<doc id="262333" wikidata="Q811493" url="?curid=262333" title="Garden State Parkway">
<text>The Garden State Parkway (GSP) is a controlled-access toll road that stretches the north–south length of eastern New Jersey from the state&#x27;s southernmost tip near Cape May north to the New York state line at Montvale. Its name refers to New Jersey&#x27;s nickname, the &quot;Garden State&quot;. The parkway has an unsigned reference number of Route 444 by the New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT). At its north end, the road becomes the Garden State Parkway Connector, a component of the New York State Thruway system that connects to the Thruway mainline in Ramapo, New York.

The Garden State Parkway is the longest highway in the state at approximately , and, according to the International Bridge, Tunnel and Turnpike Association, was the busiest toll road in the United States in 2006. Most of the highway north of the Raritan River runs through heavily populated areas. Between the Raritan River and Toms River, the highway passes through lighter suburban development, while south of Toms River, the road mostly runs through unspoiled wilderness in the Pine Barrens and swampland, interspersed with small towns and Jersey Shore beach communities. The highway has a posted speed limit of for most of its length and is primarily for passenger vehicle use; trucks weighing over are prohibited north of exit 105.

The parkway was constructed between 1946 and 1957 to connect suburban Northern New Jersey with the Jersey Shore resort areas along the Atlantic coast and to alleviate traffic on traditional north–south routes running through each town center, such as US Route 1 (US 1), US 9, and Route 35. During planning and construction of the first segment, the road was to be a toll-free highway designated as the Route 4 Parkway. However, a lack of funding caused the remainder of the parkway to be built as a toll road. The highway has seen many improvements over the years, including the addition and reconstruction of interchanges, bridge replacements, widening of the roadway, and removal of at-grade intersections. Previously, the road had been maintained by an agency known as the New Jersey Highway Authority, however in 2003, the agency merged into the New Jersey Turnpike Authority (NJTA), which now maintains the parkway along with the New Jersey Turnpike.

The parkway uses an open system of toll collection with flat-fee tolls collected at 11 toll plazas along the roadway, as well as at several entrances and exits. Tolls can be paid using cash or via the E-ZPass electronic toll collection system. Along the route are 11 service areas, providing food and fuel to travelers. Historically, the road had ten picnic areas along its length, but only one remains open today.

==Route description==

The Garden State Parkway begins at New Jersey Route 109 in Cape May County, at one of the very few expressway interchanges in the United States designated as Exit 0. It runs north along the mainland side of the Jersey Shore, crossing the Great Egg Harbor Bay and passing to the west of Atlantic City. The parkway passes through the sparsely populated Pine Barrens until it reaches Toms River in Ocean County. From here, the road heads into suburban areas. North of Tinton Falls, the route splits into a local-express lane configuration, which it maintains through Sayreville. Here, the highway crosses the Raritan River into Woodbridge Township, where it meets the New Jersey Turnpike (Interstate 95, I-95). North of here, the Garden State Parkway passes through densely populated communities in Middlesex and Union counties and intersects I-78 near Newark. The parkway eventually passes to the south and east of Paterson and meets I-80 in Saddle Brook. After traversing the suburban northern section of Bergen County, the road enters the state of New York where it becomes the Garden State Parkway Connector, continuing north to the New York State Thruway mainline.
The parkway serves as a major route connecting North Jersey with all of the state&#x27;s shore points, and as such, is subject to frequent congestion. The number of lanes on the parkway ranges from four in Cape May, Atlantic, and Bergen counties, to 15 on the Driscoll Bridge. Much of the highway runs closely parallel to, or concurrently with US 9. The speed limit on the parkway is for most of its length. However, it is posted at on a section near Toms River and on a section between Sayreville and Paramus. The NJTA may temporarily reduce the speed limit when special hazards exist. Commercial trucks with a registered weight of over are not allowed to use the parkway north of exit 105, just past the Asbury Park Toll Plaza. The entire length of the Garden State Parkway carries the unsigned designation of Route 444, and is part of the National Highway System, a network of roads important to the country&#x27;s economy, defense, and mobility.

===Cape May and Atlantic counties===

The parkway begins at an at-grade intersection with Route 109 in Lower Township, Cape May County, where Route 109 continues south toward Cape May and west toward US 9 and the Cape May–Lewes Ferry. The Garden State Parkway runs north as a four-lane freeway on the Cape May Peninsula through the Cape Island Wildlife Management Area, running west of swampland, separating the highway from the Jersey Shore communities. Trees occupy the median and the sides of the road for the next several miles. After passing to the east of Cape May National Golf Club, crossing over Jones Creek, and passing a pond in the median, the highway enters Middle Township and has an interchange with Route 47, which serves The Wildwoods resort area and the community of Rio Grande. North of this point, the parkway crosses over the abandoned Wildwood Branch of the Pennsylvania-Reading Seashore Lines, and afterwards, the trees in the median disappear and the highway has a partial interchange with Route 147, which provides access to North Wildwood, Whitesboro, and Burleigh. Crossing into the county seat of Cape May Court House, the median narrows and US 9 appears within yards of the southbound lanes of the parkway as it passes west of The Shore Club golf course. The two highways then split apart and the Garden State Parkway bisects residential areas before reaching an interchange for Stone Harbor Boulevard (CR 657), which serves the Cape Regional Medical Center and Stone Harbor.
Past this point, the road comes to an interchange for Crest Haven Road (CR 609), which provides access to the Cape May County Park &amp; Zoo and a building complex containing the Cape May County Technical School District. After a southbound entrance ramp from US 9, the parkway leaves Cape May Court House and returns to a desolate wooded setting with a wide tree-filled median. Continuing north, the parkway has an interchange with Avalon Boulevard (CR 601), serving Avalon and Swainton. North of this point, the highway enters Dennis Township and has a partial interchange with Sea Isle Boulevard (CR 625), serving Sea Isle City before reaching the Bruce Willis Service Area in the median. Past the service area, the parkway enters Upper Township and reaches the Cape May Toll Plaza northbound immediately before meeting the southern terminus of Route 50, which serves Seaville, at a partial interchange. After passing east of several homes and a golf course, the parkway has the John B. Townsend Shoemaker Holly Picnic Area in the median before it crosses over the abandoned Pennsylvania-Reading Seashore Lines Ocean City Branch. Continuing north, the highway comes to a diamond interchange with US 9 and Roosevelt Boulevard (CR 623), which serves Ocean City and Marmora. North of this exit, US 9 begins to run concurrently with the Garden State Parkway, and the two routes run east of the community of Beesleys Point before the median narrows, and they cross the Great Egg Harbor Bay on the Great Egg Harbor Bridge.
The highway surfaces into Somers Point, Atlantic County, where the southbound roadway has the Great Egg Toll Plaza before US 9 leaves the parkway at a partial junction. Past this point, the median widens and the parkway passes west of the Greate Bay Country Club and some homes before a partial interchange with West Laurel Drive, which provides access to Somers Point and Ocean City. After passing to the west of more residences, the median briefly becomes a Jersey barrier as the route crosses the Patcong Creek into Egg Harbor Township, where developments begin to appear on the west side of the highway. Eventually, the parkway crosses into uninhabited areas again before heading into a commercial area and widening to six lanes. Here, the road has an interchange with Black Horse Pike (US 40/US 322) and Tilton Road (CR 563), marking the first of three interchanges with roads that serve Atlantic City, located to the east. The median then transitions to a Jersey barrier and the parkway passes over the abandoned Pennsylvania-Reading Seashore Lines Newfield Branch before a partial interchange with Washington Avenue (CR 608) and a cloverleaf interchange with the controlled-access Atlantic City Expressway (which heads west towards Philadelphia), where the northbound and southbound roadways split apart again. Upon leaving the commercial area, the highway passes to the east of Atlantic City International Airport and crosses over a flume of the Atlantic City Reservoir, which has a basin on each side of the highway. Continuing north, the highway enters Galloway Township and passes over NJ Transit&#x27;s Atlantic City Line before it comes to a partial interchange with White Horse Pike (US 30), serving Absecon. North of this exit, the median is home to the Frank Sinatra Service Area, which also has a barrack of the New Jersey State Police. Immediately north of the service plaza, the parkway has an interchange with Jimmie Leeds Road (CR 561), serving the community of Pomona. The parkway then enters the sparsely populated Pine Barrens, passing to the east of Stockton University and reaching an interchange with Pomona Road (CR 575/CR 561 Alt.) Past this point, the road turns northeast and crosses into Port Republic as it winds north into the uninhabited Port Republic Wildlife Management Area. With some occasional development appearing along the sides of the road, the median narrows to a Jersey barrier as US 9 merges back onto the parkway, along with the Pine Barrens Byway, and the three routes cross the Mullica River.

===Burlington and Ocean counties===

The highway surfaces into Bass River Township, Burlington County, and US 9 and the Pine Barrens Byway depart at a partial interchange. Continuing northeast past the community of New Gretna, the parkway passes over US 9 with no access before crossing the Bass River and the median widens and contains a maintenance yard. Past this point, the median temporarily narrows again as the northbound lanes have the New Gretna Toll Plaza. Crossing northward through Bass River State Forest, the six-lane highway becomes desolate as it enters Little Egg Harbor Township, Ocean County. Here, the Garden State Parkway interchanges with North Green Street (CR 539), which serves Tuckerton, before entering Eagleswood, where it crosses over Westecunk Creek and passes to the west of Eagles Nest Airport. Afterwards, the parkway enters Stafford Township where development along the road begins to increase. Here, the highway has an interchange with Route 72, which provides access to Manahawkin and Long Beach Island. The parkway then forms a border between residential neighborhoods to the west and forest to the east before passing to the east of a golf course and entering Barnegat, where the concentration of houses shifts to the east. After an interchange with West Bay Avenue (CR 554), the parkway passes by residential neighborhoods on both sides of the highway before the median shortly narrows and the southbound roadway has the Barnegat Toll Plaza. Now in Ocean Township, the parkway meets the interchange with Wells Mills Road (CR 532) and crosses over Oyster Creek before entering Lacey Township, where it crosses the south, middle, and north branches of the Forked River before reaching an interchange with CR 614, serving the community of Forked River, and the Celia Cruz Service Area in the median.
Father north, the road crosses over Cedar Creek and enters Berkeley Township, passing west of a golf course and Central Regional High School while traversing Double Trouble State Park. The route then crosses into Beachwood and passes west of several homes before entering South Toms River, where the median narrows and the parkway becomes concurrently with US 9 once again at an interchange with CR 530. After crossing the Toms River and entering Toms River, the highway passes west of the Toms River Bus Terminal serving NJ Transit buses. Past this point, the road crosses the abandoned Conrail Barnegat Branch and reaches an exit for Lakehurst Road (CR 527) before passing trees and reaching a cloverleaf interchange with Route 37, which provides access to Lakehurst, Seaside Heights, and Island Beach State Park. After heading northwest between trees on the west and neighborhoods on the east, the Garden State Parkway turns northeast as the median widens and contains a maintenance yard, and US 9 leaves the parkway at an interchange with Route 166. Past the interchange, the parkway reaches the bi-directional Toms River Toll Plaza and passes by lighter suburban development in addition to parkland, with Ocean County College to the east. Upon entering Lakewood Township, the parkway has an interchange with Route 70, serving Brick Township and Point Pleasant to the east; this interchange also serves CR 528. Running along the border of Lakewood and Brick townships, the route has an interchange with CR 549 before crossing the South Branch of the Metedeconk River and passing over Route 88 with no access. Now entirely within Brick Township, the route crosses the North Branch of the Metedeconk River and reaches a second exit for CR 549, where a pedestrian bridge for the Brick Park &amp; Ride, located to the east, passes over the parkway. North of this interchange, the road widens to eight lanes and passes west of a solar farm.

===Monmouth and Middlesex counties===

Upon entering Wall Township, Monmouth County, the southbound lanes have a truck inspection area and the parkway passes west of Brick Township Reservoir through woods. The parkway crosses the Manasquan River and passes under the Capital to Coast Trail before reaching a large interchange near Allaire State Park. The interchange includes a pair of collector-distributor roads and serves the eastern terminus of I-195 (which runs west across Central Jersey toward Trenton), Route 34 (which runs southeast toward Point Pleasant), and Route 138 (which runs east toward Belmar). A park and ride is present in the southeastern cloverleaf with Route 138. Passing to the west of Shark River Park, the median contains the Judy Blume Service Area, which provides a park and ride for commuters and access to Belmar Boulevard (CR 18). The parkway enters Tinton Falls and has exits for Route 33, which runs east toward Bradley Beach and west towards Freehold Township, and Route 66, which heads east towards Asbury Park. Soon afterwards, the parkway passes to the west of the Jersey Shore Premium Outlets and has a partial exit for Asbury Avenue (CR 16), where the road widens to ten lanes. North of this point, the parkway reaches the northbound Asbury Park Toll Plaza.
Immediately north of the toll barrier, the road divides into a local-express lane configuration with two express and three local lanes in each direction. The parkway passes to the east of a solar farm before reaching an interchange with Route 18 and Route 36, which head north towards New Brunswick and east towards Long Branch, respectively. The connector road from the parkway to the western terminus of Route 36 and Hope Road (CR 51) is designated by the New Jersey Department of Transportation as Route 444S. North of the interchange, the Garden State Parkway passes over the Southern Secondary railroad line operated by the Delaware and Raritan River Railroad and bisects residential neighborhoods before crossing the Swimming River into Middletown Township, where the road has an interchange with CR 520, which contains a park and ride and serves Red Bank and Lincroft. The parkway then passes over Normandy Road, which serves as a road and railroad link between the two sections of Naval Weapons Station Earle. Continuing northwest past houses and parks, the route has an interchange with Red Hill Road (CR 52) as it enters Holmdel Township, where it serves the PNC Bank Arts Center and the New Jersey Vietnam Veterans&#x27; Memorial. Upon entering Hazlet, the parkway crosses NJ Transit&#x27;s North Jersey Coast Line before reaching an interchange for Route 35 and Route 36, which serves Keyport. At this point, the express roadway in each direction gains a third lane. Immediately north of here is a southbound exit and entrance at Lloyd Road (CR 3), where the parkway briefly enters Aberdeen Township and passes over the Matawan Creek before crossing the North Jersey Coast Line for a second time while the southbound lanes of the parkway briefly enters Matawan. Upon entering Old Bridge Township, Middlesex County, and reaching an interchange for Matawan Road (CR 626) serving Matawan, the highway enters Cheesequake State Park.
After crossing the Cheesequake Creek near a marina and leaving the park, the road enters Sayreville and has the Jon Bon Jovi Service Area in the median, with access to both the express and local lanes of the highway. Passing to the southwest of South Amboy, the parkway has a partial interchange with US 9 and passes over Conrail Shared Assets Operations&#x27; Amboy Secondary line. After a northbound entrance and southbound exit at Main Street (CR 670), the lanes, now as a 4-3-3-4 configuration, merge as they cross the abandoned Raritan River Railroad and reach the Raritan Toll Plaza southbound. North of the toll barrier is an exit for Chevalier Avenue; all southbound vehicles exiting here must have an E-ZPass transponder. Paralleling US 9 and Route 35, the parkway becomes 15 lanes as it crosses the Raritan River on the Driscoll Bridge, the widest motor vehicle bridge in the world. On the bridge, the northbound lanes are divided into two roadways; only the eastern roadway has access to exit 127, an interchange for US 9 and Route 440, providing access to the Outerbridge Crossing to Staten Island. Just north of exit 127 in Woodbridge Township, the parkway runs in between the northbound and southbound lanes of US 9. After passing under Conrail Shared Assets Operations&#x27; Perth Amboy Running Track, US 9 splits off to the east and the parkway reaches an interchange with the New Jersey Turnpike (I-95). Running northwest through Woodbridge as a ten-lane roadway, the highway has an interchange with US 1 and crosses under Conrail Shared Assets Operations&#x27; Port Reading Secondary line as it enters the community of Iselin, passing to the east of several corporate offices. Immediately after passing under Amtrak&#x27;s Northeast Corridor east of the Metropark station serving Amtrak and NJ Transit&#x27;s Northeast Corridor Line, the GSP has an interchange with Route 27, which serves Rahway to the northeast. North of this point, the parkway curves northeast through densely populated neighborhoods, passing the Colonia South and Colonia North service areas.

===Union and Essex counties===

Crossing into Clark, Union County, the highway continues to pass through dense neighborhoods as a ten-lane roadway with a Jersey barrier. After crossing the Robinson&#x27;s Branch Reservoir and passing an interchange with Central Avenue (CR 613), the southbound lanes have access to a maintenance yard. The highway then passes west of a park and Winfield Township before crossing the Rahway River into Cranford, where there is an interchange with Raritan Road (CR 607) and Centennial Avenue (CR 615). After passing west of a business park and over Conrail Shared Assets Operations&#x27; Lehigh Line and the inactive Rahway Valley Railroad, the parkway crosses NJ Transit&#x27;s Raritan Valley Line and reaches an interchange with Route 28, which serves Roselle Park to the east. Upon entering Kenilworth, the highway passes many businesses before the road meets the interchange with Galloping Hill Road (CR 509), passes to the east of Galloping Hill Golf Course, and enters Union, where the parkway has an interchange with Chestnut Street (CR 619). Immediately afterwards, the road comes to an interchange with US 22 and Route 82 serving Hillside, where the Garden State Parkway briefly runs in between the carriageways of US 22 and the Union Watersphere appears on the east side of the parkway. Here, the parkway narrows to eight lanes, and the northbound lanes have access to the Whitney Houston Service Area. After the service area, the road crosses the Elizabeth River and briefly enters Hillside, where it reaches the northbound Union Toll Plaza before an interchange with I-78.
Running northeast into Irvington, Essex County, the highway passes west of a park and east of many houses before reaching a pair of interchanges for local roads and passing through a short tunnel underneath a parking lot for Irvington Bus Terminal, serving NJ Transit buses. North of this point, the parkway gains frontage roads in each direction, which are mostly lined by residences. The frontage road for the northbound lanes is called Eastern Parkway, and the frontage road for the southbound lanes is called Western Parkway. After an interchange with South Orange Avenue (CR 510), the frontage roads end, and the parkway briefly enters Newark where it bisects Holy Sepulchre Cemetery, the northern end of which is in East Orange. After leaving the cemetery, the highway regains frontage roads which are known as Oraton Parkway. After passing East Orange General Hospital&#x27;s Eastern Pavilion, the parkway comes to an interchange with I-280 and Central Avenue (CR 508), which serve Downtown Newark. At the interchange, the Garden State Parkway loses a lane in each direction and passes under NJ Transit&#x27;s Morris &amp; Essex Lines near East Orange station. The parkway continues to run in between frontage roads containing many houses before passing west of several apartment buildings and hospitals and crossing the abandoned Orange Branch of the New York and Greenwood Lake Railway. Winding into Bloomfield as a six-lane roadway, the Garden State Parkway crosses NJ Transit&#x27;s Montclair-Boonton Line and has an interchange with Bloomfield Avenue (CR 506 Spur), where the frontage roads end. After passing under Norfolk Southern Railway&#x27;s Boonton Line and reaching an exit for Belleville Avenue (CR 506), the parkway enters a more suburban area and the southbound parkway has the Essex Toll Plaza. The highway briefly enters Nutley before crossing back into Bloomfield, where the jersey barrier becomes a grassy median and the parkway reaches a diamond interchange for Watchung Avenue (CR 655) serving Montclair and passing the Larry Doby and Connie Chung service areas, serving northbound and southbound traffic respectively, to the west of the Upper Montclair Country Club.

===Passaic and Bergen counties===

The parkway crosses into Clifton, Passaic County, where it reaches an interchange with Route 3. At this point, the space between the northbound and southbound roadways contains the Allwood Road Park and Ride serving NJ Transit buses. After passing under a set of power lines and bisecting a residential area, the route has an incomplete interchange with US 46. Immediately north, the parkway meets the southern terminus of the Route 19 freeway, which heads north toward Paterson. Past this point, the highway curves northeast and passes over NJ Transit&#x27;s Main Line before the median transitions to a Jersey barrier and the highway has a northbound exit and southbound entrance at Hazel Street (CR 702), serving Passaic. The parkway heads northeast past many homes before heading into a business district and crossing Norfolk Southern&#x27;s Passaic Spur line. After passing many more residences near the route, the parkway reaches a partial interchange with the southern terminus of Route 20. Immediately afterwards, the parkway crosses the Passaic River and enters Elmwood Park, Bergen County, where it comes to a second interchange with US 46, serving Garfield. Passing more homes, followed by several businesses, the highway then passes over the New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway&#x27;s New Jersey Subdivision line and under NJ Transit&#x27;s Bergen County Line before reaching an interchange with I-80 and the northbound Bergen Toll Plaza in Saddle Brook.
Continuing northeast, the road passes through Saddle River County Park and crosses the Saddle River tributary into Rochelle Park. After leaving the park, it crosses a pair of interchanges for Route 208 and Route 4 as it enters Paramus near the Garden State Plaza shopping mall. North of Route 4, the parkway passes east of the Arcola Country Club and runs closely parallel with Route 17 before interchanging with it. Past this interchange, the median becomes grass-filled. After passing east of businesses and west of homes, the parkway passes in between the Paramus Park shopping mall and New Bridge Medical Center before reaching an interchange with East Ridgewood Avenue (CR 80), which serves Oradell and has a park and ride. After bisecting residential neighborhoods, the parkway has a partial interchange with Linwood Avenue (CR 110) before entering Washington Township where the southbound lanes have the Pascack Valley Toll Plaza—the northernmost toll plaza on the highway. North of the toll plaza, the median becomes substantially wider and trees begin to appear within it. The Garden State Parkway finally narrows from six to four lanes at the exit for Washington Avenue (CR 502), serving Westwood and Emerson. Winding through the Pascack Valley region of Bergen County past many homes and woodland, the parkway briefly enters Hillsdale before entering Woodcliff Lake, where there is a northbound exit and southbound entrance for Chestnut Ridge Road, which is accessed via CR S73 and serves Saddle River. The parkway then enters Montvale, where it reaches the James Gandolfini Service Area, the northernmost service area on the road. Immediately north is an exit for Grand Avenue (CR 94) serving Park Ridge; this is the northernmost exit of the Garden State Parkway, which crosses into the state of New York soon afterwards. From there, the route becomes the Garden State Parkway Connector, a component of the New York State Thruway system, which heads north toward the thruway mainline (I-87/I-287) in Nanuet.

==History==
===1950s===

Plans for the Garden State Parkway date back to 1942, where it would have connected to the Palisades Interstate Parkway in Fort Lee. Following World War II, traffic increased substantially on highways along the New Jersey coast. Due to the high traffic volume and presence of numerous traffic lights, it took motorists over three hours to travel between Paterson and Atlantic City. In 1946, plans were changed to construct a high-speed parkway to provide a bypass of Route 4, which, prior to 1953, ran from Cape May north to the George Washington Bridge by way of Paterson, largely following present-day US 1, US 9, and Route 35. This highway would be constructed using state funds and be known as the Route 4 Parkway. Construction began in 1947, and the first section to open ran from Route 27 north to Cranford and opened on June 29, 1950.

The landscape architect and engineer in charge of the newly named Garden State Parkway was Gilmore David Clarke of the engineering firm Parsons Brinckerhoff, who had worked with Robert Moses on the parkway systems around New York City. Clarke&#x27;s design prototypes for the parkway combined the example of the Pennsylvania Turnpike, a model of efficiency with parallels in the German &quot;autobahn&quot; routes of the 1930s, with the Merritt Parkway model that stressed a planted &quot;green belt&quot; for beauty. Both design models featured wide planted medians to prevent head-on collisions and mask the glare of oncoming headlights. The Garden State Parkway was designed to have a natural feel. Many trees were planted, and the only signs were those for exits—there were no distracting billboards. Most of the signs were constructed from wood, or a dark-brown metal, instead of the chrome bars used on most other highways. The guardrails were also made from wood and dark metal. Most early overpasses were stone, but were later changed to concrete, with green rails and retro etchings, popular around the 1950s and 1960s. The parkway was designed to curve gently throughout its length so that drivers would remain alert and not fall asleep at the wheel.

The highway was extended south to New Brunswick Avenue in Woodbridge Township, Middlesex County, on November 1 that year, In Cape May County, a bypass of Cape May Court House opened on July 29, 1951, from exit 12 to the point where the parkway directly parallels US 9 north of Burleigh. However, due to a lack of funds, construction of the Route 4 Parkway stalled. The only segment to open was 1952, only the bypass of Toms River was opened on July 3. The solution was for the state to establish the New Jersey Highway Authority (NJHA) in April 1952 to oversee construction and operation of the remainder of the parkway as a self-liquidating toll road from Cape May to the New York state line. The parkway was extended north to Union Township on July 16, 1953. On September 16, 1953, pedestrians were banned from the parkway in order to increase safety on the segment with at-grade intersections.
Sections opened in quick succession in 1954; these were the first to be tolled. The first tolled segment was opened on January 13, 1954, from US 22 to Mill Road. Due to poor weather conditions, tolls were not collected until January 15. The Toms River bypass was extended south to Manahawkin on July 15, and north to the Eatontown Spur (now Route 36) on July 30, 1954. The bridge carrying the parkway over the Raritan River was also opened to northbound traffic on this day, extending the highway south to US 9 in Sayreville. The southbound lanes were opened on the bridge south to Eatontown on August 4, and an extension to New Gretna opened the day after. Closing the northbound gap from Eatontown to Sayreville on August 7 provided for 90 miles of unbroken highway. Within Atlantic County, a large section from Tilton Road in Egg Harbor Township to the south bank of the Mullica River opened on August 11, though north of the White Horse Pike the road initially operated as a temporary super two on the southbound lanes until August 21. This was extended south to Somers Point on August 27 (again as a super-two before the northbound lanes opened on September 22), then connected across the Mullica River to the existing section on August 28 over a temporary super-two, with the other lanes opened a few weeks later. The Cape May section of highway was also extended north to Route 50 at Seaville that day, which then was extended south to Route 47 on September 4, and north to Beesley&#x27;s Point Bridge on October 6. The entire highway south of Irvington was declared finished on October 9, 1954. The lone exception was across the Great Egg Harbor; the parkway temporarily detoured onto US 9 and over the Beesley&#x27;s Point Bridge at this point. Literature from the time suggested that the parkway would become toll-free once bonds used for its construction were paid off. However, this speculation never became a reality.
Segments north of Irvington began opening in the months thereafter. The section from Irvington to Central Avenue in East Orange was scheduled to open on November 26, but complaints about the road&#x27;s safety from Irvington officials stalled opening until December 9, after the erection of temporary fences along the road&#x27;s length. An extension north also proved tumultuous: though scheduled to open on January 4, the extension to North Arlington Avenue opened a day earlier than scheduled. Mayor William McConnell ordered a blockade on this section of the highway on January 4, stating that North Arlington Avenue would be unable to handle traffic coming from the parkway. It was only when the southbound section was opened to exit 148 on January 8 that the blockade was lifted on the southbound section. At this point, Bloomfield mayor Donald E. Scott prevented the opening of the northbound lanes until the completion of a new bridge carrying Bloomfield Avenue over Second River needed to carry exiting traffic. Though this bridge was not completed for some time, the highway opened fully to US 46 on January 19, negating this prerequisite. However, Mayor Scott still barred all entrances and exits except for the southbound entrance from Bloomfield Avenue, until an inspection proved the highway safe; the exits were finally opened on January 21. During this conflict, the section from Route 3 to Hazel Street in Clifton opened on January 4. A similar blockade was threatened to be placed, but the announcement of speedy construction of fencing prevented this. On May 10, 1955, legislation was passed that made it legal for emergency vehicles to not pay tolls when on duty. The bridge over the Passaic River opened on May 26, 1955. This extended the parkway&#x27;s northern terminus to US 46 in present-day Elmwood Park. On July 1 of that year, the portion of the highway from US 46 to Route 17 in Paramus opened. In spring 1955, a widening project began between US 22 and the Raritan River bridge; this would expand the roadway from four to six lanes. It was completed on July 9 of that year. In late 1955, construction of a northbound roadway began in Cape May. The new roadbed was opened north of Seaville by October 17, south of Cape May Court House by October 25, and fully by October 28. On April 16, 1956, the parkway&#x27;s trailblazer was posted. The final stretch of permanent roadway was opened alongside the Great Egg Harbor Bridge, completing the parkway as outlined in original plans.

Soon after the parkway&#x27;s opening, congestion on Route 17 increased substantially, prompting an extension of the parkway to Montvale, connecting to the newly built New York State Thruway. By November 30, 1955, it had been determined that this extension was financially feasible. On January 18, 1956, the NJHA entered into an agreement with the New York State Thruway Authority (NYSTA) for the prompt, and coordinated plans for extension. The agreement was formally signed on February 1 by NJHA Chairwoman Katharine E. White and NYSTA Chairman Bertram D. Tallamy. Groundbreaking for the road began on May 1 of that year. Unlike previous segments of the roadway, this one uses prestressed concrete for overpasses; this made correcting errors during construction or future demolition easier. It was originally proposed as part of a northern extension of the unbuilt Route 101, a highway that was intended to run from Kearny to Hackensack. The extension, Route S101, would have continued northward from Hackensack to the state line via Paramus. Approximately in length, the extension was planned to run north through the Bergen County municipalities of Paramus, Washington Township, Hillsdale, Woodcliff Lake, and Montvale to the state line, where the parkway would meet with a connecting spur from the mainline of the New York State Thruway. Part of the extension to Chestnut Ridge opened on July 3, 1957, and the Thruway&#x27;s Garden State Parkway Connector opened on August 29 that year. In only 36 hours, the extension reported 8,000 drivers.

On February 7, 1958, U-turning was banned in order to increase safety. This was enforced at both the toll plazas and on the main roadway, and was considered a violation even if done to correct error.
By the time the parkway had been extended to the New York State Thruway, the need for a full interchange at the exit 154 was noted. Following the recommendation of a survey to do so, D. Louis Tonti, the executive director of the New Jersey Highway Authority, announced plans in December 1957 to construct two new overpasses at exit 154 in Clifton. These overpasses would connect drivers from US 46 eastbound to the parkway northbound, and from the parkway southbound to US 46 westbound. In May 1958, a bid of the project went to Thomas Nichol Company, Inc. of Farmingdale, and construction began immediately. By August 1958, the piers for the new viaduct from US 46 eastbound to the parkway northbound were finishing up. In September, the completed piers had roadway construction on top of them. The new ramps opened on January 1, and the toll booths on the ramps opened the in February, replacing the toll booths on the grounded ramps, which were later demolished. The total cost of the project was $2.25 million, which was half a million higher than the original estimate. Dedication of the overpasses occurred on January 15, 1959, when the Highway Authority and several city officials attended a ceremony and a luncheon. During 1959, traffic counts noted 1.5 million cars used the ramps.

In June 1958, the southbound road between the exit 117 and the Asbury Park Toll Plaza was widened from two lanes to three lanes. Additionally, that same summer, the Highway authority began enforcing the speed limit through use of radar. On June 19, 1959, the northbound roadway equivalent was widened, completing the project.

On December 30, 1959, exit 139B was opened. The ramp, which served the missing movements both exit 139 and exit 140 lacked, had cost $108,487 in state funds to construct.

===1960s===
On February 1, 1961, the state banned motorcycles, scooters, and bicycles from the entire road. This ban was approved by the highway department&#x27;s safety committee and state attorney for the toll-free segments and NJHA&#x27;s safety committee for the tolled ones. This followed a year involving 20 motorcycle accidents that resulted in two fatalities. Motorists who were caught using these modes of transportation on the parkway faced either a fine of $200 or 30-day jail sentence.

On December 5, 1962, a new ramp from exit 120 onto the northbound lanes opened to traffic, serving direct access to them without traveling through Cheesequake State Park.
In March 1961, the Highway Authority announced that plans were being made to construct a new interchange at either Red Hill Road or Nutswamp Road. By June, the Highway Authority announced that the interchange would be built at Red Hill Road. In November, it was announced the exit would replace the free exit 116, though rather than being demolished, it would simply be restricted to emergency traffic. Exit 114 would help relieve local congestion that traveled to the new Bell Labs Holmdel Complex and other industrial parks operating in the area. On December 14, the Highway Authority made an appropriation of $50,000 for the engineering work on the interchange. Construction began on the exit 114 ramps on July 30, 1962, when construction equipment was taken to the site. The exit was opened to traffic on December 20, 1962. with two toll facilities also being constructed. Exit 116 was closed as planned; this was received negatively by locals.

On June 18, 1963, a meeting was held between NJHA officials, Senator Charles W. Sandman Jr., and the Cape May County Board of Freeholders. They discussed safety issues found at exit 12&#x27;s exit ramp. A northbound-only ramp that traveled at-grade across the southbound lanes; it had been described as a &quot;serious hazard&quot; by the NJHA&#x27;s safety committee. After an agreement was settled on and approval came from the State Highway department, it was announced to the public on June 26 that the northbound ramp would close permanently. When this occurred on July 2, all northbound traffic that previously utilized the ramp was advised to use exit 13, only to the north, instead. The entrance onto the northbound lanes from US 9 was left unaltered.

On July 31, 1964, a project to construct exit 38 was completed. The cloverleaf interchange, which cost approximately $800,000, was built to serve as a link to the newly constructed Atlantic City Expressway.

In May 1962, plans were announced to widen the segment from exit 154 to just near exit 158 from two lanes to three lanes. As part of this project, the Passaic River Bridge was to be reconstructed with a wider superstructure and piers. The Bergen Toll Plaza also was rebuilt to give each direction dedicated toll canopies instead of all traffic merging into a single canopy, as then existed. This part of project was completed in December 1963. A two-mile segment of roadway from the Passaic County line to exit 154 also was repaved, to add a one-inch overlay of asphalt. This project also included lengthening and widening northbound acceleration lanes to exit 153A, exit 153B, and the grounded ramp at exit 154. This part of the project began on August 1 and was completed by October 31. Construction also began on a new exit 159. This interchange would serve I-80 with direct connections and Midland Avenue with indirect connections. In preparation for this construction, the northbound exit and southbound entrance of exit 158 were closed permanently on March 16, 1963, with the remaining connections closed on June 22. On December 23 of that year, the ramps onto Midland Avenue from exit 159 were opened to traffic. Tolling of the interchange began immediately. However, the ramps to and from I-80 would not open until October 20, 1964. The project cost a total of $4,500,000. In November of that year, the northbound exit and southbound entrance at exit 157 were permanently closed, to encourage use of exit 159.

On March 8, 1965, a project began to improve the segment between the Cape May Toll Plaza and exit 30. It involved a major reconstruction of exit 29, replacing the at-grade intersection with a new grade-separated northbound exit and southbound entrance. Exit 30 also had its northbound entrance and southbound exit closed and a toll plaza constructed. Additionally, the Great Egg Toll Plaza was replaced by a new, wider plaza north of the old one, and the Cape May toll plazas had two extra collection lanes constructed While initially planned for competition by July 1, competition was delayed to July 15.

In the mid-1960s, a project to reconstruct interchanges in Essex County was undertaken. On January 1, 1966, a project was completed that constructed longer deceleration lanes and widened the exit and entrance ramps of exits 148 and 144. On January 10, tolling began on exit 148. In December 1965, a related project began to reconstruct exit 143. It would contain a collector-distributor roadway. The project was completed on April 12, 1966, exit 142 was then renumbered as exit 143 . Additionally, in December 1965, plans were announced to replace exits 145. Unlike the old ramps, this new one would provide access to I-280. Also as part of this project, exit 146 would be demolished, and an overpass would be built to replace part of the depressed roadway. The exits 146 and 145 were permanently closed to traffic in late 1965. On January 12, 1966, the replacement exit 145 were opened to traffic, though the ramps onto I-280 at the latter remained barricaded off while the highway was still under construction. On October 13, 1967, the I-280 segment and its ramps were partially opened, completing the project. These projects were carried out to reduce congestion, which had previously run rampant due to its interchanges being largely free of tolls.

The Highway Authority rebuilt exit 4 into a full interchange, with new ramps being built and old ones being reconstructed to provide full connections. The project, completed on May 24, 1968, also involved the construction of two new toll facilities. In March of that year, construction also began on a new access road to the Garden State Arts Center at exit 116. It was completed in June of that year, and on August 8, exit 116 was reopened with a new exit number.
In May 1966, the borough of Paramus and the New Jersey Highway Authority announced plans to replace exit 165, as well as widening of the segment to three lanes. It would have involved construction of new overpasses and demolition of the old ones, including a new pedestrian overpass to serve a nearby school. Costing $3.7 million (equivalent to $ in ), Construction on the new complete interchange began almost immediately, with the new southbound ramps opening on November 30, 1966, On December 29, the dual ramps on the northbound direction opened. On February 13, tolls went into effect on the Ridgewood Avenue intersection. On January 6, 1967, exit 166 was closed to prevent traffic from traveling through them. The reasoning for this was that traffic heading onto them congested many of the local roads. By September, it had been forcibly reopened after a gag order was secured to prevent local authorities from affecting parkway operations. In early 1967, the parkway was widened from four lanes to six lanes between the Bergen Toll Plaza and exit 161 in Paramus. In 1968, the road was widened from four lanes to six lanes between exit 163 and exit 165. In early 1969, the roadway was widened between exit 163 and exit 161. These widenings made the entire stretch from Ocean County to Paramus at least six lanes wide. When the parkway was opened through Clifton in 1955, a spur was supposed to open south of its exit to Broad Street at exit 155P. However, by 1965, no other construction had occurred, and the parkway&#x27;s spur had been canceled. Because of this, in 1967, work began on a project to construct the remaining ramps at exit 155P (now exit 155A); instead of serving as a spur of the parkway, they would serve Route 20 (now Route 19) instead. The ramps were opened to traffic on October 20, 1969.

===1970s===

In 1972, the dualization of the Great Egg Harbor Bridge eliminated the final two-lane segment of the parkway. On September 18, 1969, a new exit 129 were opened, the remaining ramps were opened to traffic by early 1970. This replaced the existing interchange, and made it so that the turnpike had direct connections to both directions and vice versa. On November 24, 1970, southbound parkway traffic from there south to the Raritan River was redirected onto a new roadway that lied in the median of the old one, the old were not demolished however, but rather became an exit onto US 9, effectively creating a collector-distributor road. This bypass effectively eliminated the two former exits, while these still exist, they are now Route 9 exits. On August 17, 1971, the same switch occurred to the northbound roadway, the old one also became a collector-distributor road, though it rather served as a US 9 ramp to connect to the northbound GSP as well as the New Jersey Turnpike.

An expansion of the Driscoll Bridge across the Raritan River was completed on September 2, 1971. Work then began on widening the Sayerville side and repairing and widening the existing part of the bridge deck, work was completed by beginning of 1972. On January 17, 1973, exit 127 was opened to Route 440 south. By June, the link to Route 440 north had opened. In May 1973, exit 98 was opened to northbound traffic. On July 3, 1973, the southbound exit 98 opened, completing the project. this exit replaced the preexisting exits 96, 97, and 97A, with the new exit featuring a right hand collector-distributor roadway combining the cloverleafs at exits 97 and 97A as well as the left-hand ramp at exits 97, which had its southbound ramp closed on July 1, 1973.

The speed limit was raised from on January 3, 1974. Additionally, on February 21 of that year, a project to rebuild exit 91 to increase safety was completed, as part of this project, the at-grae intersection as toll plazas were constructed. On February 27, 1974, exit 117A (now exit 118) opened to the public; a temporary northbound ramp was opened while exit 117 was reconstructed into a right side exit. This was completed later that year, the new exit 117 as well as the southbound exit 117A were tolled, unlike their original equivalents. On July 2, 1973, southbound traffic heading onto exit 105 was redirected onto a new right hand ramp, and the left-hand ramp was permanently closed. In mid 1974, construction began on new express roadways in the median thorough Monmouth County; it was two lanes wide in each direction, and had much fewer exits than the local roadway. The segment from Sayerville to Keyport was opened on July 3. Alongside this project came new ramps onto exit 105. The segment of roadway from Keyport to the Tinton Falls toll plaza was opened on August 2 of that year. Alongside this segment came new ramps at exit 117.

On November 1, 1975, motorcycles were relegalized after over 14 years of protest from motorcyclists; all of the other restrictions remained. Particular pushback was made by Malcolm Forbes, who filed two lawsuits to stop this ban. On April 14, 1976, exits 142 was opened to traffic. This interchange constructed by the highway department was first proposed in 1966. The parkway was planned to have an interchange with Route 55 constructed at milepost 19. This was canceled in 1975 after the conclusion that the highway ran through too many wetland areas. The idea has since been revisited after frequent traffic jams on Route 47. The parkway was also planned to be the southern terminus of the unbuilt Driscoll Expressway, a toll road that was planned in the early 1970s to run from Toms River to the New Jersey Turnpike in South Brunswick; this plan was abandoned in 1977.

===1980s===
In 1979, proposals for an exit at milepost 124 were proposed; in 1980 construction of this interchange became a priority. In March of that year, Hardroads Inc., a firm located in East Brunswick, was hired to construct this new interchange. They quickly acquired land for the interchage, and construction began shortly after. On October 25, 1982, this exit was partially opened to traffic. Later, on November 19, the final part of the ramp was completed. In 1980, plans was proposed to construct exit 84, which would have consisted of a southbound exit and northbound entrance onto Indian Head Road. They also would have widened the New Gretna Toll Plaza. However, it was declared unbeneficial after a study deemed it to likely discourage use of public transit, and despite a replanning of the interchange, it was later shelved indefinitely. Additionally, in 1983, plans were made to reopen exit 116 as a tolled interchange. However, they ended up unsuccessful after protest from Homdel officials.

In 1980, plans were made to construct exit 171, which would serve the boom of office complexes replacing farmland across Chestnut Ridge road. In March 1985, the entrance leading onto the southbound parkway was opened, with the exit ramp opening on July 25 of that year. In 1973, plans were made to widen a segment in Toms River. While this widening was planned to be completed by 1975, however, its competition was delayed to 1978. By 1979, work on the Toms River segment was completed, at this point the project transitioned to widening the segment between the Asbury Park toll plaza and exit 100 from two to four lanes, as well reconstructing exits 102, and widening the segment in Lakewood from two lanes to three lanes. On November 17, 1980, the road was widened from three to four lanes between exits 129 and exits 141. These new lanes were HOV lanes that were restricted to vehicles with three or more occupants, though this was later lowered to two or more occupants in June 1981. They were converted into general use lanes in 1982 after almost universal criticism. In late 1983, a project to widen the segment of roadway near the Raritan Toll Plaza from five to six lanes began. The entire project was completed by 1984. Work on the rest of the project was completed at the end of 1985. Also as part of this project the Asbury Park and Union toll plaza were reconstructed with dedicated canopies in each direction. This project made it so that the entire segment between Woodbridge and East Orange was at least four lanes wide.

On November 19, 1986, exit 131B was opened to traffic. The interchange, which was constructed as part of a related upgrade to Metropark station, cost $4.4 million to construct. In 1987, the NJHA purchased the of road that had been constructed by what is now the New Jersey Department of Transportation. These state-maintained segments were located in Cape May County between exits 6 and exits 12, in Ocean County between exit 80 and exit 83, and between exit 129 and exit 140. NJDOT sold the sections for one dollar with the requirement that tolls were never to be charged on them. That same year, the roadway between mileposts 99.5 and 83.5 was restriped from two lanes with a shoulder to three lanes with no shoulder. In December 1986, a new right hand ramp at exit 100 was opened, the existing the left-hand one was then closed permanently. Work also began in March 1987, to construct new overpasses, implode the existing ones, replacing lighting and signage, reconstructing the unaltered exits to meet with the new overpasses, and widening the parkway in the area from four lanes to six lanes. Work on the project was fully complete by December 1987. In 1988, the northbound exit 105 ramp was reconstructed, a new new loop ramp was built to feed onto NJ route 18 northbound was built, and the existing deceleration lane was replaced by a new one. In addition, an on-ramp was built that allows southbound Route 18 traffic to enter the southbound local roadway.

===1990s===
In 1994, a third lane was added to the segment between mileposts 81 and 82. The Highway Authority rebuilt exit 74. In addition to the construction of toll plazas in both directions, other alterations were made, such as demolishing the southbound entrance and exit ramps and constructing new ones to turn around at where the southbound entrance once was, thus eliminating the traffic signal that existed prior. This was completed on November 20, 1996, though at the cost of $4.4 million. In April 1997, plans to construct an jughandle overpass from southbound exits 159 onto eastbound I-80 were made. Also as part of this, new traffic signals would be installed at the Midland avenue ramps, and its overpass crossing the parkway would be reconstructed to be wider. Work on this project began immediately, and the ramp was opened to traffic in January 1998, six months ahead of schedule. Despite the fact it was not designed with it in mind, the overpass carrying I-80 traffic was not rebuilt, instead, a retaining wall was constructed instead

On April 1, 1998, a project to construct a new northbound ramp to Lomell lane at exit 83 was completed. Later that year, a traffic signal was installed at exit 81, in addition to other safety improvements. Later that year, large portions of the roadway had their speed limit increased to . In June 1999, a project to expand the Barnegat toll plaza was completed and with it eliminated the final single canopied mainline plaza. Also included in this project was new fencing, new electrical work, increased landscaping, and a toll re-coordinating shed. E-ZPass was first installed at the Pascack Valley Toll Plaza in December 1999, with the Raritan Toll plaza following in April 2000. By August, installation of the system had been fully completed.

===2000s===
In April 2001, a project to replace the Dover Road overpass to allow for improvements to said road was completed. Later that year, a law was also passed that required tolls to be kept as long as there are construction projects occurring, effectively shooting down any proposals to de-toll the tolled segments.

On July 9, 2003, Governor Jim McGreevey&#x27;s plan to disband the New Jersey Highway Authority and give control of the parkway to the New Jersey Turnpike Authority (NJTA) was completed. Additionally, in November of that year, construction was completed on the $16.23 million exit 89, a new southbound exit and northbound entrance in Lakewood. This new exit featured a toll facility, and was located in the same general area as exit 88. Due to featuring collector-distributor lanes, the Cedar Bridge Road bridge had to be demolished and a replacement with a wider superstructure built in its place.

In 2005, the entrance and exit at exit 123 were both widened from one lane to two lanes, a southbound entrance was constructed at exit 131, and missing links were constructed at exit 114 as well as exit 13.

In 2006, exit 77, an entirely new interchange, was opened to traffic. The interchange, which had the northbound and southbound ramps constructed away from each other to avoid demolition of the nearby Double Trouble State Park, contains one toll facility in each direction. Later that year, a project was also completed that rebuilt the overpass carrying NJ 138 eastbound over the Parkway. This allowed the roadway underneath it to be widened from three to four lanes, as well as eliminating a curve the old overpass contained.

In March 2007, a project to reconstruct exit 69 was completed. New ramps were built, and the existing ones were demolished. Unlike them, the new ramps had full connections; the new ones were also tolled, with two plazas being built on each side. This also came with replacement of the overpass carrying traffic over the parkway with a longer one.

In September 2006, construction began on improvements to exit 145. This project, which replaced the ramps with longer and wider ones as well as building new EZ-Pass lanes at the ramps toll plaza, was completed in November 2007 at the price of $11 million, and was completed three years ahead of schedule.

In October 2007, a project to improve exit 135 began. It was completed circa May 2008.

In 2001, plans to reconstruct exit 63 and add missing connections were announced. This project was completed in late 2008. That same year, the speed limit was reverted to between mileposts 80 and 100 in order to reduce accidents.
On September 25, 2002, construction began on a new span of the Driscoll Bridge just west of the original spans, consisting of seven lanes and emergency shoulders. On May 3, 2006, all traffic was shifted onto the new span, and the original was closed for superstructure replacement. On May 20, 2009, all northbound traffic was shifted back onto the original spans, and the new one was made exclusively for southbound traffic.
To reduce congestion, 10 of the 11 toll plazas on the roadway were converted into one-way plazas between 2004 and 2010. The Cape May (in Upper Township), Great Egg (in Somers Point), New Gretna (in Bass River Township), Barnegat (in Barnegat Township), Asbury Park (in Tinton Falls), Raritan (in Sayreville), Union (in Hillside), Essex (in Bloomfield), Bergen (in Saddle Brook), and Pascack Valley (in Washington Township) toll plazas were among these. The tolls at these plazas were doubled upon conversion. The Toms River Toll Plaza (in Toms River) is the only location on the parkway mainline where a toll is still collected in both directions.
In April 2008, a $150 million project began to construct new overpasses at exit 142. In its 1976 configuration, the parkway northbound did not have a ramp to I-78 westbound, and the parkway southbound did not have an exit to I-78 eastbound. The lack of connections was due to the cancellation of the extension of I-278 (which would have connected northbound parkway traffic with I-78 westbound) and Route 75 (which would have connected southbound parkway traffic with I-78 eastbound via I-280) in the early 1980s. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) awarded the project contract to the engineering firm Gannett Fleming for the design, and to Union Paving &amp; Construction Company for building the ramps. The ramp connecting the parkway northbound with I-78 westbound opened on September 16, 2009, with a ribbon cutting ceremony led by Governor Jon Corzine. The ramp connecting the parkway southbound with I-78 eastbound opened on December 10, 2010.

===2010s===
In April 2011, New Jersey Transportation Commissioner James Simpson announced the NJTA was considering allowing trucks on the northern portion of the Garden State Parkway. However, the idea was quickly abandoned after the agency found the road had engineering concerns that would not accommodate trucks on this segment.

A project that rebuilt the Watchung Avenue overpass at exit 151 in order to add shoulders to the segment underneath and increased safety by being wider and more friendly to pedestrians was completed in 2013. Additionally, both existing ramps were widened from two lanes to three lanes, and both of the entrance ramps onto the Parkway were entirely rebuilt.

On July 22, 2014, the NJTA filed a federal lawsuit against Jersey Boardwalk Pizza, a pizza chain in Florida, for using a logo too similar to the Garden State Parkway&#x27;s trailblazer. Federal Judge William Martini dismissed the suit on March 26, 2015.
As originally built, in Cape May County, the parkway had three at-grade intersections (at exits 9, 10, and 11), but a project to eliminate began in early 2013, when construction began on three overpasses in Cape May Court House. The plan was delayed because it had not been approved by the federal government. The $125 million project was largely complete by September 2015, with the Mechanic Street interchange also being closed around this time.

On September 5, 2016, a project to rebuild exit 0 was completed. It involved constructing a new ramp from NJ 109 southbound onto the parkway northbound, relocating the ramp itself onto a new, shorter alignment, and reconfiguring the traffic signal with pedestrian crosswalks and other safety features.

In 2012, a project to reconstruct the roadway between mileposts 83 and 100 in order to add shoulders was started. On November 9, 2014, exit 88 was permanently closed. On June 11, 2015, the northbound replacement exit 89 were opened to traffic. It was completed in May 2017, when the reconstruction of exits 91 into a full interchange was completed, ten months behind schedule because the legislature failed to raise the state&#x27;s gas tax.
In April 2014, a $68 million project to eliminate the left-hand ramps at exit 163 began. Due to this, a half mile stretch of the GSP mainline was shifted towards the median, with the existing ramps retained but now passing under the Parkway and joining it from the right. This major project was completed in September 2017, with minor work continuing into mid-October.

In 2012, the improvement of exit 105 southbound at the intersection with NJ route 36 on the local lanes was proposed. It involved replacing the single-lane ramp which provided access to Route 36 with a new one. This ramp would have two lanes and a wider shoulder, and would also provide access to Route 18 via Wayside road. Additionally, the northbound ramp onto route 36 would be constructed, as opposed to locating traffic onto route 36, it would instead carry traffic into an intersection with Wayside Road . Also, in both directions, the deceleration lanes were increased in length and widened to two lanes in addition to lighting improvements and replacing the underhead signage southbound with new overhead ones, and replacing the sign heads northbound. Construction began in 2013, and was completed by the end of 2017.

In May 2005, Governor Richard Codey announced plans for a widening of the parkway between exit 63 in Stafford Township and exit 80 in the borough of South Toms River from two to three lanes in both directions. However, the NJTA later made plans to widen the parkway from exit 80 all the way south to exit 30 in Somers Point. In 2008, planning began on a project to construct a southbound entrance and northbound exit at exit 67. By March 27, it was revealed that the new ramps would not be tolled. Construction began in the summer of 2008. While initially planned for completion on May 20, 2009, it was ultimately completed in October 2010. The project was divided into three phases. The first of these, the one from exits 80 to 63, was completed in May 2011. In November 2014, a widening project was completed between exits 63 and 48. Exit 41 was opened on March 13, 2015. Previously, drivers who wanted to go to Jimmie Leeds Road had to cut through the parking lot of the Atlantic City Service area, though they still can, however the traffic light that previously existed was eliminated. In August 2015, a project which constructed missing movements at exits 44 was completed. In June 2017, three projects to improve exits 36, 37, and 38 were completed. A new ramp was built at exit 38 order to reduce unsafe weaving, exit 37 had its deceleration lane reconstructed to be longer, and exit 36 was rebuilt to eliminate its stop-and-go pattern. In 2018, a widening from exits 48 to milepost 30 was completed, it included reconstruction of overpasses, and the opening of new bridges across the Mullica River from Port Republic to Bass River, after which point the older ones had their superstructures replaced.

The southbound bridge over the Great Egg Harbor Bay was replaced with a wider span parallel to the older span as part of a $79.3 million project. Construction began in 2013. The new bridge was opened in 2016, the old one was then permanently closed. While the northbound bridge was kept open briefly, all traffic was moved onto it in 2017 so the old bridge could be demolished and the northbound span could undergo strengthening and a superstructure replacement. Work on the project was considered mostly complete by October 2019.

In April 2016, a project to reconstruct exits 125 into a full interchange commenced. A new southbound exit would be tolled and made exclusively for E-ZPass users; no toll would be added to the new northbound entrance. Also involved in this project was the replacement of the overpasses that carried the parkway over Chevalier Avenue with wider structures, adding a alternate ramp onto Main Street, and constructing a new southbound entrance ramp and demolishing the existing one–this would provide greater access to a new shopping mall in the vicinity that is yet to be completed. It was completed in February 2020.
In 2018, planning began for an improvement project at the northbound ramps at exits 109. The project involved partly winding the ramp and constructing a new ramp to directly allow access to the Lincroft park and ride from the parkway and to allow easier access to Newman Spring Road eastbound. Improvements were also made to the ramps onto the parkway from County Route 520. These include a ramp and overpass being built on Newman Spring Road eastbound, the addition of a traffic light at Schulz Dr, the removal of the U-turn ramp to Half Mile Road and the addition of a left turn signal at the junction to compassionate. Bidding for the project was completed in July 2018, and construction began shortly after. It was completed in May 2020.

In June 2018, an improvement project began at the interchange with I-280 and CR 508 (Central Avenue). The project involved widening the entrance ramp to the parkway southbound from one to two lanes and adding a second deceleration lane on the parkway northbound. Due to the addition of the deceleration lane to South Grove St, the northbound toll plaza on the exit was completely removed starting on July 26, 2018, at 10 pm. To accommodate the wider roadway, the overpass carrying Central Avenue over the parkway was also rebuilt. Five nearby bridges were also rehabilitated as part of the project. The project cost approximately $63 million and was completed in August 2022.

===2020s===
On March 24, 2020, the NJTA temporarily suspended cash toll collection due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Drivers without E-ZPass transponders had their license plates photographed at the toll plazas and were sent bills in the mail. Cash collection resumed on May 19 of that year. Also around this time, a new high speed toll gantry was completed at the New Gretna Toll Plaza.

In March 2022, exit 105 was closed in multiple stages so that five of the overpasses, of which some date back to 1954 and others to 1974, could be replaced. The project was completed in late 2023. Additionally a temporary crossover was built at mile marker 108.5 that lasted from March 2023 to February 2024.

In 2020, a project that involved making multiple improvements between mileposts 140 and 143 was commenced. It involves repaving the road, adding new lighting, and constructing a median barrier. It also systematically replaces multiple bridges in between the mile markers, including two that carry traffic over US 22 and one that carries traffic over NJ 82. It is scheduled to be completed at the end of 2024.

On February 23, 2023, the overpass carrying exit 156 were was temporarily closed to traffic this was because the ramp was in the way of construction on the Passaic River Bridge and needed a retaining wall to be constructed in order to minimize disruption to local communities. This was completed on July 15, and is part of a greater project to reconstruct the Passaic River Bridge, the current superstructure considered functionally obsolete and structurally deficient, in addition to not meeting the greater standards of the New Jersey turnpike Authority. Work on that part of the project is scheduled for competition in fall 2025.

==Future==
There are currently plans to rebuild the segment of road between exits 80 and 83. This segment of road lacks shoulders and other safety features, and only exit 82 is a full interchange.
In 2020, the NJTA announced plans to reconstruct exit 29 into a full interchange because Exit 30, which carries traffic onto the residential street West Laurel Drive, sees chronic congestion during the summer tourist season as it connects to New Jersey Route 52 via an intersection with US 9. If this plan where fulfilled, then the exit 30 would have been demolished, meaning that summer traffic would have had to travel to CR 559 via US 9 to reach the road. This proposition was heavily criticized by officials and residents in Somers Point and Ocean City, fearing that traffic congestion would simply be relocated rather than eliminated, as well as reduceing business that relies on the interchange. They also announced plans to improve other interchanges, such as exits 6, 13, 17, 20, 40, 123, 124, 147, 153, and 168. These upgrades were suggested either to provide full connections or to improve safety by eliminating obsolete designs such as left hand exits or short deacceleration lanes, as well as to increase future capacity. The turnpike authority also has long-term plans to widen the parkway between exit 98 and exit 125, as well as between exit 142 and exit 163, and exit 129 and 142. However, opponents to this project have proposed instead to construct light rail in between the median.

==Tolls==
The Garden State Parkway uses an open system of tolling in which flat-rate tolls are collected at numerous toll plazas placed along the mainline and at certain interchanges. This contrasts with the New Jersey Turnpike, which uses a closed system in which a motorist receives a ticket with the toll rates at the highway&#x27;s entrance, and turns in the ticket along with the toll upon exiting at toll gates. Tolls can be paid by using cash or the E-ZPass electronic toll collection system.

As of January 1, 2025, the standard car toll is $1.15 for cash and $1.09 for E-ZPass on the main road at two-way toll plazas and $2.30 for cash and $2.17 for E-ZPass at one-way toll plazas. Some entrances and exits require a toll of either $0.85, $1.15, $1.65, or $2.30 for cash and $0.76, $1.09, $1.51, or $2.17 for E-ZPass. Additional E-ZPass discounts are available for off-peak travel, senior citizens, drivers of green vehicles, and trailers.

There are three different lane types at the toll plazas. However, not all plazas have every type of lane at all times.

The first type is full-service lanes. These lanes are staffed and toll collectors can provide change and receipts to drivers.

The second type is exact-change lanes. In these lanes, motorists deposit coins in a toll basket and each coin is mechanically counted; historically, these lanes also accepted tokens. Payment of tolls in exact-change lanes has been enforced by photo since 2011. The Union Toll Plaza was the first to use an automated toll-collection machine; a plaque commemorating this event includes the first quarter collected at its toll booths. As of 2018, exact-change lanes are only used for exit and entrance ramp toll plazas.

The third type of lane is dedicated for vehicles with E-ZPass tags. Some plazas also feature Express E-ZPass lanes, allowing drivers to bypass the toll plaza at highway speeds. E-ZPass is also accepted in full-service lanes. Express E-ZPass lanes operate at the Pascack Valley, Raritan, Asbury Park, Toms River, Barnegat, New Gretna and Cape May Toll Plazas.
Tokens, available for purchase at full-service toll plaza lanes, were introduced in 1981 at a price of $10 for a roll of 40 tokens; as the toll was $0.25 at the time, most drivers continued to use quarters. However, when the toll was increased to $0.35 in 1989, rolls were priced at 30 tokens for $10; between the slight discount and the convenience of using a single coin, tokens gained in popularity. Additionally, in August of that year, the highway authority installed token only lanes, though it was quickly realized this did not reduce congestion. There were also larger bus tokens, primarily for use by Atlantic City-bound buses. As E-ZPass became more widespread, tokens were phased out. Token sales were discontinued on January 1, 2002, and they were no longer accepted effective January 1, 2009.

On September 27, 2022, the NJTA awarded a $914 million contract to TransCore to convert the parkway into an all-electronic toll road, eliminating the toll booths in the process. Although the agreement has been made, the Turnpike Authority has no set date on when the conversion will be completed.

==Services==
===Service areas===

All service areas are located in the center median, unless otherwise noted.


In the 1950s, four petroleum companies were hired to provide gasoline and vehicular necessities—Esso, Texaco, Atlantic, and Cities Service. The Cities Service company was the petroleum provider at Monmouth, Forked River, Atlantic City (Absecon at the time) and Ocean View (Seaville at the time) and offered a service where female employees were hired for those service area showrooms, wore uniforms and were known as the Park-ettes. Their duties included providing directions and other information to motorists as well as rendering odd bits of service such as sewing a missing button on a patron&#x27;s coat.

On July 27, 2021, the NJTA unanimously voted in favor of renaming the service areas along the Garden State Parkway after New Jerseyans who were inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame. The Ocean View service area was originally slated to be named after Toni Morrison, but the NJTA never received written consents and releases; this prompted the New Jersey Hall of Fame to request the service area be named after Bruce Willis instead.

On January 2, 2022, two service areas that were operated by McDonald&#x27;s in Brookdale and Union were closed after their contract expired in 2021. These services areas were replaced by 2023.

===Picnic areas===

One of the objectives of the parkway was to become a state park its entire length, and its users would enjoy park-like aesthetics with minimal intrusion of urban scenery. Along the ride, users were permitted to stop and picnic along the roadway to further enjoy the relaxation qualities the parkway had to offer. All picnic areas had tall trees that provided shade and visual isolation from the roadway. Grills, benches, running water, and restrooms were provided. Over time as the parkway transformed into a road of commerce, the picnic areas were closed for a variety of reasons. Their ramp terminals became insufficient to accommodate the high-speed mainline traffic and in addition to the decreasing number of users, the picnic areas were becoming more effective as maintenance yards and were converted as such or closed altogether.

The one remaining picnic area, John B. Townsend Shoemaker Holly in Upper Township, is closed from dusk to dawn. Posted signs within the picnic area prohibit fires and camping.

There were ten operational picnic areas:
===Emergency assistance===
On the Garden State Parkway, the emergency assistance number is #GSP, which is #477 in number form. Towing and roadside assistance are provided from authorized garages. The New Jersey State Police is the primary police agency that handles calls for service on the parkway. New Jersey State Police Troop D serves the Garden State Parkway, with stations in Galloway, Holmdel, and Bloomfield. Other emergency services such as fire and first aid are usually handled by the jurisdictions in which that section of the parkway passes.

==Exit list==
The parkway was the first highway in the United States to use mileage-based exit numbers. Historically, the exit numbers on the northbound and southbound roadways were not symmetrical. The New Jersey Highway Authority considered each as a separate road and as a result, many exits had non-matching numbers.











==See also==
*

==References==
==External links==
*New Jersey Turnpike Authority &amp; Garden State Parkway Official Website
*  Straight Line Diagram
*Photos of the Garden State Parkway
*New Jersey Expressways and Tollways
*Garden State Parkway (NJ 444) (Greater New York Roads)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q811493" start="4" end="24" title="Garden State Parkway" label="Garden State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q811493" start="26" end="29" title="Garden State Parkway" label="GSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="36" end="53" title="Controlled-access highway" label="controlled-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="54" end="63" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="113" end="123" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q138548" start="168" end="176" title="Cape May, New Jersey" label="Cape May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="190" end="198" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q178277" start="213" end="221" title="Montvale, New Jersey" label="Montvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q783822" start="260" end="268" title="List of U.S. state and territory nicknames" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q130954" start="304" end="311" title="parkway" label="parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897470" start="319" end="327" title="Unsigned highway" label="unsigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q811493" start="348" end="357" title="Garden State Parkway" label="Route 444"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="365" end="404" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="453" end="483" title="New York State Thruway#Garden State Parkway Connector" label="Garden State Parkway Connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q736574" start="504" end="526" title="New York State Thruway" label="New York State Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633533" start="575" end="591" title="Ramapo, New York" label="Ramapo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="840" end="853" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087213" start="922" end="932" title="Toms River, New Jersey" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095497" start="1075" end="1087" title="New Jersey Pine Barrens" label="Pine Barrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246511" start="1137" end="1149" title="Jersey Shore" label="Jersey Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9050707" start="1402" end="1421" title="North Jersey" label="Northern New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q811340" start="1583" end="1593" title="U.S. Route 1 in New Jersey" label="US Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q811383" start="1602" end="1606" title="U.S. Route 9 in New Jersey" label="US 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q822485" start="1612" end="1620" title="New Jersey Route 35" label="Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q811493" start="1734" end="1749" title="Garden State Parkway" label="Route 4 Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376564" start="1942" end="1953" title="Interchange (road)" label="interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q867686" start="2182" end="2211" title="New Jersey Turnpike Authority" label="New Jersey Turnpike Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="2267" end="2286" title="New Jersey Turnpike" label="New Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863608" start="2309" end="2320" title="Barrier toll system" label="open system"/>
<link wikidata="Q800074" start="2490" end="2497" title="E-ZPass" label="E-ZPass"/>
<link wikidata="Q786014" start="2556" end="2568" title="Rest area" label="service area"/>
<link wikidata="Q506294" start="2640" end="2646" title="picnic" label="picnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q825549" start="2763" end="2783" title="New Jersey Route 109" label="New Jersey Route 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q497795" start="2787" end="2802" title="Cape May County, New Jersey" label="Cape May County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246511" start="2939" end="2951" title="Jersey Shore" label="Jersey Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599107" start="2966" end="2986" title="Great Egg Harbor Bay" label="Great Egg Harbor Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="3014" end="3027" title="Atlantic City, New Jersey" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095497" start="3079" end="3091" title="New Jersey Pine Barrens" label="Pine Barrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087213" start="3109" end="3119" title="Toms River, New Jersey" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q502564" start="3123" end="3135" title="Ocean County, New Jersey" label="Ocean County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085364" start="3193" end="3205" title="Tinton Falls, New Jersey" label="Tinton Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="3231" end="3249" title="Local-express lanes" label="local-express lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013228" start="3292" end="3302" title="Sayreville, New Jersey" label="Sayreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="3334" end="3347" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q204151" start="3353" end="3372" title="Woodbridge Township, New Jersey" label="Woodbridge Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="3393" end="3412" title="New Jersey Turnpike" label="New Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q811218" start="3414" end="3427" title="Interstate 95 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q496862" start="3524" end="3533" title="Middlesex County, New Jersey" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q502459" start="3538" end="3543" title="Union County, New Jersey" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="3568" end="3572" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="I-78"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="3578" end="3584" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="3641" end="3649" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q811209" start="3660" end="3664" title="Interstate 80 in New Jersey" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086321" start="3668" end="3680" title="Saddle Brook, New Jersey" label="Saddle Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q112915" start="3732" end="3745" title="Bergen County, New Jersey" label="Bergen County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3776" end="3784" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3806" end="3836" title="New York State Thruway#Garden State Parkway Connector" label="Garden State Parkway Connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q736574" start="3862" end="3884" title="New York State Thruway" label="New York State Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9050707" start="3942" end="3954" title="North Jersey" label="North Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q497928" start="4111" end="4119" title="Atlantic County, New Jersey" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307796" start="4155" end="4170" title="Driscoll Bridge" label="Driscoll Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="4221" end="4233" title="Concurrency (road)" label="concurrently"/>
<link wikidata="Q811383" start="4239" end="4243" title="U.S. Route 9 in New Jersey" label="US 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087213" start="4346" end="4356" title="Toms River, New Jersey" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013228" start="4382" end="4392" title="Sayreville, New Jersey" label="Sayreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021714" start="4397" end="4404" title="Paramus, New Jersey" label="Paramus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897470" start="4683" end="4703" title="Unsigned highway" label="unsigned designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q800459" start="4737" end="4760" title="National Highway System (United States)" label="National Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q285783" start="4909" end="4930" title="at-grade intersection" label="at-grade intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q825549" start="4936" end="4945" title="New Jersey Route 109" label="Route 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073839" start="4949" end="4963" title="Lower Township, New Jersey" label="Lower Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q497795" start="4965" end="4980" title="Cape May County, New Jersey" label="Cape May County"/>
<link wikidata="Q138548" start="5021" end="5029" title="Cape May, New Jersey" label="Cape May"/>
<link wikidata="Q811383" start="5046" end="5050" title="U.S. Route 9 in New Jersey" label="US 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034940" start="5059" end="5079" title="Cape May–Lewes Ferry" label="Cape May–Lewes Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="5132" end="5139" title="Controlled-access highway" label="freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065437" start="5147" end="5165" title="Cape May" label="Cape May Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246511" start="5275" end="5287" title="Jersey Shore" label="Jersey Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073787" start="5517" end="5532" title="Middle Township, New Jersey" label="Middle Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q822839" start="5561" end="5569" title="New Jersey Route 47" label="Route 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774970" start="5584" end="5597" title="The Wildwoods" label="The Wildwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085215" start="5631" end="5641" title="Rio Grande, New Jersey" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069121" start="5726" end="5761" title="Pennsylvania-Reading Seashore Lines" label="Pennsylvania-Reading Seashore Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q826312" start="5860" end="5869" title="New Jersey Route 147" label="Route 147"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083250" start="5896" end="5910" title="North Wildwood, New Jersey" label="North Wildwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996236" start="5912" end="5922" title="Whitesboro, New Jersey" label="Whitesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999107" start="5928" end="5936" title="Burleigh, New Jersey" label="Burleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089271" start="5971" end="5991" title="Cape May Court House, New Jersey" label="Cape May Court House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6278" end="6284" title="List of county routes in Cape May County, New Jersey#657" label="CR 657"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035014" start="6304" end="6332" title="Cooper University Hospital Cape Regional" label="Cape Regional Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083016" start="6337" end="6349" title="Stone Harbor, New Jersey" label="Stone Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6423" end="6429" title="List of county routes in Cape May County, New Jersey#609" label="CR 609"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034928" start="6461" end="6491" title="Cape May County Park &amp;amp; Zoo" label="Cape May County Park &amp;amp; Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034931" start="6530" end="6571" title="Cape May County Technical School District" label="Cape May County Technical School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6802" end="6808" title="List of county routes in Cape May County, New Jersey#601" label="CR 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086573" start="6819" end="6825" title="Avalon, New Jersey" label="Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653048" start="6830" end="6838" title="Swainton, New Jersey" label="Swainton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088389" start="6880" end="6895" title="Dennis Township, New Jersey" label="Dennis Township"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6951" end="6957" title="List of county routes in Cape May County, New Jersey#625" label="CR 625"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082878" start="6968" end="6981" title="Sea Isle City, New Jersey" label="Sea Isle City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="7002" end="7014" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073974" start="7085" end="7099" title="Upper Township, New Jersey" label="Upper Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q822935" start="7199" end="7207" title="New Jersey Route 50" label="Route 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q25199089" start="7222" end="7230" title="Seaville, New Jersey" label="Seaville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7580" end="7586" title="List of county routes in Cape May County, New Jersey#623" label="CR 623"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017603" start="7602" end="7612" title="Ocean City, New Jersey" label="Ocean City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772166" start="7617" end="7624" title="Marmora, New Jersey" label="Marmora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="7661" end="7677" title="Concurrency (road)" label="run concurrently"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880123" start="7757" end="7771" title="Beesley&amp;#x27;s Point, New Jersey" label="Beesleys Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599107" start="7818" end="7838" title="Great Egg Harbor Bay" label="Great Egg Harbor Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599110" start="7846" end="7869" title="Great Egg Harbor Bridge" label="Great Egg Harbor Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084242" start="7897" end="7909" title="Somers Point, New Jersey" label="Somers Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q497928" start="7911" end="7926" title="Atlantic County, New Jersey" label="Atlantic County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300314" start="8331" end="8345" title="Jersey barrier" label="Jersey barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q484956" start="8390" end="8409" title="Egg Harbor Township, New Jersey" label="Egg Harbor Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867517" start="8644" end="8660" title="Black Horse Pike" label="Black Horse Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q811429" start="8662" end="8667" title="U.S. Route 40 in New Jersey" label="US 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q811477" start="8668" end="8674" title="U.S. Route 322 in New Jersey" label="US 322"/>
<link wikidata="Q859381" start="8693" end="8699" title="County Route 563 (New Jersey)" label="CR 563"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="8764" end="8777" title="Atlantic City, New Jersey" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8995" end="9001" title="List of county routes in Atlantic County, New Jersey#608" label="CR 608"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075207" start="9009" end="9031" title="cloverleaf interchange" label="cloverleaf interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q811484" start="9059" end="9083" title="Atlantic City Expressway" label="Atlantic City Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="9110" end="9122" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430885" start="9257" end="9292" title="Atlantic City International Airport" label="Atlantic City International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q68530" start="9312" end="9317" title="flume" label="flume"/>
<link wikidata="Q363310" start="9434" end="9451" title="Galloway Township, New Jersey" label="Galloway Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="9468" end="9478" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q756350" start="9486" end="9504" title="Atlantic City Line" label="Atlantic City Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q811419" start="9569" end="9574" title="U.S. Route 30 in New Jersey" label="US 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q332198" start="9585" end="9592" title="Absecon, New Jersey" label="Absecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="9640" end="9653" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679789" start="9700" end="9723" title="New Jersey State Police" label="New Jersey State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q859370" start="9820" end="9826" title="County Route 561 (New Jersey)" label="CR 561"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084744" start="9854" end="9860" title="Pomona, New Jersey" label="Pomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095497" start="9909" end="9921" title="New Jersey Pine Barrens" label="Pine Barrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329259" start="9946" end="9965" title="Stockton University" label="Stockton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q859435" start="10012" end="10018" title="County Route 575 (New Jersey)" label="CR 575"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10019" end="10030" title="County Route 561 (New Jersey)#CR 561 Alternate" label="CR 561 Alt."/>
<link wikidata="Q1089405" start="10091" end="10104" title="Port Republic, New Jersey" label="Port Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10348" end="10366" title="List of New Jersey Scenic Byways#Pine Barrens Byway" label="Pine Barrens Byway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934231" start="10399" end="10412" title="Mullica River" label="Mullica River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072724" start="10478" end="10497" title="Bass River Township, New Jersey" label="Bass River Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q138141" start="10499" end="10516" title="Burlington County, New Jersey" label="Burlington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q10980467" start="10630" end="10640" title="New Gretna, New Jersey" label="New Gretna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561009" start="10706" end="10716" title="Bass River (New Jersey)" label="Bass River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867965" start="10909" end="10932" title="Bass River State Forest" label="Bass River State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073845" start="10985" end="11011" title="Little Egg Harbor Township, New Jersey" label="Little Egg Harbor Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502564" start="11013" end="11025" title="Ocean County, New Jersey" label="Ocean County"/>
<link wikidata="Q859114" start="11096" end="11102" title="County Route 539 (New Jersey)" label="CR 539"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083460" start="11118" end="11127" title="Tuckerton, New Jersey" label="Tuckerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088374" start="11145" end="11155" title="Eagleswood Township, New Jersey" label="Eagleswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987337" start="11179" end="11194" title="Westecunk Creek" label="Westecunk Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325364" start="11221" end="11240" title="Eagles Nest Airport (New Jersey)" label="Eagles Nest Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412133" start="11273" end="11290" title="Stafford Township, New Jersey" label="Stafford Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q824376" start="11386" end="11394" title="New Jersey Route 72" label="Route 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q970773" start="11421" end="11431" title="Manahawkin, New Jersey" label="Manahawkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533347" start="11436" end="11453" title="Long Beach Island" label="Long Beach Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088201" start="11613" end="11621" title="Barnegat Township, New Jersey" label="Barnegat"/>
<link wikidata="Q859308" start="11720" end="11726" title="County Route 554 (New Jersey)" label="CR 554"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076094" start="11903" end="11917" title="Ocean Township, Ocean County, New Jersey" label="Ocean Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q859023" start="11976" end="11982" title="County Route 532 (New Jersey)" label="CR 532"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116326" start="12001" end="12013" title="Oyster Creek (New Jersey)" label="Oyster Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074483" start="12030" end="12044" title="Lacey Township, New Jersey" label="Lacey Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867168" start="12157" end="12163" title="County Route 614 (Ocean County, New Jersey)" label="CR 614"/>
<link wikidata="Q765824" start="12190" end="12202" title="Forked River, New Jersey" label="Forked River"/>
<link wikidata="Q474045" start="12212" end="12222" title="Celia Cruz" label="Celia Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056608" start="12287" end="12298" title="Cedar Creek (Barnegat Bay)" label="Cedar Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088441" start="12310" end="12327" title="Berkeley Township, New Jersey" label="Berkeley Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061761" start="12363" end="12391" title="Central Regional High School" label="Central Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299927" start="12409" end="12434" title="Double Trouble State Park, New Jersey" label="Double Trouble State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086210" start="12464" end="12473" title="Beachwood, New Jersey" label="Beachwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083396" start="12523" end="12539" title="South Toms River, New Jersey" label="South Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q859006" start="12647" end="12653" title="County Route 530 (New Jersey)" label="CR 530"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820393" start="12674" end="12684" title="Toms River" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087213" start="12698" end="12708" title="Toms River, New Jersey" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="12839" end="12846" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q858980" start="12903" end="12909" title="County Route 527 (New Jersey)" label="CR 527"/>
<link wikidata="Q822547" start="12975" end="12983" title="New Jersey Route 37" label="Route 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q994376" start="13010" end="13019" title="Lakehurst, New Jersey" label="Lakehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086913" start="13021" end="13036" title="Seaside Heights, New Jersey" label="Seaside Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083013" start="13042" end="13065" title="Island Beach State Park" label="Island Beach State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q827018" start="13294" end="13303" title="New Jersey Route 166" label="Route 166"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075970" start="13461" end="13481" title="Ocean County College" label="Ocean County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088792" start="13509" end="13526" title="Lakewood Township, New Jersey" label="Lakewood Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q824151" start="13564" end="13572" title="New Jersey Route 70" label="Route 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637971" start="13582" end="13596" title="Brick Township, New Jersey" label="Brick Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014591" start="13601" end="13615" title="Point Pleasant, New Jersey" label="Point Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q858995" start="13658" end="13664" title="County Route 528 (New Jersey)" label="CR 528"/>
<link wikidata="Q859250" start="13758" end="13764" title="County Route 549 (New Jersey)" label="CR 549"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823382" start="13805" end="13821" title="Metedeconk River" label="Metedeconk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q825117" start="13839" end="13847" title="New Jersey Route 88" label="Route 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003207" start="14179" end="14189" title="Photovoltaic power station" label="solar farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679383" start="14245" end="14258" title="Wall Township, New Jersey" label="Wall Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502424" start="14260" end="14275" title="Monmouth County, New Jersey" label="Monmouth County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965952" start="14358" end="14382" title="Brick Township Reservoir" label="Brick Township Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747009" start="14422" end="14437" title="Manasquan River" label="Manasquan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035782" start="14459" end="14481" title="Capital to Coast Trail" label="Capital to Coast Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730378" start="14523" end="14541" title="Allaire State Park" label="Allaire State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="14578" end="14605" title="Local-express lanes" label="collector-distributor roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q811231" start="14641" end="14646" title="Interstate 195 (New Jersey)" label="I-195"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945571" start="14671" end="14685" title="Central Jersey" label="Central Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="14693" end="14700" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q822453" start="14703" end="14711" title="New Jersey Route 34" label="Route 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q826012" start="14762" end="14771" title="New Jersey Route 138" label="Route 138"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089538" start="14796" end="14802" title="Belmar, New Jersey" label="Belmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489811" start="14902" end="14918" title="Shark River Park" label="Shark River Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q441214" start="14944" end="14954" title="Judy Blume" label="Judy Blume"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15046" end="15051" title="List of county routes in Monmouth County, New Jersey#18-1" label="CR 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085364" start="15073" end="15085" title="Tinton Falls, New Jersey" label="Tinton Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q822416" start="15104" end="15112" title="New Jersey Route 33" label="Route 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088838" start="15137" end="15150" title="Bradley Beach, New Jersey" label="Bradley Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077969" start="15168" end="15185" title="Freehold Township, New Jersey" label="Freehold Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q823881" start="15191" end="15199" title="New Jersey Route 66" label="Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q201127" start="15226" end="15237" title="Asbury Park, New Jersey" label="Asbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15294" end="15322" title="Tinton Falls, New Jersey#Economy" label="Jersey Shore Premium Outlets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15365" end="15370" title="List of county routes in Monmouth County, New Jersey#16" label="CR 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="15552" end="15570" title="Local-express lanes" label="local-express lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q821814" start="15726" end="15734" title="New Jersey Route 18" label="Route 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q822515" start="15739" end="15747" title="New Jersey Route 36" label="Route 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="15774" end="15787" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q995231" start="15805" end="15816" title="Long Branch, New Jersey" label="Long Branch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15919" end="15924" title="List of county routes in Monmouth County, New Jersey#51" label="CR 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157089" start="16069" end="16087" title="Southern Secondary" label="Southern Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q117252616" start="16118" end="16153" title="Delaware and Raritan River Railroad" label="Delaware and Raritan River Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656233" start="16212" end="16226" title="Swimming River" label="Swimming River"/>
<link wikidata="Q735215" start="16232" end="16251" title="Middletown Township, New Jersey" label="Middletown Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q858888" start="16292" end="16298" title="County Route 520 (New Jersey)" label="CR 520"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010539" start="16342" end="16350" title="Red Bank, New Jersey" label="Red Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084100" start="16355" end="16363" title="Lincroft, New Jersey" label="Lincroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063616" start="16478" end="16505" title="Naval Weapons Station Earle" label="Naval Weapons Station Earle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16600" end="16605" title="List of county routes in Monmouth County, New Jersey#52" label="CR 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474335" start="16620" end="16636" title="Holmdel Township, New Jersey" label="Holmdel Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119814" start="16658" end="16678" title="PNC Bank Arts Center" label="PNC Bank Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009527" start="16687" end="16729" title="New Jersey Vietnam Veterans&amp;#x27; Memorial" label="New Jersey Vietnam Veterans&amp;#x27; Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592114" start="16745" end="16751" title="Hazlet, New Jersey" label="Hazlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055732" start="16791" end="16814" title="North Jersey Coast Line" label="North Jersey Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q822485" start="16850" end="16858" title="New Jersey Route 35" label="Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089880" start="16886" end="16893" title="Keyport, New Jersey" label="Keyport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17043" end="17047" title="List of county routes in Monmouth County, New Jersey#3" label="CR 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750546" start="17083" end="17100" title="Aberdeen Township, New Jersey" label="Aberdeen Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908095" start="17121" end="17134" title="Matawan Creek" label="Matawan Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082606" start="17254" end="17261" title="Matawan, New Jersey" label="Matawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089070" start="17277" end="17296" title="Old Bridge Township, New Jersey" label="Old Bridge Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q496862" start="17298" end="17314" title="Middlesex County, New Jersey" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17362" end="17368" title="List of county routes in Middlesex County, New Jersey#626" label="CR 626"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082606" start="17378" end="17385" title="Matawan, New Jersey" label="Matawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089431" start="17406" end="17428" title="Cheesequake State Park" label="Cheesequake State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="17474" end="17480" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013228" start="17519" end="17529" title="Sayreville, New Jersey" label="Sayreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q572040" start="17675" end="17686" title="South Amboy, New Jersey" label="South Amboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162679" start="17752" end="17784" title="Conrail Shared Assets Operations" label="Conrail Shared Assets Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162679" start="17791" end="17806" title="Amboy Secondary" label="Amboy Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17877" end="17883" title="List of county routes in Middlesex County, New Jersey#670" label="CR 670"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294573" start="17963" end="17985" title="Raritan River Railroad" label="Raritan River Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q800074" start="18140" end="18147" title="E-ZPass" label="E-ZPass"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="18239" end="18252" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307796" start="18260" end="18275" title="Driscoll Bridge" label="Driscoll Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q828208" start="18467" end="18476" title="New Jersey Route 440" label="Route 440"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041955" start="18502" end="18522" title="Outerbridge Crossing" label="Outerbridge Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="18526" end="18539" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q204151" start="18567" end="18586" title="Woodbridge Township, New Jersey" label="Woodbridge Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="18823" end="18842" title="New Jersey Turnpike" label="New Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q811218" start="18844" end="18848" title="Interstate 95 in New Jersey" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q811340" start="18947" end="18951" title="U.S. Route 1 in New Jersey" label="US 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q112685852" start="19009" end="19031" title="Port Reading Secondary" label="Port Reading Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q585438" start="19067" end="19073" title="Iselin, New Jersey" label="Iselin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="19157" end="19163" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="19171" end="19189" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824872" start="19202" end="19219" title="Metropark station" label="Metropark station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057868" start="19257" end="19280" title="Northeast Corridor Line" label="Northeast Corridor Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q822217" start="19314" end="19322" title="New Jersey Route 27" label="Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003082" start="19337" end="19343" title="Rahway, New Jersey" label="Rahway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086117" start="19559" end="19564" title="Clark, New Jersey" label="Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q502459" start="19566" end="19578" title="Union County, New Jersey" label="Union County"/>
<link wikidata="Q113493320" start="19702" end="19734" title="Robinson&amp;#x27;s Branch Reservoir" label="Robinson&amp;#x27;s Branch Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19783" end="19789" title="List of county routes in Union County, New Jersey#613" label="CR 613"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932900" start="19891" end="19908" title="Winfield Township, New Jersey" label="Winfield Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283641" start="19929" end="19941" title="Rahway River" label="Rahway River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089095" start="19947" end="19955" title="Cranford, New Jersey" label="Cranford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20006" end="20012" title="List of county routes in Union County, New Jersey#607" label="CR 607"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20037" end="20043" title="List of county routes in Union County, New Jersey#615" label="CR 615"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518811" start="20132" end="20143" title="Lehigh Line (Conrail)" label="Lehigh Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283643" start="20161" end="20183" title="Rahway Valley Railroad" label="Rahway Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294577" start="20223" end="20242" title="Raritan Valley Line" label="Raritan Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q822266" start="20275" end="20283" title="New Jersey Route 28" label="Route 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q770167" start="20298" end="20310" title="Roselle Park, New Jersey" label="Roselle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021540" start="20338" end="20348" title="Kenilworth, New Jersey" label="Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q858731" start="20449" end="20455" title="County Route 509 (New Jersey)" label="CR 509"/>
<link wikidata="Q28207146" start="20480" end="20506" title="Galloping Hill Golf Course" label="Galloping Hill Golf Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089738" start="20519" end="20524" title="Union Township, Union County, New Jersey" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20585" end="20591" title="List of county routes in Union County, New Jersey#619" label="CR 619"/>
<link wikidata="Q811410" start="20656" end="20661" title="U.S. Route 22 in New Jersey" label="US 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q824830" start="20666" end="20674" title="New Jersey Route 82" label="Route 82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089749" start="20683" end="20691" title="Hillside, New Jersey" label="Hillside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886390" start="20782" end="20799" title="Union Watersphere" label="Union Watersphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="20927" end="20942" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363429" start="21002" end="21017" title="Elizabeth River (New Jersey)" label="Elizabeth River"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="21123" end="21127" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="I-78"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086276" start="21152" end="21161" title="Irvington, New Jersey" label="Irvington"/>
<link wikidata="Q128077" start="21163" end="21175" title="Essex County, New Jersey" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074905" start="21354" end="21376" title="Irvington Bus Terminal" label="Irvington Bus Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881503" start="21443" end="21456" title="frontage road" label="frontage road"/>
<link wikidata="Q858749" start="21706" end="21712" title="County Route 510 (New Jersey)" label="CR 510"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="21770" end="21776" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886162" start="21794" end="21817" title="Holy Sepulchre Cemetery (East Orange, New Jersey)" label="Holy Sepulchre Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q988515" start="21851" end="21862" title="East Orange, New Jersey" label="East Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q811249" start="22071" end="22076" title="Interstate 280 (New Jersey)" label="I-280"/>
<link wikidata="Q858720" start="22097" end="22103" title="County Route 508 (New Jersey)" label="CR 508"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303521" start="22118" end="22133" title="Downtown Newark" label="Downtown Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913575" start="22246" end="22270" title="Morris &amp;amp; Essex Lines" label="Morris &amp;amp; Essex Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329078" start="22276" end="22295" title="East Orange station" label="East Orange station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014891" start="22488" end="22523" title="New York and Greenwood Lake Railway (1878–1943)" label="New York and Greenwood Lake Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q648622" start="22538" end="22548" title="Bloomfield, New Jersey" label="Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904583" start="22623" end="22645" title="Montclair-Boonton Line" label="Montclair-Boonton Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q867660" start="22674" end="22691" title="Newark-Pompton Turnpike" label="Bloomfield Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22693" end="22704" title="County Route 506 (New Jersey)#Special routes" label="CR 506 Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="22757" end="22781" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q858695" start="22846" end="22852" title="County Route 506 (New Jersey)" label="CR 506"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088133" start="22975" end="22981" title="Nutley, New Jersey" label="Nutley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23136" end="23142" title="List of county routes in Essex County, New Jersey#655" label="CR 655"/>
<link wikidata="Q678437" start="23152" end="23161" title="Montclair, New Jersey" label="Montclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q711825" start="23178" end="23188" title="Larry Doby" label="Larry Doby"/>
<link wikidata="Q717203" start="23193" end="23205" title="Connie Chung" label="Connie Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q254428" start="23387" end="23394" title="Clifton, New Jersey" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q495974" start="23396" end="23410" title="Passaic County, New Jersey" label="Passaic County"/>
<link wikidata="Q821192" start="23449" end="23456" title="New Jersey Route 3" label="Route 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q409675" start="23716" end="23721" title="U.S. Route 46" label="US 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q821931" start="23789" end="23797" title="New Jersey Route 19" label="Route 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="23832" end="23840" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736006" start="23922" end="23931" title="Main Line (NJ Transit)" label="Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24061" end="24067" title="List of county routes in Passaic County, New Jersey#702" label="CR 702"/>
<link wikidata="Q170433" start="24078" end="24085" title="Passaic, New Jersey" label="Passaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q821970" start="24350" end="24358" title="New Jersey Route 20" label="Route 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="24408" end="24421" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q576499" start="24433" end="24445" title="Elmwood Park, New Jersey" label="Elmwood Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q112915" start="24447" end="24460" title="Bergen County, New Jersey" label="Bergen County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086053" start="24521" end="24529" title="Garfield, New Jersey" label="Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725537" start="24616" end="24657" title="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway" label="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891507" start="24721" end="24739" title="Bergen County Line" label="Bergen County Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q811209" start="24776" end="24780" title="Interstate 80 in New Jersey" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086321" start="24821" end="24833" title="Saddle Brook, New Jersey" label="Saddle Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397718" start="24881" end="24905" title="Saddle River County Park" label="Saddle River County Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944720" start="24922" end="24934" title="Saddle River (Passaic River tributary)" label="Saddle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089545" start="24950" end="24963" title="Rochelle Park, New Jersey" label="Rochelle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q827860" start="25027" end="25036" title="New Jersey Route 208" label="Route 208"/>
<link wikidata="Q821297" start="25041" end="25048" title="New Jersey Route 4" label="Route 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021714" start="25062" end="25069" title="Paramus, New Jersey" label="Paramus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382294" start="25079" end="25097" title="Garden State Plaza" label="Garden State Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q821757" start="25213" end="25221" title="New Jersey Route 17" label="Route 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q11329374" start="25394" end="25406" title="Paramus Park" label="Paramus Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891540" start="25425" end="25450" title="New Bridge Medical Center" label="New Bridge Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25510" end="25515" title="List of county routes in Bergen County, New Jersey#80-1" label="CR 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086416" start="25531" end="25538" title="Oradell, New Jersey" label="Oradell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25666" end="25672" title="List of county routes in Bergen County, New Jersey#110-1" label="CR 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q485401" start="25690" end="25709" title="Washington Township, Bergen County, New Jersey" label="Washington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q858631" start="26016" end="26022" title="County Route 502 (New Jersey)" label="CR 502"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088095" start="26033" end="26041" title="Westwood, New Jersey" label="Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082713" start="26046" end="26053" title="Emerson, New Jersey" label="Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705840" start="26075" end="26089" title="Pascack Valley" label="Pascack Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082777" start="26171" end="26180" title="Hillsdale, New Jersey" label="Hillsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082846" start="26197" end="26211" title="Woodcliff Lake, New Jersey" label="Woodcliff Lake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26317" end="26323" title="List of county routes in Bergen County, New Jersey#S73" label="CR S73"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021551" start="26335" end="26347" title="Saddle River, New Jersey" label="Saddle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q178277" start="26373" end="26381" title="Montvale, New Jersey" label="Montvale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26525" end="26530" title="List of county routes in Bergen County, New Jersey#94" label="CR 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q253067" start="26540" end="26550" title="Park Ridge, New Jersey" label="Park Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="26643" end="26651" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q736574" start="26754" end="26776" title="New York State Thruway" label="New York State Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q94940" start="26832" end="26836" title="Interstate 87 (New York)" label="I-87"/>
<link wikidata="Q811258" start="26837" end="26842" title="Interstate 287" label="I-287"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268640" start="26847" end="26853" title="Nanuet, New York" label="Nanuet"/>
<link wikidata="Q811519" start="26972" end="27000" title="Palisades Interstate Parkway" label="Palisades Interstate Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="27235" end="27243" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="27248" end="27261" title="Atlantic City, New Jersey" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q821297" start="27348" end="27355" title="New Jersey Route 4" label="Route 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="27410" end="27434" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q811340" start="27485" end="27489" title="U.S. Route 1 in New Jersey" label="US 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q811383" start="27491" end="27495" title="U.S. Route 9 in New Jersey" label="US 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q822485" start="27501" end="27509" title="New Jersey Route 35" label="Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q822217" start="27667" end="27675" title="New Jersey Route 27" label="Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089095" start="27685" end="27693" title="Cranford, New Jersey" label="Cranford"/>
<link wikidata="Q456131" start="27815" end="27835" title="Gilmore David Clarke" label="Gilmore David Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16912277" start="27860" end="27880" title="Parsons Brinckerhoff" label="Parsons Brinckerhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="27902" end="27914" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="27945" end="27958" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q623935" start="28036" end="28057" title="Pennsylvania Turnpike" label="Pennsylvania Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="28116" end="28124" title="autobahn" label="autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113025" start="28161" end="28176" title="Merritt Parkway" label="Merritt Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q204151" start="29044" end="29063" title="Woodbridge Township, New Jersey" label="Woodbridge Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089271" start="29140" end="29160" title="Cape May Court House, New Jersey" label="Cape May Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q867686" start="29486" end="29514" title="New Jersey Turnpike Authority" label="New Jersey Highway Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089738" start="29714" end="29728" title="Union Township, Union County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q811410" start="30025" end="30030" title="U.S. Route 22 in New Jersey" label="US 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q822515" start="30224" end="30232" title="New Jersey Route 36" label="Route 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="30293" end="30306" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q484956" start="30712" end="30731" title="Egg Harbor Township, New Jersey" label="Egg Harbor Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q811419" start="30812" end="30828" title="U.S. Route 30 in New Jersey" label="White Horse Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q159184" start="30988" end="30997" title="super-two" label="super-two"/>
<link wikidata="Q822935" start="31262" end="31270" title="New Jersey Route 50" label="Route 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880122" start="31364" end="31391" title="Beesley&amp;#x27;s Point Bridge" label="Beesley&amp;#x27;s Point Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q821192" start="33210" end="33217" title="New Jersey Route 3" label="Route 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="33518" end="33531" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q409675" start="33610" end="33615" title="U.S. Route 46" label="US 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q576499" start="33631" end="33643" title="Elmwood Park, New Jersey" label="Elmwood Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q821757" start="33710" end="33718" title="New Jersey Route 17" label="Route 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021714" start="33722" end="33729" title="Paramus, New Jersey" label="Paramus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599110" start="34244" end="34267" title="Great Egg Harbor Bridge" label="Great Egg Harbor Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q821757" start="34377" end="34385" title="New Jersey Route 17" label="Route 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q178277" start="34452" end="34460" title="Montvale, New Jersey" label="Montvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q736574" start="34492" end="34514" title="New York State Thruway" label="New York State Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q53144495" start="34672" end="34704" title="New York State Thruway Authority" label="New York State Thruway Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q825472" start="35191" end="35200" title="New Jersey Route 101" label="Route 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q776648" start="35242" end="35248" title="Kearny, New Jersey" label="Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q138458" start="35252" end="35262" title="Hackensack, New Jersey" label="Hackensack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343116" start="35894" end="35900" title="U-turn" label="U-turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q254428" start="36412" end="36419" title="Clifton, New Jersey" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089714" start="36633" end="36644" title="Farmingdale, New Jersey" label="Farmingdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032075" start="37595" end="37600" title="Radar speed gun" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089431" start="38510" end="38532" title="Cheesequake State Park" label="Cheesequake State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883199" start="39007" end="39032" title="Bell Labs Holmdel Complex" label="Bell Labs Holmdel Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066364" start="39553" end="39575" title="Charles W. Sandman Jr." label="Charles W. Sandman Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q497795" start="39585" end="39600" title="Cape May County" label="Cape May County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931391" start="39601" end="39621" title="Board of County Commissioners (New Jersey)" label="Board of Freeholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075207" start="40313" end="40335" title="cloverleaf interchange" label="cloverleaf interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q811484" start="40426" end="40450" title="Atlantic City Expressway" label="Atlantic City Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q811209" start="41314" end="41318" title="Interstate 80 in New Jersey" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="42944" end="42970" title="collector-distributor lanes" label="collector-distributor road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119814" start="44158" end="44182" title="Garden State Arts Center" label="Garden State Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134118" start="45159" end="45168" title="gag order" label="gag order"/>
<link wikidata="Q502564" start="45573" end="45585" title="Ocean County, New Jersey" label="Ocean County"/>
<link wikidata="Q821931" start="46041" end="46049" title="New Jersey Route 19" label="Route 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887014" start="49190" end="49204" title="Malcolm Forbes" label="Malcolm Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q452497" start="49434" end="49442" title="New Jersey Route 55" label="Route 55"/>
<link wikidata="Q822839" start="49636" end="49644" title="New Jersey Route 47" label="Route 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q867552" start="49718" end="49737" title="Driscoll Expressway" label="Driscoll Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932994" start="49840" end="49855" title="South Brunswick, New Jersey" label="South Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086351" start="50082" end="50096" title="East Brunswick, New Jersey" label="East Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q248668" start="56055" end="56068" title="Jim McGreevey" label="Jim McGreevey"/>
<link wikidata="Q867686" start="56164" end="56193" title="New Jersey Turnpike Authority" label="New Jersey Turnpike Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088792" start="56363" end="56371" title="Lakewood, New Jersey" label="Lakewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370583" start="56593" end="56607" title="superstructure" label="superstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307796" start="58400" end="58415" title="Driscoll Bridge" label="Driscoll Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073974" start="58899" end="58913" title="Upper Township, New Jersey" label="Upper Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084242" start="58930" end="58942" title="Somers Point, New Jersey" label="Somers Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072724" start="58960" end="58979" title="Bass River Township, New Jersey" label="Bass River Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088201" start="58995" end="59012" title="Barnegat Township, New Jersey" label="Barnegat Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085364" start="59031" end="59043" title="Tinton Falls, New Jersey" label="Tinton Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013228" start="59058" end="59068" title="Sayreville, New Jersey" label="Sayreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089749" start="59081" end="59089" title="Hillside, New Jersey" label="Hillside"/>
<link wikidata="Q648622" start="59102" end="59112" title="Bloomfield, New Jersey" label="Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086321" start="59126" end="59138" title="Saddle Brook, New Jersey" label="Saddle Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q485401" start="59164" end="59183" title="Washington Township, Bergen County, New Jersey" label="Washington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087213" start="59301" end="59311" title="Toms River, New Jersey" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q811238" start="59723" end="59728" title="Interstate 278" label="I-278"/>
<link wikidata="Q824578" start="59809" end="59817" title="New Jersey Route 75" label="Route 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="59928" end="59967" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60029" end="60044" title="Gannett Fleming" label="Gannett Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="60272" end="60283" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143211" start="60444" end="60457" title="James Simpson (government official)" label="James Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="61169" end="61176" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416536" start="61269" end="61284" title="William Martini" label="William Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q497795" start="61347" end="61362" title="Cape May County, New Jersey" label="Cape May County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089271" start="61530" end="61550" title="Cape May Court House, New Jersey" label="Cape May Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q880166" start="63736" end="63749" title="Richard Codey" label="Richard Codey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412133" start="63815" end="63832" title="Stafford Township, New Jersey" label="Stafford Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083396" start="63863" end="63879" title="South Toms River, New Jersey" label="South Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084242" start="64025" end="64037" title="Somers Point, New Jersey" label="Somers Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934231" start="65307" end="65320" title="Mullica River" label="Mullica River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089405" start="65326" end="65339" title="Port Republic, New Jersey" label="Port Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072724" start="65343" end="65353" title="Bass River Township, New Jersey" label="Bass River"/>
<link wikidata="Q800074" start="66105" end="66112" title="E-ZPass" label="E-ZPass"/>
<link wikidata="Q738031" start="66767" end="66789" title="park and ride" label="Lincroft park and ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="67045" end="67058" title="traffic light" label="traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832434" start="67144" end="67160" title="Variations in traffic light operation" label="left turn signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="68087" end="68104" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q800074" start="68122" end="68129" title="E-ZPass" label="E-ZPass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300314" start="68866" end="68880" title="median barrier" label="median barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q822978" start="70171" end="70190" title="New Jersey Route 52" label="New Jersey Route 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q859345" start="70353" end="70359" title="County Route 559 (New Jersey)" label="CR 559"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863608" start="71274" end="71285" title="Barrier toll system" label="open system"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="71439" end="71458" title="New Jersey Turnpike" label="New Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q10429599" start="71473" end="71486" title="Ticket system" label="closed system"/>
<link wikidata="Q800074" start="71688" end="71695" title="E-ZPass" label="E-ZPass"/>
<link wikidata="Q387420" start="72150" end="72163" title="green vehicle" label="green vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450622" start="72659" end="72676" title="Traffic enforcement camera" label="enforced by photo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150083" start="72822" end="72829" title="Quarter (United States coin)" label="quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="73915" end="73928" title="Atlantic City, New Jersey" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932392" start="74179" end="74188" title="TransCore" label="TransCore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072952" start="74220" end="74244" title="Open road tolling" label="all-electronic toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q786014" start="74448" end="74460" title="rest area" label="service area"/>
<link wikidata="Q867662" start="74618" end="74622" title="Esso" label="Esso"/>
<link wikidata="Q775060" start="74624" end="74630" title="Texaco" label="Texaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816506" start="74632" end="74640" title="Atlantic Petroleum" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974437" start="74646" end="74660" title="Citgo" label="Cities Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705795" start="75294" end="75317" title="New Jersey Hall of Fame" label="New Jersey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q72334" start="75387" end="75400" title="Toni Morrison" label="Toni Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="75546" end="75558" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="75629" end="75644" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q506294" start="76100" end="76111" title="picnic area" label="picnic area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073974" start="76688" end="76702" title="Upper Township, New Jersey" label="Upper Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679789" start="77039" end="77062" title="New Jersey State Police" label="New Jersey State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q363310" start="77221" end="77229" title="Galloway, New Jersey" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474335" start="77231" end="77238" title="Holmdel Township, New Jersey" label="Holmdel"/>
<link wikidata="Q648622" start="77244" end="77254" title="Bloomfield, New Jersey" label="Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349580" start="77485" end="77496" title="exit number" label="exit number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620972" start="77855" end="77876" title="Straight Line Diagram" label="Straight Line Diagram"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262334" wikidata="Q1974246" url="?curid=262334" title="Dalen">
<text>Dalen (Dutch Low Saxon: &quot;Daoln&quot;) is a village and a former municipality in the northeastern Netherlands, in the province of Drenthe. Since 1998, Dalen has been part of the municipality of Coevorden.

The village was first mentioned in the 12th century as &quot;in Dalon&quot;. The etymology is unclear. Dalen is an &quot;esdorp&quot; which developed in the Early Middle Ages along the road from Coevorden to Groningen. It contains two triangular village greens.

The Dutch Reformed church is an aisleless church with a tower from the 15th century. The church was damaged during the Siege of Coevorden of 1813 and rebuilt in 1824.

There are many shops and restaurants, bakeries and a pub called the D&#x27;aolle Bakkerij. The village is known for its two windmills, Jan Pol and De Bente, which are open to the public. There is a family resort from Center Parcs called &#x27;De Huttenheugte&#x27; and next to the resort lies the theme park Plopsa Indoor. Dalen railway station has connections to Emmen and Coevorden/Zwolle.

==Notable people==
Famous residents have included:
* Albert Bouwers (1893-1972), optician (born)
* Karsten Kroon (b. 1976), road bicycle racer (born)
* Gerald Sibon (b. 1974), football striker

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1974246" start="0" end="5" title="Dalen" label="Dalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q516137" start="7" end="22" title="Dutch Low Saxon" label="Dutch Low Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="102" end="113" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q772" start="134" end="141" title="Drenthe" label="Drenthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q60453" start="198" end="207" title="Coevorden" label="Coevorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q537981" start="331" end="337" title="esdorp" label="esdorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q60453" start="405" end="414" title="Coevorden" label="Coevorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="418" end="427" title="Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435568" start="776" end="783" title="Jan Pol (windmill)" label="Jan Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q305495" start="788" end="796" title="De Bente Windmill" label="De Bente"/>
<link wikidata="Q448083" start="858" end="870" title="Center Parcs Europe" label="Center Parcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780387" start="949" end="962" title="Plopsa" label="Plopsa Indoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303336" start="964" end="985" title="Dalen railway station" label="Dalen railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199793" start="1087" end="1101" title="Albert Bouwers" label="Albert Bouwers"/>
<link wikidata="Q456629" start="1133" end="1146" title="Karsten Kroon" label="Karsten Kroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q525057" start="1186" end="1198" title="Gerald Sibon" label="Gerald Sibon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262345" wikidata="Q217530" url="?curid=262345" title="Nepenthes">
<text>Nepenthes ( ) is a genus of carnivorous plants, also known as tropical pitcher plants, or monkey cups, in the monotypic family Nepenthaceae. The genus includes about 170 species, and numerous natural and many cultivated hybrids. They are mostly liana-forming plants of the Old World tropics, ranging from South China, Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines; westward to Madagascar (two species) and the Seychelles (one); southward to Australia (four) and New Caledonia (one); and northward to India (one) and Sri Lanka (one). The greatest diversity occurs on Borneo, Sumatra, and the Philippines, with many endemic species. Many are plants of hot, humid, lowland areas, but the majority are tropical montane plants, receiving warm days but cool to cold, humid nights year round. A few are considered tropical alpine, with cool days and nights near freezing. The name &quot;monkey cups&quot; refers to the fact that monkeys were once thought to drink rainwater from the pitchers.

==Description==

&quot;Nepenthes&quot; species usually consist of a shallow root system and a prostrate or climbing stem, often several metres long and up to or more, and usually or less in diameter, although this may be thicker in a few species (e.g. &quot;N. bicalcarata&quot;). From the stems arise alternate, sword-shaped leaves with entire leaf margins. An extension of the midrib (the tendril), which in some species aids in climbing, protrudes from the tip of the leaf; at the end of the tendril the pitcher forms. The pitcher starts as a small bud and gradually expands to form a globe- or tube-shaped trap.

The trap contains a fluid of the plant&#x27;s own production, which may be watery or more viscous, and is used to drown the prey. This fluid contains viscoelastic biopolymers that may be crucial to the retention of insects within the traps of many species. The viscoelastic fluid in the pitchers is especially effective in the retention of winged insects. The trapping efficiency of this fluid remains high, even when significantly diluted by water, as inevitably happens in wet conditions.

The lower part of the trap contains glands which absorb nutrients from captured prey. Along the upper inside part of the trap is a slick, waxy coating which makes the escape of its prey nearly impossible. Surrounding the entrance to the trap is a structure called the peristome (the &quot;lip&quot;), which is slippery and often quite colorful, attracting prey, but offering an unsure footing. The prey-capture effectiveness of the peristome is further enhanced in moist environments, where condensation may cause a thin water film to form on the surface of the peristome. When wet, the slippery surface of the peristome causes insects to &#x27;aquaplane&#x27;, or slip and fall, into the pitcher. Above the peristome is a lid (the operculum); in many species, this keeps rain from diluting the fluid within the pitcher, the underside of which may contain nectar glands which attract prey.

&quot;Nepenthes&quot; species usually produce two types of pitchers, known as leaf dimorphism. Appearing near the base of the plant are the large, lower traps, which typically sit on the ground. The upper or aerial pitchers are usually smaller, coloured differently, and possess different features from the lower pitchers. These upper pitchers usually form as the plant reaches maturity and the plant grows taller. To keep the plant steady, the upper pitchers often form a loop in the tendril, allowing it to wrap around nearby support. In some species (e.g. &quot;N. rafflesiana&quot;), different prey may be attracted by the two types of pitchers. This varied morphology also often makes identification of species difficult.

Prey usually consists of insects, but the largest species (e.g. &quot;N. rajah&quot; and &quot;N. rafflesiana&quot;) may occasionally catch small vertebrates, such as &quot;frogs, birds, and small mammals&quot;. Records of cultivated plants trapping small birds have been made. Flowers occur in racemes or more rarely in panicles with male and female flowers on separate plants. Three species have symbiotic relationships with treeshrews, which eat the nectar produced by the plant and defecate into the pitchers, providing valuable nutrients.

&quot;Nepenthes&quot; are insect-pollinated, the primary agents being flies (including blow flies, midges, and mosquitoes), moths, wasps, and butterflies. Their smells can range from sweet to musty or fungus-like. Seed is typically produced in a four-sided capsule which may contain 50–500 wind-distributed seeds, consisting of a central embryo and two wings, one on either side (though &quot;N. pervillei&quot; differs).

The genus is cytologically diploid, with all studied species having a chromosome number of &quot;2n&quot;=80. This high number is thought to reflect paleopolyploidy (likely 8x or 16x).

==Taxonomy==

About 170 species of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; are currently recognised as valid. This number is increasing, with several new species being described each year.

===Etymology===
The genus name &quot;Nepenthes&quot; was first published in 1737 in Carl Linnaeus&#x27;s &quot;Hortus Cliffortianus&quot;. It references a passage in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot;, in which the potion &quot;Nepenthes pharmakon&quot; is given to Helen by an Egyptian queen. &quot;Nepenthes&quot; () literally means &quot;without grief&quot; ( &quot;nē&quot; = &quot;not&quot;, &quot;penthos&quot; = &quot;grief&quot;) and, in Greek mythology, is a drug that quells all sorrows with forgetfulness. Linnaeus explained:

If this is not Helen&#x27;s &quot;Nepenthes&quot;, it certainly will be for all botanists. What botanist would not be filled with admiration if, after a long journey, he should find this wonderful plant. In his astonishment past ills would be forgotten when beholding this admirable work of the Creator! [translated from Latin by Harry Veitch]

The plant Linnaeus described was &quot;N. distillatoria&quot;, called&quot; bāndurā&quot; (බාඳුරා), a species from Sri Lanka.

&quot;Nepenthes&quot; was formally published as a generic name in 1753 in Linnaeus&#x27;s famous &quot;Species Plantarum&quot;, which established botanical nomenclature as it exists today. &quot;Nepenthes distillatoria&quot; is the type species of the genus.

The name &quot;monkey cups&quot; was discussed in the May 1964 issue of &quot;National Geographic&quot;, in which Paul A. Zahl wrote:

The carriers called them &quot;monkey cups,&quot; a name I had heard elsewhere in reference to &quot;Nepenthes&quot;, but the implication that monkeys drink the pitcher fluid seemed farfetched. I later proved it true. In Sarawak, I found an orangutan that had been raised as a pet and later freed. As I approached it gingerly in the forest, I offered it a half-full pitcher. To my surprise, the ape accepted it, and with the finesse of a lady at tea, executed a delicate bottoms-up.

The plants are often called &quot;kantong semar&quot; (Semar&#x27;s pocket) in Indonesia and &quot;sako ni Hudas&quot; (Judas&#x27; money bag) in the Philippines.

===Evolution and phylogeny===

An absence of evidence of intermediate species, fossil or living (i.e. a missing link), does not allow forming a phylogenetic timeline for the development of the distinctive traits of modern &quot;Nepenthes&quot;, which include its relatively rare strict dioecy and carnivorous pitchers. Although &quot;Nepenthes&quot; is distantly related to several modern genera, among these, even the carnivorous relatives [the sundews (&quot;Drosera&quot;), Venus flytrap (&quot;Dionaea muscipula&quot;), waterwheel plant (&quot;Aldrovanda&quot;), and dewy pine (&quot;Drosophyllum&quot;)], all lack those traits. Among known &quot;Nepenthes&quot;, no protomodern characteristics or large variations are found, which suggests that all extant species radiated from a single close ancestor bearing all the modern traits. Phylogenetic comparisons of the chloroplast &quot;matK &quot;gene sequences between &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species and with related species support this conclusion, long genetic distance between &quot;Nepenthes&quot; and others, and abruptly diverging &quot;pom-pom&quot; grouping of the &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species .

Fossilized pollen of &quot;Nepenthes&quot;-like plants living on the northern Tethys Sea from 65 to 35 million years ago indicates that then-warmer Europe may have been where the proto-&quot;Nepenthes&quot; developed, and then escaped to Asia and India as Africa collided with Europe and the ensuing climate change wiped out the ancestral species in the original habitat. About 20 million years ago, Borneo, Sumatra, and Sulawesi and possibly even the Philippines were connected to mainland Asia, providing a bridge for the colonization of most sites of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species radiation. The extensive landbridges in the area 20,000 years ago during the ice age would have provided access to the remaining sites of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; populations in Oceania. The main complication with this hypothesis is the presence of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; on the distant islands of Seychelles and Madagascar. The seeds were thought to have been transferred by seabirds and shorebirds, which rest during their migrations in swampy habitats and may have inadvertently picked up the seeds. This hypothesis is possibly reinforced by the success of the lowland swamp-dwelling &quot;N. distillatoria&quot; in colonizing so many locations.

==Distribution and habitat==

The genus &quot;Nepenthes&quot; is mostly found within the Malay Archipelago, with the greatest biodiversity found on Borneo, Sumatra, and the Philippines, especially in the Borneo montane rain forests. The full range of the genus includes Madagascar (&quot;N. madagascariensis&quot; and &quot;N. masoalensis&quot;), the Seychelles (&quot;N. pervillei&quot;), Sri Lanka (&quot;N. distillatoria&quot;), and India (&quot;N. khasiana&quot;) in the west to Australia (&quot;N. mirabilis&quot;, &quot;N. rowanae&quot;, &quot;N. parvula&quot;, and &quot;N. tenax&quot;) and New Caledonia (&quot;N. vieillardii&quot;) in the southeast. Most species are restricted to very small ranges, including some found only on individual mountains. These limited distributions and the inaccessibility of the regions often means some species go decades without being rediscovered in the wild (e.g. &quot;N. deaniana&quot;, which was rediscovered 100 years after its initial discovery). About 10 species have population distributions larger than a single island or group of smaller islands. &quot;Nepenthes mirabilis&quot; has the distinction of being the most widely distributed species in the genus, ranging from Indochina and throughout the Malay Archipelago to Australia.

Because of the nature of the habitats that &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species occupy, they are often graded as either lowland or highland species, depending on their altitude above sea level, with the rough delineation between lowland and highland. Species growing at lower altitudes require continuously warm climates with little difference between day and night temperatures, whereas highland species thrive when they receive warm days and much cooler nights. &quot;Nepenthes lamii&quot; grows at a higher altitude than any other in the genus, up to .

Most &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species grow in environments that provide high humidity and precipitation and moderate to high light levels. A few species, including &quot;N. ampullaria&quot;, prefer the dense, shaded forests, but most other species thrive on the margins of tree/shrub communities or clearings. Some species (e.g. &quot;N. mirabilis&quot;) have been found growing in clear-cut forest areas, roadsides, and disturbed fields. Other species have adapted to growing in savanna-like grass communities. The soils in which &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species grow are usually acidic and low in nutrients, being composed of peat, white sand, sandstone, or volcanic soils. Exceptions to these generalities include species that thrive in soils with high heavy metal content (e.g. &quot;N. rajah&quot;), on sandy beaches in the sea spray zone (e.g. &quot;N. albomarginata&quot;). Other species grow on inselbergs and as lithophytes, while others, such as &quot;N. inermis&quot;, can grow as epiphytes with no soil contact.

==Ecological relationships==

The most obvious interaction between &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species and their environments, including other organisms, is that of predator and prey. &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species attract their prey through active production of attractive colours, sugary nectar, and sweet scents. From this relationship, the plants primarily gain nitrogen and phosphorus to supplement their nutrient requirements for growth, given these soil nutrients are typically lacking. The most frequent prey is an abundant and diverse group of arthropods, with ants and other insects topping the menu. Other arthropods found frequently include spiders, scorpions, and centipedes, while snails and frogs are more unusual, but not unheard of. The most uncommon prey for &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species includes rats found in &quot;N. rajah&quot;. The composition of prey captured depends on many factors, including location, but can incorporate hundreds of individual insects and many different species. While many &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species are generalists in what they capture, at least one, &quot;N. albomarginata&quot;, has specialised and almost exclusively traps termites and produces nearly no nectar. &quot;Nepenthes albomarginata&quot; gains its name from the ring of white trichomes directly beneath the peristome. These trichomes—or &quot;hairs&quot;—are palatable to termites and will attract them to the pitcher. In the course of collecting the edible trichomes, hundreds or thousands of termites will fall into the pitcher.

===Symbioses===

&quot;N. bicalcarata&quot; provides space in the hollow tendrils of its upper pitchers for the carpenter ant &quot;Camponotus schmitzi&quot; to build nests. The ants take larger prey from the pitchers, which may benefit &quot;N. bicalcarata&quot; by reducing the amount of putrefaction of collected organic matter that could harm the natural community of infaunal species that aid the plant&#x27;s digestion.

&quot;N. lowii&quot; has also formed a dependent relationship, but with vertebrates instead of insects. The pitchers of &quot;N. lowii&quot; provide a sugary exudate reward on the reflexed pitcher lid (operculum) and a perch for tree shrew species, which have been found eating the exudate and defecating into the pitcher. A 2009 study, which coined the term &quot;tree shrew lavatories&quot;, determined between 57 and 100% of the plant&#x27;s foliar nitrogen uptake comes from the faeces of tree shrews. Another study showed the shape and size of the pitcher orifice of &quot;N. lowii&quot; exactly match the dimensions of a typical tree shrew (&quot;Tupaia montana&quot;). A similar adaptation was found in &quot;N. macrophylla&quot;, &quot;N. rajah&quot;, &quot;N. ampullaria&quot;, and is also likely to be present in &quot;N. ephippiata&quot;.

Similarly, &quot;N. hemsleyana&quot;, which is native to Borneo, has a symbiotic partnership with Hardwicke&#x27;s woolly bat. During the day, a bat may roost above the digestive fluid inside the pitcher. While a bat is inside, it may defaecate, with the plant gaining nitrogen from the droppings. Further research has discovered that the shape and design of the pitcher has evolved to be an acoustic reflector to make it easier for bats to echo-locate, and distinguishes it from other closely related species that don&#x27;t make good roosts.

===Infauna===

Organisms that spend at least part of their lives within the pitchers of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species are often called &quot;Nepenthes&quot; infauna. The most common infaunal species, often representing the top trophic level of the infaunal ecosystem, are many species of mosquito larvae. Other infaunal species include fly and midge larvae, spiders, mites, ants, and even a species of crab (&quot;Geosesarma malayanum&quot;). Many of these species specialise to one pitcher plant species and are found nowhere else. These specialists are called nepenthebionts. Others, often associated with but not dependent on &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species, are called nepenthophiles. Nepenthexenes, on the other hand, are rarely found in the pitchers, but will often appear when putrefaction approaches a certain threshold, attracting fly larvae that would normally not be found in the pitcher infaunal community. The complex ecological relationship between pitcher plants and infauna is not yet fully understood, but the relationship may be mutualistic: the infauna is given shelter, food, or protection, and the plant that harbours the infauna receives expedited breakdown of captured prey, increasing the rate of digestion and keeping harmful bacterial populations repressed.

=== Antimicrobial properties ===
&quot;Nepenthes&quot; digestive fluids are sterile before pitchers open and contain secondary metabolites and proteins that act as bactericides and fungicides after the pitcher opens. While the digestive fluid is being produced, the pitcher is not yet open, so there is no chance of microbial contamination. During pitcher development, at least 29 digestive proteins including proteases, chitinases, pathogenesis-related proteins and thaumatin-like proteins are produced in the pitcher fluid. In addition to breaking down prey, these can act as antimicrobial agents. When the pitchers open, the fluid is exposed to bacteria, fungal spores, insects and rain. Often pitchers have a lid that covers the trap, excepting a few (e.g. &quot;N. lowii&quot;, &quot;N. attenboroughii&quot; and &quot;N. jamban&quot;), preventing rain water from entering. The lid inhibits rainwater from diluting the digestive fluid. Once the bacteria and fungi enter the fluid, secondary metabolites are produced in addition to antimicrobial proteins. Naphthoquinones, a class of secondary metabolite, are commonly produced, and these either kill or inhibit the growth and reproduction of bacteria and fungi. This adaptation could have evolved since &quot;Nepenthes&quot; plants that could produce secondary metabolites and antimicrobial proteins to kill bacteria and fungi were most likely more fit. Plants that produced antimicrobial compounds could prevent loss of valuable nutrients gained from insects within the pitcher. Since &quot;Nepenthes&quot; cannot digest certain bacteria and fungi, the bactericides and fungicides allow plants to maximize nutrient uptake.

==Botanical history==

The earliest known record of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; dates back to the 17th century. In 1658, French colonial governor Étienne de Flacourt published a description of a pitcher plant in his seminal work &quot;Histoire de la Grande Isle de Madagascar&quot;. It reads:

It is a plant growing about 3 feet high which carries at the end of its leaves, which are 7 inches long, a hollow flower or fruit resembling a small vase, with its own lid, a wonderful sight. There are red ones and yellow ones, the yellow being the biggest. The inhabitants of this country are reluctant to pick the flowers, saying that if somebody does pick them in passing, it will not fail to rain that day. As to that, I and all the other Frenchmen did pick them, but it did not rain. After rain these flowers are full of water, each one containing a good half-glass. [translated from French in &quot;Pitcher-Plants of Borneo&quot;]

Flacourt called the plant &quot;Amramatico&quot;, after a local name. More than a century later, this species was formally described as &quot;N. madagascariensis&quot;.

The second species to be described was &quot;N. distillatoria&quot;, the Sri Lankan endemic. In 1677, Danish physician Thomas Bartholin made brief mention of it under the name &quot;Miranda herba&quot;, Latin for &quot;marvellous herb&quot;. Three years later, Dutch merchant Jacob Breyne referred to this species as &quot;Bandura zingalensium&quot;, after a local name for the plant. &quot;Bandura&quot; subsequently became the most commonly used name for the tropical pitcher plants, until Linnaeus coined &quot;Nepenthes&quot; in 1737.

&quot;Nepenthes distillatoria&quot; was again described in 1683, this time by Swedish physician and naturalist Herman Niklas Grim. Grim called it &quot;Planta mirabilis destillatoria&quot; or the &quot;miraculous distilling plant&quot;, and was the first to clearly illustrate a tropical pitcher plant. Three years later, in 1686, English naturalist John Ray quoted Grim as saying:

The root draws up moisture from the earth which with the help of the sun&#x27;s rays rises up into the plant itself and then flows down through the stems and nerves of the leaves into the natural utensil to be stored there until used for human needs. [translated from Latin in &quot;Pitcher-Plants of Borneo&quot;]

One of the earliest illustrations of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; appears in Leonard Plukenet&#x27;s &quot;Almagestum Botanicum&quot; of 1696. The plant, called &quot;Utricaria vegetabilis zeylanensium&quot;, is undoubtedly &quot;N. distillatoria&quot;.

Around the same time, German botanist Georg Eberhard Rumphius discovered two new &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species in the Malay Archipelago. Rumphius illustrated the first one, now considered synonymous with &quot;N. mirabilis&quot;, and gave it the name &quot;Cantharifera&quot;, meaning &quot;tankard-bearer&quot;. The second, referred to as &quot;Cantharifera alba&quot;, is thought to have been &quot;N. maxima&quot;. Rumphius described the plants in his most famous work, the six-volume &quot;Herbarium Amboinense&quot;, a catalogue of the flora of Ambon Island. However, it would not be published until many years after his death.

After going blind in 1670, when the manuscript was only partially complete, Rumphius continued work on &quot;Herbarium Amboinensis&quot; with the help of clerks and artists. In 1687, with the project nearing completion, at least half of the illustrations were lost in a fire. Persevering, Rumphius and his helpers first completed the book in 1690. However, two years later, the ship carrying the manuscript to the Netherlands was attacked and sunk by the French, forcing them to start over from a copy that had fortunately been retained by Governor-General Johannes Camphuijs. The &quot;Herbarium Amboinensis&quot; finally arrived in the Netherlands in 1696. Even then, the first volume did not appear until 1741, 39 years after Rumphius&#x27;s death. By this time, Linnaeus&#x27;s name &quot;Nepenthes&quot; had become established.

&quot;Nepenthes distillatoria&quot; was again illustrated in Johannes Burmann&#x27;s &quot;Thesaurus Zeylanicus&quot; of 1737. The drawing depicts the end of a flowering stem with pitchers. Burmann refers to the plant as &quot;Bandura zeylanica&quot;.

The next mention of tropical pitcher plants was made in 1790, when Portuguese priest João de Loureiro described &quot;Phyllamphora mirabilis&quot;, or the &quot;marvellous urn-shaped leaf&quot;, from Vietnam. Despite living in the country for around 35 years, it seems unlikely that Loureiro observed living plants of this species, as he stated the lid is a moving part, actively opening and closing. In his most celebrated work, &quot;Flora Cochinchinensis&quot;, he writes:

[...] (the) leaf-tip ends in a long hanging tendril, twisted spirally in the middle, from which hangs a sort of vase, oblong, pot-bellied, with a smooth lip with a projecting margin and a lid affixed to one side, which of its own nature freely opens and closes in order to receive the dew and store it. A marvellous work of the Lord! [translated from French in &quot;Pitcher-Plants of Borneo&quot;]

&quot;Phyllamphora mirabilis&quot; was eventually transferred to the genus &quot;Nepenthes&quot; by Rafarin in 1869. As such, &quot;P. mirabilis&quot; is the basionym of this most cosmopolitan of tropical pitcher plant species.

Loureiro&#x27;s description of a moving lid was repeated by Jean Louis Marie Poiret in 1797. Poiret described two of the four &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species known at the time: &quot;N. madagascariensis&quot; and &quot;N. distillatoria&quot;. He gave the former its current name and called the latter &quot;Nepente de l&#x27;Inde&quot;, or simply &quot;&quot;Nepenthes&quot; of India&quot;, although this species is absent from the mainland. In Jean-Baptiste Lamarck&#x27;s &quot;Encyclopédie Méthodique Botanique&quot;, he included the following account:

This urn is hollow, as I have just said, usually full of soft, clear water, and then closed. It opens during the day and more than half the liquid disappears, but this loss is repaired during the night, and the next day the urn is full again and closed by its lid. This is its sustenance, and enough for more than one day because it is always about half-full at the approach of night. [translated from French in &quot;Pitcher-Plants of Borneo&quot;]

With the discovery of new species and Sir Joseph Banks&#x27; original introduction of specimens to Europe in 1789, interest in &quot;Nepenthes&quot; grew throughout the 19th century, culminating in what has been called the &quot;Golden Age of &quot;Nepenthes&quot;&quot; in the 1880s. However, the popularity of the plants dwindled in the early 20th century, before all but disappearing by World War II. This is evidenced by the fact that no new species were described between 1940 and 1966. The revival of global interest in the cultivation and study of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; is credited to Japanese botanist Shigeo Kurata, whose work in the 1960s and 1970s did much to bring attention to these plants.

==Cultivation==

&quot;Nepenthes&quot; may be cultivated in greenhouses. Easier species include &quot;N. alata&quot;, &quot;N. ventricosa&quot;, &quot;N. khasiana&quot;, and &quot;N. sanguinea&quot;. These four species are highlanders (&quot;N. alata&quot; has both lowland and highland forms), some easy lowlander species are &quot;N. rafflesiana&quot;, &quot;N. bicalcarata&quot;, &quot;N. mirabilis&quot;, and &quot;N. hirsuta&quot;.

Highland forms are those species that grow in habitats generally higher in elevation, and thus exposed to cooler evening temperatures. Lowland forms are those species growing nearer to sea level. Both forms respond best to rainwater (but some tap water works as long as it is flushed monthly with rainwater or water low in dissolved solid and chemicals), bright light (though some species can grow in full sun), a well-drained medium, good air circulation and relatively high humidity, although easier species such as &quot;N. alata&quot; can adapt to lower humidity environments. Highland species must have night-time cooling to thrive in the long term. Chemical fertilisers are best used at low strength. Occasional feeding with frozen (thawed before use) crickets may be beneficial. Terrarium culture of smaller plants, such as &quot;N. bellii&quot;, &quot;N.&quot; × &quot;trichocarpa&quot; and &quot;N. ampullaria&quot;, is possible, but most plants will get too large over time.

Plants can be propagated by seed, cuttings, and tissue culture. Seeds are usually sown on damp chopped &quot;Sphagnum&quot; moss, or on sterile plant tissue culture media once they have been properly disinfected. The seeds generally become nonviable soon after harvesting, so seed are not usually the preferred method of propagation. A 1:1 mixture of orchid medium with moss or perlite has been used for germination and culture. Seed may take two months to germinate, and two years or more to yield mature plants. Cuttings may be rooted in damp &quot;Sphagnum&quot; moss in a plastic bag or tank with high humidity and moderate light. They can begin to root in one to two months and start to form pitchers in about six months. Tissue culture is now used commercially and helps reduce collection of wild plants, as well as making many rare species available to hobbyists at reasonable prices. &quot;Nepenthes&quot; species are considered threatened or endangered plants and all of them are listed in CITES Appendix II, with the exception of &quot;N. rajah&quot; and &quot;N. khasiana&quot; which are listed in CITES Appendix I. The CITES listing means all international trade (including in parts and derivatives) is controlled by the CITES permitting system, with wild
sourced specimens of Appendix I species prohibited from commercial international trade.

==Hybrids and cultivars==
There are many hybrid &quot;Nepenthes&quot; and numerous named cultivars. Some of the more well-known, artificially produced hybrids and cultivars include:
* &quot;N.&quot; × &quot;coccinea&quot; ((&quot;N. rafflesiana&quot; × &quot;N. ampullaria&quot;) × &quot;N. mirabilis&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; × &quot;ventrata&quot; (&quot;N. ventricosa&quot; × &quot;N. alata&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; × &#x27;Bloody Mary&#x27; (&quot;N. ventricosa&quot; × &quot;N. ampullaria&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; &#x27;D&#x27;amato&#x27; (&quot;N. lowii&quot; × &quot;N. ventricosa&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; × &quot;mixta&quot; (&quot;N. northiana&quot; × &quot;N. maxima&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; &#x27;Syurga&#x27; (&quot;N. ventricosa&quot; × &quot;N. northiana&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; &#x27;Menarik&#x27; (&quot;N. rafflesiana&quot; × &quot;N. veitchii&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; &#x27;Emmarene&#x27; (&quot;N. khasiana&quot; × &quot;N. ventricosa&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; &#x27;Judith Finn&#x27; (&quot;N. spathulata&quot; × &quot;N. veitchii&quot;)
* &quot;N.&quot; &#x27;Gaya&#x27; (&quot;N. khasiana&quot; × (&quot;N. ventricosa&quot; × &quot;N. maxima&quot;))

==See also==
* &quot;Nepenthes&quot; classification
* &quot;Nepenthes&quot; infauna
* List of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; endophyte species

==References==

* Danser&#x27;s Monograph on &quot;Nepenthes&quot; (covers species from Malaysia, Indonesia and New Guinea, but not elsewhere)
* Nepenthaceae in: Watson, L., and M. J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards). The Families of Flowering Plants . Descriptions, Illustrations, Identification, Information Retrieval.

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Beaver, R.A. 1983. The communities living in &quot;Nepenthes&quot; pitcher plants: fauna and food webs. In: J.H. Frank &amp; L.P. Lounibos (eds.) &quot;Phytotelmata: Plants as Hosts for Aquatic Insect Communities&quot;. Plexus Publishing, New Jersey. pp. 129–159.
* 
* Boulay, J. 1997. Les &quot;Nepenthes&quot;. &quot;Dionée&quot; 38.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* &quot;Nepenthes&quot; – the Monkey Cups from the Botanical Society of America
* &quot;Nepenthes&quot;: The Interactive Guide at Tom&#x27;s Carnivores
* How to Grow &quot;Nepenthes&quot; at Tom&#x27;s Carnivores
* &quot;Nepenthes&quot; photographs at the Carnivorous Plant Photo Finder
* A video about &quot;Nepenthes rajah&quot; from &quot;The Private Life of Plants&quot;
* The Carnivorous Plant FAQ: &quot;Nepenthes&quot; by Barry Rice
* Evolution – &quot;Nepenthes&quot; Phylogeny from the International Carnivorous Plant Society
* Inner World of &quot;Nepenthes&quot; from the John Innes Centre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="19" end="24" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18240" start="28" end="46" title="carnivorous plants" label="carnivorous plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q217530" start="62" end="85" title="Nepenthes" label="tropical pitcher plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q217530" start="90" end="101" title="Nepenthes" label="monkey cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="110" end="119" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217530" start="127" end="139" title="Nepenthes" label="Nepenthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919793" start="160" end="177" title="List of Nepenthes species" label="about 170 species"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585647" start="192" end="199" title="List of Nepenthes natural hybrids" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q14079" start="245" end="250" title="liana" label="liana"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="273" end="282" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="283" end="290" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="311" end="316" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="318" end="327" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="329" end="337" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="347" end="358" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="372" end="382" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="405" end="415" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="436" end="445" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="457" end="470" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="495" end="500" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="511" end="520" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102063" start="532" end="550" title="List of Nepenthes species by distribution" label="greatest diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="561" end="567" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="569" end="576" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="609" end="616" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="702" end="709" title="montane" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="917" end="923" title="monkey" label="monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640465" start="1076" end="1085" title="prostrate shrub" label="prostrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q139530" start="1240" end="1254" title="Nepenthes bicalcarata" label="N. bicalcarata"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1327" end="1338" title="leaf margin" label="leaf margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372136" start="1361" end="1367" title="midrib" label="midrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q165859" start="1373" end="1380" title="tendril" label="tendril"/>
<link wikidata="Q910483" start="1749" end="1761" title="viscoelastic" label="viscoelastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q422649" start="1762" end="1773" title="biopolymers" label="biopolymers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540567" start="2359" end="2368" title="peristome" label="peristome"/>
<link wikidata="Q447888" start="2823" end="2832" title="operculum (botany)" label="operculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="2947" end="2953" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q138821" start="3547" end="3561" title="Nepenthes rafflesiana" label="N. rafflesiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="3735" end="3742" title="insects" label="insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q132973" start="3780" end="3788" title="Nepenthes rajah" label="N. rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="3856" end="3866" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="3988" end="3994" title="Flower" label="Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q158583" start="4005" end="4011" title="raceme" label="raceme"/>
<link wikidata="Q148600" start="4031" end="4038" title="panicle" label="panicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="4045" end="4049" title="male" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q43445" start="4054" end="4060" title="female" label="female"/>
<link wikidata="Q231550" start="4137" end="4146" title="treeshrew" label="treeshrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063308" start="4281" end="4298" title="Entomophily" label="insect-pollinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404" start="4342" end="4352" title="Calliphoridae" label="blow flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234359" start="4354" end="4359" title="midge" label="midge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="4366" end="4374" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="4456" end="4462" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="4469" end="4473" title="Seed" label="Seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="4593" end="4599" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q142936" start="4648" end="4660" title="Nepenthes pervillei" label="N. pervillei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141" start="4691" end="4704" title="Cell biology" label="cytologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="4705" end="4712" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="4748" end="4765" title="chromosome number" label="chromosome number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361745" start="4827" end="4842" title="paleopolyploidy" label="paleopolyploidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919793" start="4884" end="4895" title="List of Nepenthes species" label="170 species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="5120" end="5133" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q551911" start="5147" end="5167" title="Hortus Cliffortianus" label="Hortus Cliffortianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="5202" end="5207" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="5221" end="5228" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249918" start="5249" end="5255" title="potion" label="potion"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="5300" end="5305" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="5312" end="5317" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q731512" start="5334" end="5342" title="Nepenthe" label="Nepenthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="5480" end="5495" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673040" start="5902" end="5914" title="Harry Veitch" label="Harry Veitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="6094" end="6101" title="genus" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="6147" end="6164" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310776" start="6190" end="6212" title="botanical nomenclature" label="botanical nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247254" start="6239" end="6262" title="Nepenthes distillatoria" label="Nepenthes distillatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="6276" end="6288" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="6382" end="6401" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="6680" end="6689" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683355" start="6978" end="6983" title="Semar" label="Semar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="7043" end="7054" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7055" end="7064" title="Money bag#History" label="money bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q447188" start="7191" end="7203" title="Transitional fossil" label="missing link"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="7231" end="7243" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="7373" end="7379" title="dioecy" label="dioecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q266" start="7548" end="7555" title="Drosera" label="Drosera"/>
<link wikidata="Q155825" start="7585" end="7602" title="Dionaea muscipula" label="Dionaea muscipula"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668" start="7635" end="7645" title="Aldrovanda" label="Aldrovanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107254" start="7675" end="7687" title="Drosophyllum" label="Drosophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="7925" end="7937" title="Phylogenetic" label="Phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="7957" end="7968" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126695" start="7975" end="7979" title="Maturase K" label="matK"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="8323" end="8333" title="Tethys Sea" label="Tethys Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="8545" end="8559" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="8645" end="8651" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="8653" end="8660" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="8666" end="8674" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="9004" end="9011" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="9123" end="9133" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="9138" end="9148" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="9201" end="9209" title="seabirds" label="seabirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="9214" end="9224" title="shorebirds" label="shorebirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247254" start="9418" end="9434" title="Nepenthes distillatoria" label="N. distillatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="9564" end="9581" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102063" start="9592" end="9613" title="List of Nepenthes species by distribution" label="greatest biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913201" start="9679" end="9706" title="Borneo montane rain forests" label="Borneo montane rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q139507" start="9763" end="9782" title="Nepenthes madagascariensis" label="N. madagascariensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474329" start="9799" end="9813" title="Nepenthes masoalensis" label="N. masoalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142936" start="9844" end="9856" title="Nepenthes pervillei" label="N. pervillei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247254" start="9882" end="9898" title="Nepenthes distillatoria" label="N. distillatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q144311" start="9924" end="9935" title="Nepenthes khasiana" label="N. khasiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q150525" start="9975" end="9987" title="Nepenthes mirabilis" label="N. mirabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11212877" start="10001" end="10011" title="Nepenthes rowanae" label="N. rowanae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28184795" start="10025" end="10035" title="Nepenthes parvula" label="N. parvula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911897" start="10053" end="10061" title="Nepenthes tenax" label="N. tenax"/>
<link wikidata="Q150566" start="10094" end="10108" title="Nepenthes vieillardii" label="N. vieillardii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912254" start="10389" end="10400" title="Nepenthes deaniana" label="N. deaniana"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="10699" end="10708" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="10922" end="10930" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="10937" end="10946" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237767" start="11224" end="11239" title="Nepenthes lamii" label="Nepenthes lamii"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="11385" end="11393" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q134453" start="11478" end="11491" title="Nepenthes ampullaria" label="N. ampullaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721219" start="11690" end="11699" title="clearcutting" label="clear-cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="11788" end="11795" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="11933" end="11937" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="11951" end="11960" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="12061" end="12072" title="heavy metal (chemistry)" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132973" start="12093" end="12101" title="Nepenthes rajah" label="N. rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046888" start="12134" end="12143" title="sea spray" label="sea spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q137234" start="12161" end="12177" title="Nepenthes albomarginata" label="N. albomarginata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139493" start="12208" end="12217" title="inselberg" label="inselberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321691" start="12226" end="12236" title="lithophyte" label="lithophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q146135" start="12267" end="12277" title="Nepenthes inermis" label="N. inermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="12297" end="12305" title="epiphyte" label="epiphyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="12489" end="12506" title="predation" label="predator and prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="12613" end="12619" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="12689" end="12697" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="12702" end="12712" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="12876" end="12885" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="12893" end="12896" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="12908" end="12914" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="12976" end="12982" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="12985" end="12993" title="scorpion" label="scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43447" start="13000" end="13009" title="centipede" label="centipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="13018" end="13023" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="13029" end="13033" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q137234" start="13431" end="13447" title="Nepenthes albomarginata" label="N. albomarginata"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="13500" end="13507" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="13614" end="13622" title="trichome" label="trichome"/>
<link wikidata="Q139530" start="13893" end="13907" title="Nepenthes bicalcarata" label="N. bicalcarata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153724" start="14002" end="14021" title="Camponotus schmitzi" label="Camponotus schmitzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q671701" start="14160" end="14172" title="putrefaction" label="putrefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102154" start="14242" end="14250" title="Nepenthes infauna" label="infaunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q148744" start="14303" end="14311" title="Nepenthes lowii" label="N. lowii"/>
<link wikidata="Q231550" start="14526" end="14536" title="tree shrew" label="tree shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="14780" end="14786" title="faeces" label="faeces"/>
<link wikidata="Q774635" start="14950" end="14964" title="Tupaia montana" label="Tupaia montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q146125" start="15013" end="15027" title="Nepenthes macrophylla" label="N. macrophylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q132973" start="15041" end="15049" title="Nepenthes rajah" label="N. rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q134453" start="15063" end="15076" title="Nepenthes ampullaria" label="N. ampullaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247992" start="15126" end="15139" title="Nepenthes ephippiata" label="N. ephippiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994664" start="15165" end="15178" title="Nepenthes hemsleyana" label="N. hemsleyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="15205" end="15211" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q301862" start="15246" end="15273" title="Hardwicke&amp;#x27;s woolly bat" label="Hardwicke&amp;#x27;s woolly bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053008" start="15920" end="15933" title="trophic level" label="trophic level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="15981" end="15989" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="16029" end="16032" title="fly" label="fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234359" start="16037" end="16042" title="midge" label="midge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="16060" end="16064" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009123" start="16107" end="16127" title="Geosesarma malayanum" label="Geosesarma malayanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102154" start="16255" end="16269" title="nepenthebionts" label="nepenthebionts"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="16738" end="16749" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="mutualistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q804539" start="17140" end="17151" title="bactericide" label="bactericide"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="17386" end="17394" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q424099" start="17397" end="17406" title="chitinase" label="chitinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q9323463" start="17409" end="17437" title="pathogenesis-related protein" label="pathogenesis-related protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q24775038" start="17443" end="17452" title="thaumatin" label="thaumatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q148744" start="17743" end="17751" title="Nepenthes lowii" label="N. lowii"/>
<link wikidata="Q132614" start="17765" end="17782" title="Nepenthes attenboroughii" label="N. attenboroughii"/>
<link wikidata="Q166392" start="17799" end="17808" title="Nepenthes jamban" label="N. jamban"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862682" start="18035" end="18049" title="Naphthoquinone" label="Naphthoquinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q290175" start="18795" end="18814" title="Étienne de Flacourt" label="Étienne de Flacourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198877" start="19548" end="19572" title="Pitcher-Plants of Borneo" label="Pitcher-Plants of Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="19695" end="19713" title="Species description" label="formally described"/>
<link wikidata="Q139507" start="19723" end="19742" title="Nepenthes madagascariensis" label="N. madagascariensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247254" start="19796" end="19812" title="Nepenthes distillatoria" label="N. distillatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="19824" end="19833" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="19835" end="19842" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q365909" start="19870" end="19886" title="Thomas Bartholin" label="Thomas Bartholin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77266" start="20027" end="20039" title="Jacob Breyne" label="Jacob Breyne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20402" end="20420" title="Herman Niklas Grim" label="Herman Niklas Grim"/>
<link wikidata="Q316949" start="20641" end="20649" title="John Ray" label="John Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198877" start="20957" end="20981" title="Pitcher-Plants of Borneo" label="Pitcher-Plants of Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61439" start="21276" end="21299" title="Georg Eberhard Rumphius" label="Georg Eberhard Rumphius"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="21356" end="21373" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q150525" start="21448" end="21460" title="Nepenthes mirabilis" label="N. mirabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q139550" start="21639" end="21648" title="Nepenthes maxima" label="N. maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="21779" end="21784" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q219608" start="21788" end="21800" title="Ambon Island" label="Ambon Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22767" end="22783" title="Johannes Burmann" label="Johannes Burmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q729917" start="23044" end="23060" title="João de Loureiro" label="João de Loureiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="23159" end="23166" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446418" start="23330" end="23358" title="rapid plant movement" label="actively opening and closing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198877" start="23803" end="23827" title="Pitcher-Plants of Borneo" label="Pitcher-Plants of Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q810198" start="23994" end="24002" title="basionym" label="basionym"/>
<link wikidata="Q966539" start="24125" end="24148" title="Jean Louis Marie Poiret" label="Jean Louis Marie Poiret"/>
<link wikidata="Q82122" start="24508" end="24529" title="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck" label="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198877" start="25038" end="25062" title="Pitcher-Plants of Borneo" label="Pitcher-Plants of Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="25109" end="25131" title="Joseph Banks" label="Sir Joseph Banks&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="25461" end="25473" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="25663" end="25668" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278721" start="25681" end="25694" title="Shigeo Kurata" label="Shigeo Kurata"/>
<link wikidata="Q139643" start="25878" end="25886" title="Nepenthes alata" label="N. alata"/>
<link wikidata="Q135548" start="25900" end="25913" title="Nepenthes ventricosa" label="N. ventricosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q144311" start="25927" end="25938" title="Nepenthes khasiana" label="N. khasiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911548" start="25956" end="25968" title="Nepenthes sanguinea" label="N. sanguinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q138821" start="26109" end="26123" title="Nepenthes rafflesiana" label="N. rafflesiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q139530" start="26137" end="26151" title="Nepenthes bicalcarata" label="N. bicalcarata"/>
<link wikidata="Q150525" start="26165" end="26177" title="Nepenthes mirabilis" label="N. mirabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438256" start="26195" end="26205" title="Nepenthes hirsuta" label="N. hirsuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="26972" end="26979" title="cricket (insect)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091738" start="27051" end="27060" title="Nepenthes bellii" label="N. bellii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922573" start="27068" end="27108" title="Nepenthes × trichocarpa" label="&amp;quot;N.&amp;quot; × &amp;quot;trichocarpa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q134453" start="27119" end="27132" title="Nepenthes ampullaria" label="N. ampullaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549003" start="27248" end="27262" title="Plant tissue culture" label="tissue culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30019" start="27309" end="27317" title="Sphagnum" label="Sphagnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="27324" end="27328" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q655819" start="27578" end="27585" title="perlite" label="perlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549003" start="27927" end="27941" title="Plant tissue culture" label="Tissue culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="28199" end="28204" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q132973" start="28246" end="28254" title="Nepenthes rajah" label="N. rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q144311" start="28271" end="28282" title="Nepenthes khasiana" label="N. khasiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="28598" end="28604" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="28646" end="28654" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689679" start="29736" end="29772" title="Nepenthes classification" label="&amp;quot;Nepenthes&amp;quot; classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102154" start="29775" end="29804" title="Nepenthes infauna" label="&amp;quot;Nepenthes&amp;quot; infauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591735" start="29807" end="29854" title="List of Nepenthes endophyte species" label="List of &amp;quot;Nepenthes&amp;quot; endophyte species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028763" start="30516" end="30522" title="Dionée" label="Dionée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520244" start="30631" end="30659" title="Botanical Society of America" label="Botanical Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988846" start="30922" end="30948" title="The Private Life of Plants" label="The Private Life of Plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864668" start="31009" end="31019" title="Barry Rice (botanist)" label="Barry Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910690" start="31075" end="31114" title="International Carnivorous Plant Society" label="International Carnivorous Plant Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262346" wikidata="Q208820" url="?curid=262346" title="Baptismal font">
<text>A baptismal font is an ecclesiastical architectural element, which serves as a receptacle for baptismal water used for baptism, as a part of Christian initiation for both rites of infant and adult baptism. 
==Aspersion and affusion fonts==
The earliest western fonts are found in the Catacombs of Rome. The fonts of many western Christian denominations that practice infant baptism are designed for baptisms using a non-immersive method, such as aspersion (sprinkling) or affusion (pouring). The simplest of these fonts has a pedestal with a holder for a basin of water. The materials vary greatly consisting of carved and sculpted marble, wood, or metal in different shapes. Many fonts are in octagonal shape, as a reminder of the new creation and as a connection to the Old Testament practice of circumcision, which traditionally occurs on the eighth day. Some fonts are three-sided as a reminder of the Holy Trinity to represent the unity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit as three persons in one.

Fonts are often placed at or near the entrance to a church&#x27;s nave to remind believers of their baptism as they enter the church to pray, since the rite of baptism served as their initiation into the Church. In Lutheran churches, the baptismal font may be located in the chancel near the altar to serve as a testament to Lutheran sacramental theology.
In many churches of the Middle Ages and Renaissance, there was a special chapel or even a separate building for housing the baptismal fonts, called a baptistery. Both fonts and baptisteries were often octagonal (eight-sided), octagonal fonts becoming more common from the 13th century and the norm from the 14th century. Saint Ambrose wrote that fonts and baptisteries were octagonal &quot;because on the eighth day, by rising, Christ loosens the bondage of death and receives the dead from their graves&quot;.
Saint Augustine similarly described the eighth day as &quot;everlasting... hallowed by the resurrection of Christ&quot;.

The quantity of water is usually small. There are some fonts where water pumps, a natural spring, or gravity keeps the water moving to mimic the moving waters of a stream. This visual and audible image communicates a &quot;living waters&quot; aspect of baptism. Some liturgical church bodies use consecrated holy water for the purpose of baptism, while others will use water straight out of the tap to fill the font. A special silver vessel called a ewer can be used to fill the font. Most baptismal fonts have covers to prevent water from evaporating and to protect baptismal water against contamination.

The mode of a baptism at a font is usually one of sprinkling, pouring, washing, or dipping in keeping with the Koine Greek verb βαπτίζω. Βαπτίζω can also mean &quot;immerse&quot;, but most fonts are too small for that application. Some fonts are large enough to allow the immersion of infants, however.

===Regional types===
In certain regions of England, a common historic type of font design can be identified. In South East England the &quot;Aylesbury font&quot; can be seen in several churches in Buckinghamshire and the surrounding area. These fonts, which date from the late 12th Century around the years 1170 to 1190, are typically chalice-shaped, ornately carved around the rim with fluting below, and are considered fine examples of English Norman architecture. They are named after the font found in the Church of St Mary the Virgin, Aylesbury. Other identifiable types include the Early English &quot;table-top&quot; font, also found in Buckinghamshire; the &quot;Bodmin font&quot; in Cornwall, the &quot;Seven Sacrament fonts&quot; in East Anglia; and &quot;Chalice fonts&quot; in Herefordshire.
In Northern Europe, baroque font covers in the shape of a floating angel which are hung vertically from the ceiling of the choir became fashionable in the Lutheran churches of Germany, Denmark and Sweden during the 17th and 18th centuries. During the baptism ceremony, they were lowered using a pulley which symbolized the angel bringing the baptismal water directly from heaven. 

==Immersion fonts==
The earliest baptismal fonts were designed for full immersion, and were often cross-shaped, usually with three steps to represent Holy Trinity, leading down into the baptismal pool. Often such baptismal pools were located in a separate building, called a baptistery; however, this baptismal practice was then relocated to be administered near the entrance of the church, mostly nearby the main door to signify entrance to the Church. As infant baptism became more common, fonts became smaller. Denominations that believe only in baptism by full immersion tend to use the term &quot;baptismal font&quot; to refer to immersion tanks dedicated for that purpose; however, in the Roman Catholic tradition, a baptismal font differs from an immersion.

Full-immersion baptisms may take place in a man-made tank or pool, or a natural body of water such as a river or lake. The entire body is fully immersed, dunked, submerged or otherwise placed completely under the water. This practice symbolizes the death of the old nature, as found in Romans . In Hagia Sophia, the water was supplied to the baptismal tank from a water tower. 
In the Eastern Orthodox Church, baptism is always by full triple immersion, even in the case of infant baptism (aspersion or pouring is permitted only &quot;in extremis&quot;). For this reason, Eastern baptismal fonts tend to be larger than their Western counterparts and they are usually portable. Eastern Orthodox fonts are often shaped like a large chalice (significant since the Orthodox administer Holy Communion to infants after baptism), and are normally fashioned out of metal rather than stone or wood. Symbolically, Orthodox baptismal fonts represent the womb of the Church, as well as the tomb of Christ, since the baptized individual is put into the tomb/womb and is brought out born into a new life in Christ. During the baptismal service, three candles are lit on or around the baptismal font, in honour of the Holy Trinity. In many Orthodox churches, a special kind of holy water, called &quot;Theophany Water&quot;, is consecrated on the Feast of Theophany (Epiphany). The consecration (literally, &quot;Great Blessing&quot;) is performed twice: the first time on the eve of the feast, in a baptismal font; the second, on the day of the feast, in a natural body of water.

In the Roman Catholic Church, especially after its Second Vatican Council (1962–1965), greater attention is being given to the form of the baptismal font. Currently, the Roman Catholic Church encourages baptismal fonts that are suitable for the full immersion of an infant or child, and for at least the pouring of water over the whole body of an adult. The font should be located in a space that is visibly and physically accessible, and should preferably make provision for flowing water.

Baptisms of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are usually undertaken in a simple font located in a local meetinghouse, although they can be performed in any body of water in which the person may be completely immersed. In Latter-day Saint temples, where proxy baptisms for the dead are performed, the fonts rest on the sculptures of twelve oxen representing the twelve tribes of Israel, following the pattern of the Molten Sea in the Temple of Solomon (see 2 Chronicles 4:2-5).

==Examples==
===Aspersion and affusion fonts===
===Immersion fonts===
==See also==
* Baptistery
* Bronze laver (Temple)
* Mikveh
* Holy water font
* &quot;Nipson anomemata me monan opsin&quot;
* Church of the priest Félix and baptistry of Kélibia

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Further reading===
* 
* 


==External links==
* Church Furniture article in Christian Cyclopedia
* The Baptismal font of Renier d&#x27;Huy in Liège, Belgium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="2" end="16" title="Baptismal font" label="baptismal font"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="23" end="59" title="Church architecture" label="ecclesiastical architectural element"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="119" end="126" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="180" end="186" title="Infant baptism" label="infant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532651" start="191" end="204" title="Believer&amp;#x27;s baptism" label="adult baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="284" end="301" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="329" end="351" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="367" end="381" title="infant baptism" label="infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807922" start="446" end="455" title="aspersion" label="aspersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547705" start="472" end="480" title="affusion" label="affusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="632" end="638" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="640" end="644" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="649" end="654" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166080" start="694" end="709" title="Octagon" label="octagonal shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="772" end="785" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="798" end="810" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="911" end="918" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="1052" end="1065" title="Church (building)" label="church&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="1066" end="1070" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1152" end="1156" title="Rites of passage#Religious initiation rites" label="rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="1275" end="1282" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705760" start="1325" end="1354" title="Lutheran sacraments" label="Lutheran sacramental theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1380" end="1391" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1396" end="1407" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="1429" end="1435" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q210077" start="1506" end="1516" title="baptistery" label="baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1523" end="1528" title=":no:Fil:Døpefont Fra 1715 Thomas Blix av tre, formet som et barn som bærer en skål på hodet.jpg" label="fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q166080" start="1557" end="1564" title="octagon" label="octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43689" start="1677" end="1690" title="Saint Ambrose" label="Saint Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1867" end="1882" title="Saint Augustine" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="1958" end="1970" title="resurrection" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285545" start="2256" end="2266" title="Christian liturgy" label="liturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q218198" start="2297" end="2307" title="holy water" label="holy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q132397" start="2439" end="2443" title="ewer" label="ewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="2707" end="2718" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="3012" end="3030" title="South East England" label="South East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="3097" end="3112" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="3346" end="3365" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17526737" start="3406" end="3449" title="St Mary the Virgin&amp;#x27;s Church, Aylesbury" label="the Church of St Mary the Virgin, Aylesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="3488" end="3501" title="Early English (architecture)" label="Early English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="3592" end="3600" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="3643" end="3654" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="3689" end="3702" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207707" start="3827" end="3832" title="Choir (architecture)" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3859" end="3867" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q210077" start="4361" end="4371" title="baptistery" label="baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="4543" end="4557" title="infant baptism" label="infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299434" start="4635" end="4660" title="baptism by full immersion" label="baptism by full immersion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4932" end="4945" title="Water#Taste and odor" label="body of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="5138" end="5144" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="5150" end="5162" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="5237" end="5260" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5387" end="5398" title="List of Latin phrases (F-L)#I" label="in extremis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210723" start="5582" end="5589" title="chalice (cup)" label="chalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="5633" end="5647" title="Holy Communion" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818625" start="5830" end="5844" title="Tomb of Jesus" label="tomb of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="6055" end="6067" title="Holy Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548499" start="6139" end="6154" title="Theophany Water" label="Theophany Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="6165" end="6176" title="consecration" label="consecrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="6184" end="6202" title="Epiphany (feast)" label="Feast of Theophany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402000" start="6325" end="6330" title="Great Feast" label="feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6426" end="6447" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="6470" end="6492" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="6923" end="6970" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968929" start="7030" end="7042" title="Ward (LDS Church)" label="meetinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654661" start="7164" end="7171" title="Temple (LDS Church)" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q81990" start="7179" end="7206" title="Baptism for the dead" label="proxy baptisms for the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306192" start="7341" end="7351" title="Molten Sea" label="Molten Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="7359" end="7376" title="Temple of Solomon" label="Temple of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210077" start="7489" end="7499" title="Baptistery" label="Baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958596" start="7502" end="7523" title="Bronze laver (Temple)" label="Bronze laver (Temple)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211351" start="7526" end="7532" title="Mikveh" label="Mikveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q642861" start="7535" end="7550" title="Holy water font" label="Holy water font"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039789" start="7559" end="7590" title="Nipson anomemata me monan opsin" label="Nipson anomemata me monan opsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q85131782" start="7599" end="7650" title="Church of the priest Félix and baptistry of Kélibia" label="Church of the priest Félix and baptistry of Kélibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109477" start="7774" end="7794" title="Christian Cyclopedia" label="Christian Cyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262349" wikidata="Q2037863" url="?curid=262349" title="SEPTA">
<text>SEPTA, the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, is a regional public transportation authority that operates bus, rapid transit, commuter rail, light rail, and electric trolleybus services for nearly four million people throughout five counties in and around Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. It also manages projects that maintain, replace, and expand its infrastructure, facilities, and vehicles.

SEPTA is the major transit provider for Philadelphia and four surrounding counties within the Philadelphia metropolitan area, including Delaware, Montgomery, Bucks, and Chester counties. It is a state-created authority, with the majority of its board appointed by the five counties it serves. Several SEPTA commuter rail and bus services serve New Castle County, Delaware and Mercer County, New Jersey, although service to Philadelphia from South Jersey is provided by the PATCO Speedline, which is run by the Delaware River Port Authority, a bi-state agency, and NJ Transit, which operates many bus lines and a commuter rail line to Philadelphia.

SEPTA has the seventh-largest U.S. rapid transit system in the nation by ridership, and the fifth-largest overall transit system in the nation, with about 302 million annual unlinked trips as of 2018. It controls 290 active stations, over of track, 2,350 revenue vehicles, and 196 routes. It also oversees shared-ride services in Philadelphia and ADA services across the region, which are operated by third-party contractors, Amtrak, and NJ Transit.

SEPTA is the only U.S. transit authority that operates all five major types of terrestrial transit vehicles: regional commuter rail trains, rapid transit subway and elevated trains, light rail trolleys, trolleybuses, and motorbuses. This title was shared with Boston&#x27;s Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, which also ran ferryboat service, until trolleybuses in Greater Boston were discontinued in 2023, leaving SEPTA as the sole remaining U.S. transit authority operating all five terrestrial transit vehicle types.

== History ==
=== Formation ===

SEPTA was created by the Pennsylvania General Assembly, on August 17, 1963, to coordinate government funding to various transit and railroad companies in southeastern Pennsylvania. It commenced operations on February 18, 1964.

On November 1, 1965, SEPTA absorbed two predecessor agencies:
* The Passenger Service Improvement Corporation (PSIC), was created on January 20, 1960, to work with the Reading Company and Pennsylvania Railroad to improve commuter rail service and help the railroads maintain otherwise unprofitable passenger rail service.
* The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Compact (SEPACT), was created September 8, 1961, by the City of Philadelphia and the Counties of Montgomery, Bucks, and Chester to coordinate regional transport issues.
By 1966, the Reading Company and Pennsylvania Railroad commuter railroad lines were operated under contract to SEPTA. On February 1, 1968, the Pennsylvania Railroad merged with the New York Central railroad to become Penn Central. On June 21, 1979, it filed for bankruptcy. Penn Central continued to operate in bankruptcy until 1976, when Conrail took over its assets along with those of several other bankrupt railroads, including the Reading Company. Conrail operated commuter services under contract to SEPTA until January 1, 1983, when SEPTA took over operations and acquired track, rolling stock, and other assets to form the Railroad Division.

=== Subsequent expansion ===

Like New York City&#x27;s Second Avenue Subway, the original proposal for the Roosevelt Boulevard Subway dates back to 1913, but construction has remained elusive. Instead, after completing the Market–Frankford Line in and around the city stagnated until the early 2000s.

On September 30, 1968, SEPTA acquired the Philadelphia Transportation Company (PTC), which operated a citywide system of bus, trolley, and trackless trolley routes, the Market–Frankford Line (subway-elevated rail), the Broad Street Line (subway), and the Delaware River Bridge Line (subway-elevated rail to City Hall, Camden, NJ) which became SEPTA&#x27;s City Transit Division. The PTC had been created in 1940 with the merger of the Philadelphia Rapid Transit Company (formed in 1902), and a group of smaller, then-independent transit companies operating within the city and its environs.

On January 30, 1970, SEPTA acquired the Philadelphia Suburban Transportation Company, also known as the Red Arrow Lines, which included the Philadelphia and Western Railroad (P&amp;W) route now called the Norristown High Speed Line, the Media–Sharon Hill Line (Routes 101 and 102), and several suburban bus routes in Delaware County. Today, this is known as the Victory Division, though it is sometimes referred to as the Red Arrow Division.

On March 1, 1976, SEPTA acquired the transit operations of Schuylkill Valley Lines, known today as the Frontier Division. Meanwhile, SEPTA gradually began to take over the Pennsylvania Railroad and Reading Company commuter trains. SEPTA primarily sought to consolidate the formerly-competing services, leading to severe cutbacks in the mid-1980s. Subsequent proposals have since been made to restore service to Allentown, Bethlehem, West Chester, and Newtown, with support from commuters, local officials, and pro-train advocates.

SEPTA&#x27;s planning department focused on the Schuylkill Valley Metro, a &quot;cross-county metro&quot; that would re-establish service to Phoenixville, Pottstown, and Reading without requiring the rider to go into Philadelphia. However, ridership projections were dubious, and the Federal Railroad Administration refused to fund the project.

Many derelict lines under SEPTA ownership have been converted to rail trails, postponing any restoration proposals for the foreseeable future. Proposals have also been made for increased service on existing lines, including later evenings and Sundays to Wilmington, Delaware, and Newark. Maryland&#x27;s MARC commuter rail system is considering extending its service as far as , which would allow passengers to connect directly between SEPTA and MARC. Other recent proposals have also focused on extending and enhancing SEPTA&#x27;s other transit services. Senator of Pennsylvania, Bob Casey, has supported recent proposals expanding the Broad Street Line to the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard. , SEPTA had completed an Environmental Impact Statement to extend the Norristown High Speed Line to the King of Prussia area.

In September 2021, SEPTA proposed rebranding their rail transit services, the Market–Frankford Line, Broad Street Line, Subway–Surface trolley lines, Norristown High Speed Line, Route 15 trolley, and the Media–Sharon Hill Line) as the &quot;SEPTA Metro&quot;, in order to make the system easier to navigate. Under this proposal, new maps, station signage, and line designations would be created. Under the proposed nomenclature, trunk lines would receive a letter and a color, with services having a numeric suffix and service name to make wayfinding easier. Services on the current Market–Frankford Line, for instance, would be called &quot;the L&quot; and colored blue, with local service becoming the &quot;L1 Market–Frankford Local&quot;. SEPTA budgeted $40 million for the rebranding in June 2023. SEPTA upgraded its website in late 2023 in advance of the planned rollout of SEPTA Metro in 2024.

 In 2024, general manager Leslie Richards resigned. 

== Governance ==
At its founding in 1968, the board had 11 members. In 1991 the state legislature added four additional members, giving themselves more influence on the board.

SEPTA is governed by a 15-member board of directors:

* The City of Philadelphia appoints two members: one member is appointed by the Mayor, the other by the City Council President. These two board members can veto any item that is approved by the full SEPTA board because the city represents more than two-thirds of SEPTA&#x27;s local funding, fare revenue, and ridership. However, the veto may be overridden with the vote of at least 75% of the full board within 30 days.
* Bucks, Chester, Delaware, and Montgomery counties appoint two members each. These members are appointed by the county commissioners in Bucks, Chester, and Montgomery and by the county council in Delaware.
* The majority and minority leaders of the two houses of the Pennsylvania State Legislature (the Senate and the House of Representatives) appoint one member each, for a total of four members.
* The governor appoints one member.

The members of the SEPTA Board are:
The day-to-day operations of SEPTA are handled by the general manager, who is appointed and hired by the board of directors. The general manager is assisted by nine department heads called assistant general managers.

The present interim general manager is Scott Sauer. Past general managers include Leslie Richards, Jeffrey Knueppel, Joseph Casey, Faye L. M. Moore, Joseph T. Mack, John &quot;Jack&quot; Leary, Louis Gambaccini, and David L. Gunn. Past acting general managers include James Kilcur and Bill Stead.

SEPTA is a member of the Northeast Corridor Commission, a federal commission on Northeast Corridor rail service.

== Ridership ==

In 2020, annual ridership was 223.5 million individual rides. 17.1 million were rides on SEPTA&#x27;s suburban network. 26.3 million were rides on SEPTA&#x27;s &quot;regional rail&quot; network. 180.1 million were rides on SEPTA&#x27;s &quot;city transit&quot; network.

Ridership had decreased 13% from 2014 to 2019 due to many factors. Some explanations mentioned by SEPTA for this decrease are &quot;increased competition, structural changes in ridership patterns, and moderate gas prices.&quot; The 24% decrease in ridership from 2019 to 2020 was mostly attributable to the impact of government-implemented lock-downs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic that began in mid-March 2020.

== Routes ==
SEPTA&#x27;s public services consist of three main networks: SEPTA Metro, bus operations, and regional rail.

=== SEPTA Metro ===
, SEPTA is in the process of rolling out SEPTA Metro, a unified brand for its urban rail transit services, including rapid transit, trolley, and interurban services. SEPTA has the largest trolley system in the United States.
===Buses===
SEPTA lists 115 bus routes, not including about two dozen school trips, with most routes in the City of Philadelphia proper. SEPTA generally employs lettered, one-digit, and two-digit route numbering for its City Division routes; 90-series and 100-series routes for its Suburban Division routes; 200-series routes for its Regional Rail connector routes; 300-series routes for other specialized or third-party contract routes; and 400-series routes for limited-service buses to schools within Philadelphia.

==== Trolleybuses ====
Trolleybuses, or trackless trolleys as they are called by SEPTA, operate on routes 59, 66, and 75. Service resumed in spring 2008 after a nearly five-year suspension. Until June 2002, five SEPTA routes were operated with trackless trolleys, using AM General vehicles built in 1978–79. Routes 29, 59, 66, 75 and 79 used trackless trolleys, but were converted to diesel buses for an indefinite period starting in 2002 (routes 59, 66, 75) and 2003 (routes 29, 79).

The aging AM General trackless trolleys were retired and in February 2006, SEPTA placed an order for 38 new low-floor trackless trolleys from New Flyer Industries, enough for routes 59, 66 and 75, and the pilot trackless trolley arrived for testing in June 2007. The vehicles were delivered between February and August 2008. Trackless trolley service resumed on Routes 66 and 75 on April 14, 2008, and on Route 59 the following day, but was initially limited to just one or two vehicles on each route, as new trolley buses gradually replaced the motorbuses serving the routes over a period of several weeks.

The SEPTA board voted in October 2006 not to order additional vehicles for Routes 29 and 79, and those routes permanently became non-electric.

=== Regional rail ===

On January 1, 1983, SEPTA took over the commuter rail services formerly operated by Conrail under contract and reorganized them as Regional Rail. This division operates 13 lines serving more than 150 stations covering most of the five-county southeastern Pennsylvania region. It also runs trains to Wilmington and Newark in Delaware and Trenton and West Trenton in New Jersey. Daily ridership on the regional rail network averaged 58,713 in 2023, with the Lansdale/Doylestown, Paoli/Thorndale, and Trenton lines each receiving over 7,000 riders per day.

Most of the cars used on the lines were built between 1976 and 2013. After building delays, the first Silverliner V cars were introduced into service on October 29, 2010. These cars represent the first new electric multiple units purchased for the Regional Rail system since the completion of the Silverliner IV order in 1976 and the first such purchase to be made by SEPTA. As of March 19, 2013, all Silverliner V cars are in service and make up almost one-third of the current 400 car Regional Rail fleet, which are replacing the older, aging fleet.

In July 2016, a serious structural flaw, including cracks in a weight-bearing beam on a train car&#x27;s undercarriage, was discovered during an emergency inspection to exist in more than 95% of the 120 Silverliner V cars in the SEPTA regional rail fleet. SEPTA announced that it would take &quot;the rest of the summer&quot; to repair and would reduce the system&#x27;s capacity by as much as 50%. In addition to regular commuter rail service, the loss of system capacity was also expected to cause transportation issues for the Democratic National Convention being held in Philadelphia on the week of July 25, 2016.

== Operational divisions ==
SEPTA has three major operating divisions: City Transit, Suburban, and Regional Rail. These divisions reflect the different transit and railroad operations that SEPTA has assumed. SEPTA also offers CCT Connect paratransit service.

=== City Transit Division ===
The City Transit Division operates routes mostly within Philadelphia, including buses, subway–surface trolleys, one surface trolley line, the Market–Frankford Line, and the Broad Street Line. SEPTA City Transit Division surface routes include bus and trackless trolley lines. Some city division routes extend into Delaware, Montgomery, and Bucks counties. This division is the descendant of the Philadelphia Transportation Company. Aside from the two heavy rail lines, the City Transit Division has eight operating depots in this division: five of these depots only operate buses, one is a mixed bus/trackless trolley depot, one is a mixed bus/streetcar depot and one is a streetcar-only facility.

=== Suburban Division ===
==== Victory District ====

The Victory District operates suburban bus and trolley or light rail routes that are based at 69th Street Transportation Center in Upper Darby in Delaware County. Its light rail routes comprise the Norristown High Speed Line (Route 100) that runs from 69th Street Transportation Center to Norristown Transportation Center and the Media–Sharon Hill Line (Routes 101 and 102). This district is the descendant of the Philadelphia Suburban Transportation Company, also known as the Red Arrow Lines. Some residents of the Victory District operating area still refer to this district as the &quot;Red Arrow Division&quot;.

==== Frontier District ====
The Frontier District operates suburban bus routes that are based at the Norristown Transportation Center in Montgomery County and bus lines that serve eastern Bucks County. This district is the descendant of the Schuylkill Valley Lines in the Norristown area and the Trenton-Philadelphia Coach Lines in eastern Bucks County. SEPTA took over Schuylkill Valley Lines operations on March 1, 1976. SEPTA turned over the Bucks County routes (formerly Trenton-Philadelphia Coach Line Routes, a subsidiary of SEPTA) to Frontier Division in November 1983.

==== Suburban contract operations ====
Krapf Transit operates one bus line under contract to SEPTA in Chester County: Route 204 between Paoli Regional Rail Station and Eagleview. This route is operated from Krapf&#x27;s own garage, located in West Chester, Pennsylvania. Krapf has operated three other bus routes for SEPTA in the past. Route 202 (West Chester to Wilmington), Route 207 (The Whiteland WHIRL) and Route 208 (Strafford Train Station to Chesterbrook) are no longer operating.

SEPTA contracted bus operations before in Chester County. SEPTA and Reeder&#x27;s Inc. joined forces in 1977 to operate three bus routes out of West Chester. These routes were Route 120 (West Chester to Coatesville), Route 121 (West Chester to Paoli), and Route 122 (West Chester to Oxford). Bus service between West Chester and Coatesville was a replacement for the previous trolley service operated by West Chester Traction. SEPTA replaced two of the routes with their own bus service. Route 122 service was replaced by SEPTA&#x27;s Route 91 in July 1982, after only one year of service. Route 91 was eliminated due to lack of ridership.

Route 121 was replaced by SEPTA&#x27;s Route 92 in October 1982. This service continues to operate today. Since ridership on the Route 120 was strong it continued to operate under the operations of Reeder&#x27;s Inc. even after SEPTA pulled the funding source. Krapf purchased the Reeder&#x27;s operation in 1992 and designated the remaining (West Chester to Coatesville) bus route as Krapf Transit &quot;Route A&quot;. Route 205 (Paoli Station to Chesterbrook) was formerly operated by Krapf until late 2019, when it was merged into SEPTA&#x27;s own Route 206 (Paoli Station to Great Valley).

=== Railroad Division ===
The Railroad Division operates 13 commuter railroad routes that begin in Center City Philadelphia and radiate outwards, terminating in intra-city, suburban and out-of-state locations.

This division is the descendant of the six electrified commuter lines of the Reading Company (RDG), the six electrified commuter lines of the Pennsylvania Railroad (PRR, later Penn Central: PC), and the new airport line constructed by the City of Philadelphia between 1974 and 1984.

With the construction and opening of the Center City Commuter Connection Tunnel in 1984, lines were paired such that a former Pennsylvania Railroad line was coupled with a former Reading line. Seven such pairings were created and given route designations numbered R1 through R8 (with R4 not used). As a result, the routes were originally designed so that trains would proceed from one outlying terminal to Center City, stopping at 30th Street Station, Suburban Station and , formerly Market East Station, then proceed out to the other outlying terminal assigned to the route. Since ridership patterns have changed since the implementation of this plan, SEPTA removed the R-numbers from the lines in July 2010 and instead refers to the lines by the names of their termini.

The out-of-state terminals offer connections with other transit agencies. The Trenton Line offers connections in Trenton, New Jersey to NJ Transit (NJT) or Amtrak for travel to New York City. Plans exist to restore NJT service to West Trenton, New Jersey, thus offering a future alternate to New York via the West Trenton Line and NJT. Another plan offers a connection for travel to Baltimore and Washington, D.C. via MARC, involving extensions of the SEPTA Wilmington/Newark Line from Newark, Delaware, an extension of MARC&#x27;s Penn service from Perryville, Maryland, or both.

=== CCT Connect ===

CCT Connect is a paratransit service from SEPTA that offers a Shared-Ride Program for senior citizens and ADA Paratransit Service for people with disabilities. The Shared-Ride Program provides a door-to-door ridesharing service through advance reservations for senior citizens age 65 or older in the city of Philadelphia for travel within the city and to points within of the city&#x27;s borders.

The ADA Paratransit Service provides door-to-door service through advance reservations for people with disabilities in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), allowing for travel across the SEPTA service area within of fixed-route transit service when such service operates. CCT Connect is operated by third-party contractors for SEPTA.

Easton Coach, First Transit, MV Transportation, and Total Transit Corp. operate CCT Connect service in Philadelphia County; Easton Coach operates CCT Connect service in Bucks County; Krapf Transit operates CCT Connect service in Chester County; Community Transit of Delaware County operates CCT Connect service in Delaware County; and First Transit operates CCT Connect service in Montgomery County.

== Financing ==
SEPTA is considered a non-profit. SEPTA gets income from passenger fares, investments, and multiple government agencies to cover operating costs.

=== Operating costs ===
SEPTA had $1,530,984,000 in total operating expenses for the fiscal year of 2021. $1,088,773,000 (71.1%) of those expenses are considered &quot;Labor and Fringe Benefits&quot;. $331,432,000 (21.6%) of those expenses are &quot;Material and Services&quot; costs. $27,313,000 (1.8%) are due to &quot;Propulsion Power&quot; costs. $26,026,000 (1.7%) are due to &quot;Fuel&quot; costs. $24,711,000 (1.6%) are for &quot;Injury and Damage Claims&quot;. $23,875,000 (1.6%) are due to &quot;Depreciation/Contributed Capital&quot; costs. The last $8,854,000 (.5%) in costs are due to &quot;Vehicle and Facility Rentals&quot;.

=== Operating revenue ===
To cover 35% of their operating costs, SEPTA receives $541,768,000 in operating revenue, which includes: $480,574,000 (88.7%) from passenger revenue, $16,250,000 (3%) from SEPTA&#x27;s &quot;Shared Ride Program&quot;, $42,188,000 (7.8%) from &quot;Other Income&quot;, and $2,756,000 (.5%) from &quot;Investment Income&quot;.

=== Government funding ===
To make up for the $989,200,000 gap in operating expenses for FY2021, SEPTA receives 65% of its FY2021 income from federal, state, and local government funding. SEPTA receives this financial support in the form of direct funding, grants, income from a Pennsylvanian sales tax, proceeds from state bond programs, and lease funding.

$779,842,000 (78.8%) of SEPTA&#x27;s funding short-fall is covered by a combination of state government funding. $111,986,000 (11.3%) of SEPTA&#x27;s funding short-fall is covered by local government programs. $93,028,000 (9.4%) of SEPTA&#x27;s funding short-fall is covered by the Federal government. $4,360,000 (.5%) of the gap is covered by &quot;Other&quot; means.

As of June 2022, SEPTA no longer receives $180,000,000 annually from the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission as a result of Act 89, signed into law in 2013. Under Act 89, this funding became $50,000,000 for the 2023 fiscal year, and will eventually become nothing.

== Fares ==
Rides on SEPTA&#x27;s transit services (buses, rapid transit, trolleys, and trackless trolleys) cost $2.50. This must be paid in exact change when using cash. Electronic payment methods allow transfers from one SEPTA transit service to another. This includes two free transfers. A number of interchanges between rapid transit lines can be used for free, without a transfer. Electronic payment methods previously offered rides for $2, but this was raised to match the cash base rate ($2.50) on December 1, 2024.

Fares on Regional Rail are based on fare zones reflecting the station&#x27;s distance from Center City Philadelphia. Fares are higher on weekdays and lower during weekends and major holidays when paying with a SEPTA Key Card or a Quick Trip. Fares paid on board the train to the conductor are the same prices at all times. Until December 1, 2024, weekday evening fares were the same as weekend/holiday fares. SEPTA also offers intermediate fares for trips on Regional Rail that do not go through Center City Philadelphia and &quot;via Center City Philadelphia&quot; fares that can be used between two outlying stations that require travel through Center City Philadelphia. These fares were raised to present levels on December 1, 2024.

Fares for the CCT Connect service cost $4.25.

=== Passes ===
Several types of passes are available that allow a certain number of trips on transit and/or Regional Rail for a specified amount of time. These passes are only available on a SEPTA Key card. Paper passes have been discontinued.

The TransPass costs $25.50 weekly and $96 monthly and can be used for all transit rides within the time period. The TransPass is valid on Regional Rail for riders traveling between Zone 1 and Center City stations or the Airport Line. The TransPass can be used anywhere on Regional Rail on weekends and major holidays.

The TrailPass is available either weekly or monthly and can be used on Regional Rail up to the zone printed on the pass along with all transit rides within the time period. Prices for the TrailPass are based on fare zones reflecting distance from Center City Philadelphia. TrailPasses have anywhere privileges on weekends and major holidays.

The Cross County Pass costs $30.75 weekly and $115 monthly and can be used for all transit rides and all Regional Rail trips outside Center City Philadelphia within the time period. The pass can be used with a payment of an additional Zone 1 fare for travel into Center City Philadelphia. Cross County Passes have anywhere privileges on weekends and holidays.

The One-Day Anywhere FleX Pass (formerly called the One-Day Independence Pass) can be used for up to 10 trips in one day on transit and Regional Rail services, with an individual pass $13 and a three-pass bundle $35. An additional charge of $3.75 per individual pass must be paid for Regional Rail travel in New Jersey.

The One-Day Neighborhood FleX Pass can be used on transit and Regional Rail, between Zone 2 and Center City Stations for 10 trips costing $10 for one day and $27 for a three-pass bundle. Additional surcharge applies to riders using the Neighborhood FleX Pass beyond Zone 2 stations on Regional Rail.

The One-Day Convenience Pass allows for 8 rides on transit services in one day for $6, while the Three-Day Convenience Pass allows for 24 rides on transit services in a 72-hour period for $15.00. The pass is not valid on Regional Rail.

SEPTA offers the SEPTA Key University Pass to college students at University of Pennsylvania, Temple University, Drexel University, University of the Arts, and Saint Joseph&#x27;s University. These passes can be monthly or semester-based, and allow 960 rides over the course of the semester; fares are discounted by approximately 10 percent.

=== Reduced fares ===
SEPTA allows senior citizens to apply for Senior Fare Cards. This allows them to ride transit services and Regional Rail trains in Pennsylvania for free with identification; fares on Regional Rail trains operating to Delaware or New Jersey are half the weekday fare. Disabled persons may apply for a Reduced Fare Card. This allows them to ride transit services for half price and Regional Rail trains for half the weekday fare with identification.

SEPTA allows all children under the age of 12 to ride for free with a fare-paying adult. Children riding alone must pay regular fares. SEPTA offers special fares for students in K–12 schools who ride SEPTA to get to school. The SEPTA Key Student Fare Card program provides students with a SEPTA Key card that can be used for up to 8 trips per school day, between 5:30 AM and 8:00 PM. Cards can be upgraded to be used on Regional Rail.

SEPTA is currently partnering with the City of Philadelphia on running Zero Fare, a 2-year pilot program that will allow residents who live near or below the Poverty threshold to ride all services for free. Riders cannot apply on their own. 90% of them will be selected randomly based on age and income, and the remaining 10% will be enrolled through a number of community organizations. SEPTA reported positive results at the end of the first year of the program, during which 24,000 Zero Fare Key Cards were distributed. During the second year, SEPTA plans to distribute a further 20,000 cards by June 30, 2025.

== Payment methods ==

SEPTA stations and vehicles are equipped with turnstiles, scanners, and fare boxes that accept various types of payment methods depending on the mode of transit: SEPTA Key, Key Tix (transit only), Quick Trips (transit station turnstiles, from Center City Regional Rail Stations, and the Airport Line), cash (buses, trolleys, and trolleybuses only), and NFC (currently transit only). Fares on Regional Rail can be paid to a conductor onboard the train using cash or a credit card; these fares are more expensive than those purchased using a SEPTA Key card.

SEPTA stations have Fare Kiosks that can be used to purchase Key cards and Quick Trips, and also replenish the Travel Wallet.

=== SEPTA Key ===

The SEPTA Key card is a smart card that can be used on SEPTA&#x27;s transit services and Regional Rail. The card replaced tokens, paper tickets, and paper passes; it is now the preferred method of payment on SEPTA services. In addition to storing passes, the card has a travel wallet that can be reloaded online, at kiosks, SEPTA Sales Offices, and participating retailers. Reduced fare cards issued to the elderly and the disabled are special cards that are printed with photo ID.

=== Key Tix ===
In August 2022, SEPTA introduced the ability to pay for transit rides using electronic tickets that can be bought through the SEPTA mobile apps for Android and iOS. Once a ticket is activated, the app displays a QR code that can be read at scanners and turnstiles. In addition to allowing discounted rides and free transfers, multiple passengers can use the same ticket. After a limited pilot program, the feature was released to the general public in December 2022.

=== Quick Trip ===
Quick Trips are magnetic strip cards that can be used for a single ride from transit stations with turnstiles, Center City Regional Rail Stations, or the Airport Line. They can be purchased at Fare Kiosks and cost $2.50 for transit and the price varies by zone and time of day on Regional Rail. They do not allow free transfers, except at free interchange stations in Center City at the 13th, 15th, and Drexel at 30th Street Stations.

=== NFC Payments ===
In July 2023, SEPTA launched a limited pilot program to allow passengers to pay for transit trips using contactless credit cards and digital wallets on NFC-enabled phones and smart watches. This feature was made available to the general public for transit rides on September 29, 2023. Availability on Regional Rail was originally planned for 2024. SEPTA began a limited pilot program to test this in December 2024 (excluding Trenton and West Trenton stations), with general availability planned for 2025. 
=== PATCO Freedom Card ===
The Freedom Share Card fare card used by the PATCO Speedline is accepted on all SEPTA services except Regional Rail. The card is read at SEPTA Key card readers.

=== Paper Tickets ===
Paper tickets were used on Regional Rail. Sales were discontinued in 2020. Valid tickets were still accepted on trains until April 1, 2021. As of April 2, 2021, previously purchased paper tickets were no longer accepted on Regional Rail.

=== Tokens ===
SEPTA tokens could be used on transit services for discounted fares. Each token cost $2, and they could only be purchased in packs of 2, 5, or 10. The usage of tokens predates the formation of SEPTA, having been employed by various transit agencies since the 1880s. Philadelphia was the last major US city to utilize tokens for transit fare payments. Token sales were discontinued on April 30, 2018, and the token vending machines were removed from transit stations. Previously sold tokens could be redeemed at fare kiosks and their value could be loaded onto the Travel Wallet of the SEPTA Key card. Effective January 1, 2024, SEPTA no longer accepts tokens at vehicle fareboxes or fare kiosks.

== Transit police ==

SEPTA established its current Transit Police Department in 1981. It now has about 260 officers operating in seven patrol zones. It maintains a patrol, bicycle, and police dog unit, and a Special Operations Response Team trained to deal with potential hostage situations. In May 2023, Charles Lawson was appointed chief of the Transit Police, after serving as acting chief since July 2022.

== Equipment ==
=== Buses ===
In 1982, SEPTA ordered buses from Neoplan USA, a purchase that was both the largest for Neoplan at the time and SEPTA&#x27;s largest to date. These buses were used throughout the SEPTA service area. SEPTA changed its specifications on new bus orders each year. The Neoplan AK&#x27;s (numbered 8285–8410), which was SEPTA&#x27;s first Neoplan order, had longitudinal seating: all of the seats face towards the aisle. Their suburban counterparts (8411–8434) had longitudinal seating only in the rear of the bus. The back door has a wheelchair ramp, which forced SEPTA officials to limit its use and specify wheelchair lifts in their next order. These buses had a nine-liter 6v92 engine and Allison HT-747 transmission.

In 1983, SEPTA, along with other transit operators in Pennsylvania, ordered 1,000 Neoplan buses of various lengths. SEPTA ultimately received 450 buses from this order: 425 were buses (BD 8435–8584 and CD 8601–8875), which came without wheelchair lifts, and 25 buses (BP 1301–1325).

SEPTA purchased additional Neoplans in 1986. The first two groups (3000–3131 and 3132–3251) came without rear wheelchair lifts; the last two groups, one in late 1987 (3252–3371) and another in 1989 (3372–3491), included them. All Neoplans built between 1986 and 1989 were equipped with a ZF 4HP-590 transmission.

By the early 1990s, SEPTA had 1,092 Neoplan AN440 coaches in active service, making it the largest transit system in North America with a fleet primarily manufactured by Neoplan USA. These buses dominated the streets of Philadelphia through late 1997 when the earlier fleet of AK and BD Neoplans (8285–8581) was replaced by 400 buses built by American Ikarus and – the same company after a 1996 reorganization – North American Bus Industries. The older GMC RTS 35- and 40-foot buses were also replaced in this order, with the sole remaining exception of No. 4462, a 35-foot coach. More replacements occurred when SEPTA received its first low-floor fleet and retired the last AN440 buses on June 20, 2008.

The Neoplan model had not entirely vanished from Philadelphia&#x27;s streets by the start of the 21st century. In 1998, SEPTA ordered 155 articulated buses from the company. These buses replaced the 1984 Volvo 10BM 60-foot articulated buses. These buses have now been retired since late 2015, replaced by the 2013–2016 NovaBus LFS-A HEV.

The 1998 purchase included 89 29-foot Transmark-29 buses from National-Eldorado (4501–4580, 4581 received later), the first of which began to arrive in late 2000. Most of these buses ran on suburban routes occasionally entering the city, but some are in the &quot;LUCY&quot; service in the University City section of West Philadelphia, in a special paint scheme, and others on lighter lines within Philadelphia. SEPTA had decided to buy from Metrotrans Legacy, SEPTA&#x27;s first choice in small buses, but the company filed for bankruptcy in 1999.

A fleet of buses known as &quot;cutaways&quot; were purchased. These buses were built on Ford van chassis, with bodies similar to those seen on car rental shuttles at various airports. These buses were retired around 2003 and replaced with slightly larger cutaway buses on a Freightliner truck chassis.

After evaluating sample buses from New Flyer and NovaBus in 1994–96, SEPTA ordered 100 low-floor buses (nos. 5401–5500) from New Flyer in 2001.

Trackless trolley (trolley bus) service was suspended in 2003 and the 110 AM General vehicles that had provided service on SEPTA&#x27;s five trackless trolley routes never returned to service. In early 2006, SEPTA ordered 38 new low-floor trackless trolleys from New Flyer, which entered service in 2008, restoring trackless service on routes 59, 66 and 75. These buses replaced SEPTA Neoplan EZs, ending Neoplan&#x27;s 26-year domination.

SEPTA placed an order with delivery starting in 2008 for 400 New Flyer hybrid buses—with options for up to 80 additional buses to replace the NABI Ikarus buses at the end of their 12-year life. These will not be the first hybrid buses, since SEPTA purchased two small groups of hybrids, 5601H–5612H, which arrived in 2003, and 5831H–5850H in 2004.

Prior to the 2008 purchase, SEPTA borrowed an MTA New York City Transit Orion VII hybrid bus # 6365 to evaluate it in service. SEPTA was the first to purchase New Flyer DE40LFs equipped with rooftop HVAC units. SEPTA delivered 525 2017–2022 NFI XDE40 hybrid buses to replace all the diesel buses that were delivered between 2001 and 2004. SEPTA is replacing cloth seats with plastic seats on their buses that were delivered after 2008 in an effort to combat bed bug infestations.

SEPTA&#x27;s revenue from advertisements on the backs of its buses leads the authority to order mainly buses equipped with a rooftop HVAC, and with their rear route-number sign mounted on the roof, especially on 2008–2009 New Flyer DE40LFs and future orders.

In 2016, SEPTA launched a pilot program that would see battery electric buses replace diesel buses on former trackless trolley routes 29 and 79. Using a $2.6-million Federal Transit Administration grant, the agency ordered 25 such buses from Proterra, Inc. of California, together with two overhead fast-charging stations. They are expected to enter service in 2017, returning electric propulsion to these routes after nearly 15 years of diesel operation. These same busses were sidelined in February, 2020 for an undisclosed reason, but multiple agency sources blamed a defect in the buses&#x27; plastic chassis that led to a cracking problem.

In 2021, SEPTA placed an order for 220 New Flyer XDE40 buses with an option for 120 additional buses. These buses replaced the New Flyer D40LF buses that were delivered in 2005 and are currently replacing the New Flyer DE40LF buses that were delivered between 2008-2009.

=== Subway ===

The Broad Street Line uses cars built by Kawasaki between 1982 and 1984. These cars, known as B-IV as they are the fourth generation used on the line, are stainless steel and include some cars with operating cabs at both ends, as well as some with only a single cab. These cars use the standard gauge of .

The Market–Frankford Line uses a class of cars known as M-4, as they, like the Broad Street B-IVs, represent the line&#x27;s fourth generation of cars and were built from 1997 to 1999 by Adtranz. These cars use a broad gauge of , known as &quot;Pennsylvania trolley gauge&quot;. In 2017, 90 cars had emergency welding to fix cracking steel beams. Then in 2020 all the cars, including the ones temporarily repaired in 2017, had to have more permanent welding to fix cracking steel beams.

=== Trolley ===

The SEPTA trolley fleet has three different types of cars.

The 112 vehicles used on the SEPTA Subway–Surface trolley lines (Routes 10, 11, 13, 34, and 36) were built by Kawasaki beginning in 1981 after a 1980 prototype was delivered and tested. Known as &quot;K-cars&quot;, they use the Pennsylvania trolley gauge. Larger than the replaced PCC cars they are 50 feet long and capable of reaching a top speed of . They also were the first in North America to have unitized roof-mounted air conditioners and to have electronic control of switches at junctions. The city cars operate out of two depots, Elmwood and Callowhill.

The suburban trolley lines (Routes 101 and 102) use 29 Kawasaki-built vehicles similar to, but slightly larger than, the Subway–Surface trolleys. They use a slightly wider track gauge than the city lines – – but the same wheel gauge. Wheel profiles are different and different gear ratios provide higher speeds. Notably, they are double-ended, unlike the Subway-Surface trolleys, as these lines lack any loops to turn the vehicles at their suburban terminals. Unlike the city cars, which use traditional trolley pole power collectors, the suburban cars use pantographs and are capable of a top speed of .

SEPTA Route 15 (Girard Avenue Line) uses PCC cars. These cars were originally built in 1947 by the St. Louis Car Company and were rebuilt by Brookville (and renamed PCC II) for the line&#x27;s reopening in 2003 to include air conditioning and a wheelchair lift. The Girard line has the same Pennsylvania trolley gauge as the Subway-Surface lines and operates out of Callowhill depot. Since 2020, these cars are once again being rebuilt by SEPTA and when scheduled to return in 2023, they will feature plastic seating.

Currently, SEPTA is ordering new 130 low floor streetcars that will be built and delivered by Alstom. These trolley cars are scheduled to enter service between 2027-2030. These cars will operate on the Subway-Surface trolleys, as well as Route 15 and the suburban trolleys.

=== Regional Rail ===

SEPTA&#x27;s regional rail services primarily use a fleet of &quot;Silverliner&quot; electric multiple unit cars. During rush-hour service they are supplemented by a small fleet of unpowered passenger cars, based on the &quot;Comet&quot; family of railcars, hauled by 15 Siemens ACS-64 electric locomotives.

=== Interurban ===
The Norristown High Speed Line uses a unique class of 26 cars known as N-5s. They were delivered in 1993 by ABB after significant production difficulties and a change of assembly locations. These cars are powered by a nominally 600 volt top-contact third rail. They run on a standard gauge track. They are the first fleet of cars in North America to have Alternating Current (AC) traction motors.

They have running gear (trucks) incorporating design elements used on the Swedish High-Speed trains. Axle suspensions provide flexibility that allows axles to steer themselves around curves as small as 5 degrees. While the vehicles were designed for a top speed of , the signal system allows operations at up to .

=== Accessibility ===
All of SEPTA&#x27;s buses are fully accessible under the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). As of February 2022, about 46% of its subway and commuter rail stations combined are ADA-compliant, which is the second-lowest accessibility rate for rail stops in the country. The New York City Subway, at 28% as of September 2021, has the lowest in the nation.

The trolley vehicles are fully inaccessible, meaning that no trolley stop can possibly be compliant with the ADA. SEPTA was sued successfully over its lack of accessibility back in 2009.

== Maintenance facilities ==
;Transit Divisions
* 69th Street Yard (City Transit Division/ Market–Frankford Line in Delaware County)
* Allegheny Depot (City Transit Division/ articulated and standard size buses; formerly housed Nearside, double-ended, and PCC streetcars)
* Berridge Shops (formerly Wyoming Shops, bus maintenance, and overhauls)
* Bridge Street Yard (City Transit Division/ Market–Frankford Line)
* Callowhill Depot (City Transit Division/ bus and streetcar; formerly housed Nearside, Peter Witt, double-ended, and PCC streetcars)
* Comly Depot (City Transit Division/ articulated and standard size buses)
* Elmwood Depot (City Transit Division/ streetcar, also used as a station. Replaced former Woodland Depot)
* Fern Rock Yard (City Transit Division/ Broad Street Line)
* Frankford Depot (City Transit Division/ bus and trackless trolley; formerly housed Nearside, double-ended, and PCC streetcars)
* Frontier Depot (Suburban Transit Division/ bus)
* Germantown Brakes Maintenance Facility (Germantown Depot, City Transit Division/ bus maintenance)
* Midvale Depot (City Transit Division/ articulated, standard size, and formerly housed buses. Replaced former Luzerne Depot)
* Southern Depot (City Transit Division/ articulated and standard size buses: SEPTA board voted to not have trackless trolleys return to South Philly; formerly housed Nearside, double-ended and Peter Witt streetcars)
* Victory Depot (69th Street, Suburban Transit Division/ bus and light rail)
* Woodland Maintenance Facility (streetcar overhaul and repairs. Site of former Woodland Depot, which formerly housed Nearside, double-ended, and PCC streetcars)

;Regional Rail
== Connecting transit agencies in the Philadelphia region ==
=== Local services ===

The PATCO Speedline is a rapid transit line that runs from Center City Philadelphia to Camden, New Jersey and terminates in Lindenwold, New Jersey. At the 8th Street station, passengers can transfer to the Market–Frankford Line and Broad–Ridge Spur with an additional transfer fare. Paid transfers are also available at PATCO&#x27;s 12th–13th Street station and 15th–16th Street station with SEPTA&#x27;s Broad Street Line Walnut–Locust station. The PATCO Speedline crosses over the Delaware River via the Ben Franklin Bridge. It is owned by the Delaware River Port Authority.

In the western Philadelphia suburbs, Krapf&#x27;s Transit runs regularly scheduled buses for the TMACC between Coatesville and Parkesburg and between West Chester, Pennsylvania West Chester and Oxford. Krapf&#x27;s also provides contract services to SEPTA on route 204. They also operate a free express shuttle bus from Center City to the Navy Yard in South Philadelphia as well as a free shuttle bus loop within the Navy Yard itself.

In King of Prussia, the Greater Valley Forge Transportation Management Association runs a community shuttle, the Rambler, which connects with SEPTA at the King of Prussia Transit Center.

In the northwestern Philadelphia suburbs, Pottstown Area Rapid Transit (PART) operates five bus routes in Pottstown and the neighboring townships of Douglass, Limerick, Lower Pottsgrove, Upper Pottsgrove, and West Pottsgrove in Montgomery County and North Coventry Township in Chester County. PART and SEPTA have an agreement allowing transfers between PART service and SEPTA Route 93 buses in Pottstown.

=== Regional services ===
NJ Transit runs buses from Philadelphia to various New Jersey points. Many NJT buses stop at the Philadelphia Greyhound Terminal, which is immediately north of Jefferson Station or at other locations in Center City Philadelphia. NJT also operates the River Line light rail line between Camden and Trenton, the Northeast Corridor Line between Trenton and New York, and the Atlantic City Line between 30th Street Station and Atlantic City. Both the Northeast Corridor Line and River Line connect with SEPTA&#x27;s Regional Rail Trenton Line at the Trenton Transit Center. SEPTA Route 127 connects with NJT bus and rail services here also.

DART First State provides bus service in Delaware. This service connects with SEPTA&#x27;s Wilmington/Newark Line Regional Rail service in Wilmington, Delaware, and Newark, Delaware. In 2007, SEPTA bus Route 306 began service, connecting the Great Valley Corporate Center and West Chester with the Brandywine Town Center; service between West Chester and Brandywine Town Center was discontinued in 2010 due to low ridership. In February 2009, SEPTA bus Route 113 commenced connecting bus service with DART at the Tri-State Mall, allowing service between Delaware County and Delaware, and connecting with DART First State&#x27;s #13 and #61 bus at the Tri-State Mall. The transfer point at the Tri-State Mall was moved in 2023 to the Claymont Transportation Center.

=== National and international services ===
Amtrak provides rail service between 30th Street Station and Lancaster, Harrisburg, Pittsburgh, and Chicago to the west, Baltimore and Washington, D.C. to the southwest, and New York City, Boston, and Montreal to the northeast. SEPTA&#x27;s Wilmington/Newark Line and Trenton Line run along Amtrak&#x27;s Northeast Corridor. SEPTA&#x27;s Paoli/Thorndale Line runs along the far eastern leg of Amtrak&#x27;s Philadelphia to Harrisburg Main Line and Keystone Corridor.

All Regional Rail routes stop at 30th Street Station&#x27;s upper platform. It is a short walk down a ramp to Amtrak&#x27;s gates. Other shared Amtrak/Regional Rail stations include and on the Wilmington/Newark Line, , , , and on the Paoli/Thorndale Line, and Trenton on the Trenton Line. Amtrak also offers limited service from and , which are also on Trenton Line. Amtrak is faster than SEPTA, but significantly more expensive, particularly for services along the Northeast Corridor.

Greyhound and a variety of interregional bus operators, most of which are part of the Trailways system, stop at the Philadelphia Greyhound Terminal. In addition to being adjacent to Jefferson Station, the terminal is one block from the Market–Frankford Line&#x27;s station and various SEPTA bus routes. Major destinations served with one-seat rides to and from the terminal include Allentown, Atlantic City, Baltimore, Harrisburg, Newark, New York City, Pittsburgh, Reading, Scranton, Washington, D.C., and Wilmington. Six NJ Transit bus routes (313, 315, 316, 317, 318, and 551) originate and terminate from this terminal.

SEPTA serves Philadelphia International Airport with local bus service and with the Airport Line from Center City.

== Criticism and recognition ==
===20th century===
SEPTA&#x27;s 50-year history has often been tumultuous because the agency is governed at a county level rather than state level. &quot;Railpace Newsmagazine&quot; contributor Gerry Williams observed that SEPTA regularly staggers from crisis to crisis, with little support or oversight originating at the state level in Harrisburg. It has a long history of being at odds with the riding public and both county and state officials. SEPTA has had more labor strikes than any other transit agency in the U.S., occurring in 1977, 1981, 1983, 1986, 1995, 1998, 2005, 2009, 2014, and 2016.

Williams commented that there is a notable lack of &quot;any group... influential enough to bring shame on SEPTA,&quot; adding that SEPTA&#x27;s chronic ills &quot;merely reflect the broader problems of local provincialism and petty political squabbles which are so rampant within the (Delaware Valley) region.&quot; The five counties it serves regularly have various hidden agendas working in the background, often at cross purposes with one another than as a unified region, a problem that has resulted in many services being severed mid-route without regard to the affected counties. This factor is regularly influenced by the changing political winds at the state capital in Harrisburg.

===21st century===
SEPTA made improvements in the 21st century that helped reverse the downward trend. $191 million of funds made available from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 were utilized to make over 30 major improvements to the system, including renovations of the Spring Garden and Girard Avenue subway stations and building the first Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) station at Fox Chase terminal in 2010. SEPTA also inaugurated a consolidated, multi-modal control center that helps manage all aspects of the system.

SEPTA was voted the best large transit agency in North America by the American Public Transportation Association (APTA) in July 2012. The award was criticized by &quot;Next City&quot; columnist Diana Lind, stating that despite some outward appearances of improvement, SEPTA still largely operates under a cloud of non-transparency and continues to lack a system-wide expansion program for the future. This is most notable in the regional rail division, which suffered severe cutbacks in the 1980s and whose affected routes have been converted into rail trails, preventing a restoration of those services for the foreseeable future. When asked to produce data pertaining to SEPTA&#x27;s repeated attempts to consolidate bus stops, Lind observed &quot;the report on the project barely elaborates on the information. SEPTA&#x27;s trials deserve public attention and input. The public deserves the data—show us the average times before and after the pilot. Give reader surveys. Tell us why you haven&#x27;t tried another pilot on another bus line.&quot;

Between 2009 and 2013, SEPTA was criticised for its use of sex identification markers on the SEPTA-issued monthly transit passes, as some transgender and gender-queer people had experienced discrimination related to the markers. These markers, SEPTA said, were an anti-fraud measure designed to prevent people in the same household sharing a monthly pass. However, the lobby group SEPTA Riders Against Gender Exclusion (SEPTA R.A.G.E) said that the sex identification markers had resulted in harassment, violence, and discrimination for those who did not physically match the stated sex on the pass. The markers on the monthly passes were stopped in June 2013.

In October 2020, SEPTA trialled the use of lean benches instead of traditional seating at some of its stations. This was criticized by some as lean benches are widely considered to be hostile architecture, designed to stop homeless populations using the stations to sleep. SEPTA stated that the use of the lean benches was to encourage social distancing to prevent the spread the COVID-19. These trials concluded in September 2021 with the removal of the lean benches.

One of the biggest issues facing SEPTA is passengers smoking and vaping in stations and vehicles. SEPTA has been subject to criticism for not doing a sufficient job of upholding the law which prohibits smoking in public transportation facilities and vehicles. 

== See also ==
* Doe v. Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority
* List of metro systems
* List of United States rapid transit systems by ridership
* Commuter rail in North America
* List of suburban and commuter rail systems
* List of United States commuter rail systems by ridership
* List of light rail transit systems
* List of United States light rail systems by ridership
* List of United States local bus agencies by ridership

== Further reading ==
*
*John F. Tucker Transit History Collection (1895–2002) at Hagley Museum and Library.(includes records of the pre-SEPTA Philadelphia Rapid Transit Company and the Philadelphia Transportation Company for the period 1907–1968.)

== References ==
==External links==

* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2037863" start="0" end="5" title="SEPTA" label="SEPTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037863" start="11" end="61" title="SEPTA" label="Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="77" end="98" title="public transportation" label="public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373492" start="123" end="126" title="transit bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="128" end="141" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="143" end="156" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="158" end="168" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="183" end="193" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="273" end="285" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27844" start="544" end="552" title="Delaware County, Pennsylvania" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q378527" start="554" end="564" title="Montgomery County, Pennsylvania" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="566" end="571" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q27840" start="577" end="584" title="Chester County, Pennsylvania" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q156156" start="752" end="779" title="New Castle County, Delaware" label="New Castle County, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q496886" start="784" end="809" title="Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Mercer County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567568" start="849" end="861" title="South Jersey" label="South Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043730" start="881" end="896" title="PATCO Speedline" label="PATCO Speedline"/>
<link wikidata="Q948591" start="918" end="947" title="Delaware River Port Authority" label="Delaware River Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="972" end="982" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q756350" start="1020" end="1038" title="Atlantic City Line" label="commuter rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602914" start="1071" end="1112" title="List of United States rapid transit systems" label="seventh-largest U.S. rapid transit system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="1404" end="1407" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="ADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="1617" end="1646" title="Commuter rail" label="regional commuter rail trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="1648" end="1688" title="Rapid transit" label="rapid transit subway and elevated trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="1690" end="1709" title="Light rail" label="light rail trolleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="1711" end="1721" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="1729" end="1737" title="motorbus" label="motorbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1768" end="1774" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="1782" end="1824" title="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority" label="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="1841" end="1850" title="ferry" label="ferryboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010124" start="1866" end="1896" title="trolleybuses in Greater Boston" label="trolleybuses in Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867077" start="2096" end="2125" title="Pennsylvania General Assembly" label="Pennsylvania General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q837860" start="2467" end="2482" title="Reading Company" label="Reading Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="2487" end="2508" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q837860" start="2850" end="2865" title="Reading Company" label="Reading Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="3018" end="3034" title="New York Central" label="New York Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428642" start="3054" end="3066" title="Penn Central" label="Penn Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="3176" end="3183" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389778" start="3468" end="3485" title="SEPTA Regional Rail" label="Railroad Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3523" end="3536" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104718" start="3544" end="3564" title="Second Avenue Subway" label="Second Avenue Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073072" start="3596" end="3622" title="Roosevelt Boulevard Subway" label="Roosevelt Boulevard Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q823251" start="3712" end="3733" title="Market–Frankford Line" label="Market–Frankford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923606" start="3833" end="3868" title="Philadelphia Transportation Company" label="Philadelphia Transportation Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="3912" end="3915" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="3917" end="3924" title="Tram" label="trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="3930" end="3947" title="trackless trolley" label="trackless trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q837022" start="4010" end="4027" title="Broad Street Line" label="Broad Street Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043730" start="4046" end="4072" title="PATCO Speedline" label="Delaware River Bridge Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182864" start="4523" end="4556" title="Philadelphia and Western Railroad" label="Philadelphia and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205806" start="4588" end="4614" title="Norristown High Speed Line" label="Norristown High Speed Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q112724791" start="4620" end="4642" title="Media–Sharon Hill Line" label="Media–Sharon Hill Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4745" end="4761" title="SEPTA Suburban Division bus routes#Victory District" label="Victory Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4929" end="4946" title="SEPTA Suburban Division bus routes#Frontier District" label="Frontier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="4998" end="5019" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q837860" start="5024" end="5039" title="Reading Company" label="Reading Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="5237" end="5246" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="5248" end="5257" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010244" start="5259" end="5271" title="West Chester, Pennsylvania" label="West Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185886" start="5277" end="5284" title="Newtown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433116" start="5406" end="5429" title="Schuylkill Valley Metro" label="Schuylkill Valley Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181862" start="5499" end="5511" title="Phoenixville, Pennsylvania" label="Phoenixville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185890" start="5513" end="5522" title="Pottstown, Pennsylvania" label="Pottstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q237896" start="5528" end="5535" title="Reading, Pennsylvania" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440355" start="5642" end="5673" title="Federal Railroad Administration" label="Federal Railroad Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="5958" end="5968" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="5970" end="5978" title="Delaware, United States" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q506586" start="5984" end="5990" title="Newark, Delaware" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714458" start="6008" end="6012" title="MARC Train" label="MARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q887841" start="6286" end="6295" title="Bob Casey Jr." label="Bob Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="6367" end="6394" title="Philadelphia Naval Shipyard" label="Philadelphia Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354340" start="6421" end="6451" title="Environmental Impact Statement" label="Environmental Impact Statement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6466" end="6492" title="Norristown High Speed Line#King of Prussia Spur" label="Norristown High Speed Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186442" start="6500" end="6515" title="King of Prussia, Pennsylvania" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q823251" start="6601" end="6622" title="Market–Frankford Line" label="Market–Frankford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q839339" start="6643" end="6671" title="SEPTA subway–surface trolley lines" label="Subway–Surface trolley lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205806" start="6673" end="6699" title="Norristown High Speed Line" label="Norristown High Speed Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444107" start="6701" end="6709" title="SEPTA Route 15" label="Route 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q112724791" start="6727" end="6749" title="Media–Sharon Hill Line" label="Media–Sharon Hill Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735194" start="7451" end="7466" title="Leslie Richards" label="Leslie Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855009" start="7790" end="7795" title="Mayor of Philadelphia" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182649" start="7814" end="7826" title="Philadelphia City Council" label="City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867077" start="8398" end="8428" title="Pennsylvania General Assembly" label="Pennsylvania State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q879318" start="8535" end="8543" title="Governor of Pennsylvania" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210069" start="8656" end="8671" title="general manager" label="general manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735194" start="8902" end="8917" title="Leslie Richards" label="Leslie Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771557" start="9014" end="9030" title="Louis Gambaccini" label="Louis Gambaccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175064" start="9036" end="9049" title="David L. Gunn" label="David L. Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406760" start="9143" end="9172" title="Northeast Corridor Commission" label="Northeast Corridor Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q87742125" start="9890" end="9907" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Pennsylvania" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491904" start="10160" end="10178" title="urban rail transit" label="urban rail transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="10199" end="10212" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="10214" end="10221" title="Tram" label="trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664428" start="10227" end="10237" title="interurban" label="interurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="10849" end="10859" title="Trolleybus" label="Trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389790" start="10932" end="10934" title="SEPTA Route 59" label="59"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389792" start="10936" end="10938" title="SEPTA Route 66" label="66"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389794" start="10944" end="10946" title="SEPTA Route 75" label="75"/>
<link wikidata="Q295481" start="11096" end="11106" title="AM General" label="AM General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389782" start="11141" end="11143" title="SEPTA Route 29" label="29"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389790" start="11145" end="11147" title="SEPTA Route 59" label="59"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389792" start="11149" end="11151" title="SEPTA Route 66" label="66"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389794" start="11153" end="11155" title="SEPTA Route 75" label="75"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389795" start="11160" end="11162" title="SEPTA Route 79" label="79"/>
<link wikidata="Q105162850" start="11454" end="11474" title="New Flyer Industries" label="New Flyer Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="12387" end="12397" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q506586" start="12402" end="12408" title="Newark, Delaware" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="12412" end="12420" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="12425" end="12432" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470406" start="12437" end="12449" title="West Trenton, New Jersey" label="West Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="12453" end="12463" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487336" start="12544" end="12563" title="Lansdale/Doylestown Line" label="Lansdale/Doylestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132125" start="12565" end="12580" title="Paoli/Thorndale Line" label="Paoli/Thorndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838588" start="12586" end="12593" title="Trenton Line" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516726" start="12745" end="12758" title="Silverliner V" label="Silverliner V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="14053" end="14064" title="paratransit" label="paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="14161" end="14173" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389772" start="14185" end="14190" title="SEPTA City Transit Division surface routes" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q839339" start="14192" end="14215" title="SEPTA Subway–Surface Trolley Lines" label="subway–surface trolleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444107" start="14221" end="14241" title="SEPTA Route 15" label="surface trolley line"/>
<link wikidata="Q823251" start="14247" end="14268" title="Market–Frankford Line" label="Market–Frankford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q837022" start="14278" end="14295" title="Broad Street Line" label="Broad Street Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389772" start="14297" end="14339" title="SEPTA City Transit Division surface routes" label="SEPTA City Transit Division surface routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923606" start="14500" end="14535" title="Philadelphia Transportation Company" label="Philadelphia Transportation Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389798" start="14897" end="14900" title="SEPTA Suburban Division bus routes" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642427" start="14952" end="14985" title="69th Street Transportation Center" label="69th Street Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q20694" start="14989" end="15000" title="Upper Darby" label="Upper Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q27844" start="15004" end="15019" title="Delaware County, Pennsylvania" label="Delaware County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205806" start="15056" end="15082" title="Norristown High Speed Line" label="Norristown High Speed Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405858" start="15147" end="15179" title="Norristown Transportation Center" label="Norristown Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q112724791" start="15188" end="15210" title="Media–Sharon Hill Line" label="Media–Sharon Hill Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130406" start="16093" end="16106" title="Krapf Group" label="Krapf Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010244" start="16297" end="16323" title="West Chester, Pennsylvania" label="West Chester, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739353" start="17879" end="17903" title="Center City, Philadelphia" label="Center City Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837860" start="18068" end="18083" title="Reading Company" label="Reading Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="18133" end="18154" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="18238" end="18250" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053570" start="18316" end="18347" title="Center City Commuter Connection" label="Center City Commuter Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q224214" start="18706" end="18725" title="30th Street Station" label="30th Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531481" start="18727" end="18743" title="Suburban Station" label="Suburban Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="19161" end="19180" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="19184" end="19200" title="New Jersey Transit" label="NJ Transit (NJT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="19204" end="19210" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19225" end="19238" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470406" start="19278" end="19302" title="West Trenton, New Jersey" label="West Trenton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="19431" end="19440" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="19445" end="19461" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q753761" start="19598" end="19618" title="Perryville, Maryland" label="Perryville, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="19668" end="19679" title="paratransit" label="paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="20188" end="20219" title="Americans with Disabilities Act" label="Americans with Disabilities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453919" start="20420" end="20433" title="First Transit" label="First Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720138" start="20435" end="20452" title="MV Transportation" label="MV Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q496900" start="20509" end="20528" title="Philadelphia County, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="20575" end="20587" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130406" start="20589" end="20602" title="Krapf Group" label="Krapf Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27840" start="20635" end="20649" title="Chester County, Pennsylvania" label="Chester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q27844" start="20720" end="20735" title="Delaware County, Pennsylvania" label="Delaware County"/>
<link wikidata="Q378527" start="20787" end="20804" title="Montgomery County, Pennsylvania" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646331" start="22765" end="22797" title="Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission" label="Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739353" start="25303" end="25327" title="Center City, Philadelphia" label="Center City Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="26456" end="26482" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="26484" end="26501" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q603034" start="26503" end="26520" title="Drexel University" label="Drexel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068615" start="26522" end="26544" title="University of the Arts (Philadelphia)" label="University of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475413" start="26550" end="26580" title="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s University" label="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="27798" end="27815" title="Poverty threshold" label="Poverty threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060598" start="28985" end="28994" title="SEPTA Key" label="SEPTA Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q41349" start="29005" end="29015" title="smart card" label="smart card"/>
<link wikidata="Q751944" start="29103" end="29109" title="token coin" label="tokens"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="29628" end="29635" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="29640" end="29643" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203" start="29692" end="29699" title="QR code" label="QR code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500495" start="30961" end="30979" title="Freedom Card" label="Freedom Share Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043730" start="31002" end="31017" title="PATCO Speedline" label="PATCO Speedline"/>
<link wikidata="Q192620" start="32365" end="32372" title="hostage" label="hostage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993698" start="32568" end="32579" title="Neoplan USA" label="Neoplan USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164387" start="33139" end="33154" title="wheelchair lift" label="wheelchair lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265914" start="33206" end="33217" title="Detroit Diesel Series 92" label="6v92 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036530" start="33222" end="33229" title="Allison Transmission" label="Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063086" start="33827" end="33847" title="ZF Ecomat" label="4HP-590 transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993696" start="33886" end="33899" title="Neoplan Transliner (North America)" label="Neoplan AN440"/>
<link wikidata="Q751979" start="34193" end="34208" title="North American Bus Industries" label="American Ikarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q751979" start="34262" end="34291" title="North American Bus Industries" label="North American Bus Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078334" start="34488" end="34497" title="low-floor bus" label="low-floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q654749" start="34694" end="34709" title="articulated bus" label="articulated bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350677" start="34957" end="34974" title="ElDorado (bus manufacturer)" label="National-Eldorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196722" start="35701" end="35712" title="cutaway bus" label="cutaway bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105162850" start="35784" end="35793" title="New Flyer" label="New Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q672889" start="35798" end="35805" title="NovaBus" label="NovaBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="35894" end="35925" title="Trolleybus" label="Trackless trolley (trolley bus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q295481" start="35968" end="35978" title="AM General" label="AM General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116508" start="36406" end="36416" title="hybrid bus" label="hybrid bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48385308" start="37142" end="37149" title="bed bug" label="bed bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925184" start="37480" end="37500" title="battery electric bus" label="battery electric bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440472" start="37591" end="37621" title="Federal Transit Administration" label="Federal Transit Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011784" start="37667" end="37681" title="Proterra, Inc." label="Proterra, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q748148" start="38400" end="38408" title="Kawasaki Heavy Industries" label="Kawasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="38645" end="38659" title="Standard-gauge railway" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q823251" start="38670" end="38691" title="Market–Frankford Line" label="Market–Frankford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q378767" start="38853" end="38860" title="Adtranz" label="Adtranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q906942" start="38879" end="38890" title="broad gauge" label="broad gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831516" start="38911" end="38937" title="Pennsylvania trolley gauge" label="Pennsylvania trolley gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q839339" start="39260" end="39294" title="SEPTA subway–surface trolley lines" label="SEPTA Subway–Surface trolley lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389780" start="39303" end="39305" title="SEPTA Route 10" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389783" start="39307" end="39309" title="SEPTA Route 11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389784" start="39311" end="39313" title="SEPTA Route 13" label="13"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389786" start="39315" end="39317" title="SEPTA Route 34" label="34"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389789" start="39323" end="39325" title="SEPTA Route 36" label="36"/>
<link wikidata="Q748148" start="39341" end="39349" title="Kawasaki Heavy Industries" label="Kawasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q112724791" start="39800" end="39822" title="Media–Sharon Hill Line" label="suburban trolley lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q112724791" start="39831" end="39842" title="Media–Sharon Hill Line" label="101 and 102"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353239" start="40300" end="40312" title="trolley pole" label="trolley pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q657874" start="40353" end="40364" title="Pantograph (transport)" label="pantographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444107" start="40402" end="40416" title="SEPTA Route 15" label="SEPTA Route 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389774" start="40443" end="40446" title="SEPTA PCC II" label="PCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589579" start="40501" end="40522" title="St. Louis Car Company" label="St. Louis Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q112404" start="40543" end="40553" title="Brookville Equipment Corporation" label="Brookville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164387" start="40647" end="40662" title="wheelchair lift" label="wheelchair lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="41015" end="41021" title="Alstom" label="Alstom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516724" start="41286" end="41297" title="Silverliner" label="Silverliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114230" start="41445" end="41450" title="Comet (railcar)" label="Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q697211" start="41490" end="41504" title="Siemens ACS-64" label="Siemens ACS-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205806" start="41551" end="41577" title="Norristown High Speed Line" label="Norristown High Speed Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q52825" start="41655" end="41658" title="ABB" label="ABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="42359" end="42390" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="42579" end="42599" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q823251" start="42940" end="42961" title="Market–Frankford Line" label="Market–Frankford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q27844" start="42965" end="42980" title="Delaware County, Pennsylvania" label="Delaware County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022935" start="43265" end="43281" title="Callowhill Depot" label="Callowhill Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366955" start="43474" end="43487" title="Elmwood Carhouse" label="Elmwood Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444482" start="43581" end="43595" title="Fern Rock Transportation Center" label="Fern Rock Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043730" start="44605" end="44620" title="PATCO Speedline" label="PATCO Speedline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="44626" end="44639" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739353" start="44660" end="44684" title="Center City, Philadelphia" label="Center City Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="44688" end="44706" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088281" start="44725" end="44747" title="Lindenwold, New Jersey" label="Lindenwold, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8255403" start="44756" end="44774" title="8th Street station (Philadelphia)" label="8th Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q823251" start="44807" end="44828" title="Market–Frankford Line" label="Market–Frankford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q837022" start="44833" end="44849" title="Broad–Ridge Spur" label="Broad–Ridge Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548965" start="44934" end="44958" title="12–13th &amp;amp; Locust station" label="12th–13th Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551078" start="44963" end="44987" title="15–16th &amp;amp; Locust station" label="15th–16th Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963710" start="45024" end="45045" title="Walnut–Locust station" label="Walnut–Locust station"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="45084" end="45098" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q817485" start="45107" end="45126" title="Ben Franklin Bridge" label="Ben Franklin Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q948591" start="45147" end="45176" title="Delaware River Port Authority" label="Delaware River Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130406" start="45216" end="45228" title="Krapf&amp;#x27;s" label="Krapf&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130405" start="45276" end="45281" title="TMACC" label="TMACC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133193" start="45290" end="45301" title="Coatesville, Pennsylvania" label="Coatesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q598314" start="45306" end="45316" title="Parkesburg, Pennsylvania" label="Parkesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q777793" start="45373" end="45379" title="Oxford, Pennsylvania" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186442" start="45618" end="45633" title="King of Prussia, Pennsylvania" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24259735" start="45770" end="45800" title="King of Prussia Transit Center" label="King of Prussia Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235394" start="45845" end="45873" title="Pottstown Area Rapid Transit" label="Pottstown Area Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185890" start="45909" end="45918" title="Pottstown, Pennsylvania" label="Pottstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q378527" start="46031" end="46048" title="Montgomery County, Pennsylvania" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q27840" start="46080" end="46094" title="Chester County, Pennsylvania" label="Chester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="46235" end="46245" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="46262" end="46274" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182708" start="46332" end="46363" title="Philadelphia Greyhound Terminal" label="Philadelphia Greyhound Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900642" start="46395" end="46412" title="Jefferson Station (Philadelphia)" label="Jefferson Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739353" start="46438" end="46462" title="Center City, Philadelphia" label="Center City Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155505" start="46486" end="46496" title="River Line (New Jersey Transit)" label="River Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="46521" end="46527" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="46532" end="46539" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057868" start="46545" end="46568" title="Northeast Corridor Line" label="Northeast Corridor Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q756350" start="46607" end="46625" title="Atlantic City Line" label="Atlantic City Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q224214" start="46634" end="46653" title="30th Street Station" label="30th Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="46658" end="46671" title="Atlantic City" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838588" start="46761" end="46773" title="Trenton Line (SEPTA)" label="Trenton Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838611" start="46781" end="46803" title="Trenton Transit Center" label="Trenton Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204301" start="46873" end="46889" title="DART First State" label="DART First State"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022734" start="46964" end="46986" title="Wilmington/Newark Line" label="Wilmington/Newark Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q27844" start="47427" end="47442" title="Delaware County, Pennsylvania" label="Delaware County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="47447" end="47455" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130102" start="47606" end="47636" title="Claymont station" label="Claymont Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="47683" end="47689" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q224214" start="47720" end="47739" title="30th Street Station" label="30th Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="47744" end="47753" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="47755" end="47765" title="Harrisburg" label="Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="47767" end="47777" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="47783" end="47790" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="47804" end="47813" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="47818" end="47834" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="47857" end="47870" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="47872" end="47878" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="47884" end="47892" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838588" start="47951" end="47963" title="Trenton Line" label="Trenton Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="47988" end="48006" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132125" start="48021" end="48041" title="Paoli/Thorndale Line" label="Paoli/Thorndale Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q82666" start="48090" end="48126" title="Philadelphia to Harrisburg Main Line" label="Philadelphia to Harrisburg Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108078" start="48131" end="48148" title="Keystone Corridor" label="Keystone Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="48617" end="48635" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="48638" end="48647" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878581" start="48724" end="48733" title="Trailways" label="Trailways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900642" start="48820" end="48837" title="Jefferson Station (Philadelphia)" label="Jefferson Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q823251" start="48874" end="48895" title="Market–Frankford Line" label="Market–Frankford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="49020" end="49029" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="49031" end="49044" title="Atlantic City, New Jersey" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="49046" end="49055" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="49057" end="49067" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="49069" end="49075" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="49077" end="49090" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="49092" end="49102" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q237896" start="49104" end="49111" title="Reading, Pennsylvania" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="49113" end="49121" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="49123" end="49139" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="49145" end="49155" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="49161" end="49171" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q512128" start="49276" end="49310" title="Philadelphia International Airport" label="Philadelphia International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698916" start="49347" end="49359" title="Airport Line (SEPTA)" label="Airport Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739353" start="49365" end="49376" title="Center City, Philadelphia" label="Center City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915393" start="49734" end="49745" title="Pennsylvania State Capitol" label="state level"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="49749" end="49759" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130357262" start="49961" end="49965" title="1983 SEPTA Regional Rail strike" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925894" start="50300" end="50315" title="Delaware Valley" label="Delaware Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="50693" end="50703" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q466637" start="50855" end="50901" title="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009" label="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580508" start="50995" end="51008" title="Spring Garden station (Broad Street Line)" label="Spring Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564139" start="51013" end="51026" title="Girard station (Broad Street Line)" label="Girard Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="51066" end="51111" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565192" start="51130" end="51148" title="Fox Chase station" label="Fox Chase terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020959" start="51438" end="51447" title="Next City" label="Next City"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="52459" end="52470" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="52475" end="52487" title="gender-queer" label="gender-queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317666" start="53167" end="53187" title="hostile architecture" label="hostile architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="53363" end="53371" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980427" start="53732" end="53789" title="Doe v. Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority" label="Doe v. Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q206974" start="53792" end="53813" title="List of metro systems" label="List of metro systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602914" start="53816" end="53872" title="List of United States rapid transit systems by ridership" label="List of United States rapid transit systems by ridership"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378075" start="53875" end="53905" title="Commuter rail in North America" label="Commuter rail in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641740" start="53908" end="53950" title="List of suburban and commuter rail systems" label="List of suburban and commuter rail systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602750" start="53953" end="54009" title="List of United States commuter rail systems by ridership" label="List of United States commuter rail systems by ridership"/>
<link wikidata="Q117581" start="54012" end="54046" title="List of light rail transit systems" label="List of light rail transit systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433474" start="54049" end="54102" title="List of United States light rail systems by ridership" label="List of United States light rail systems by ridership"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153865" start="54105" end="54158" title="List of United States local bus agencies by ridership" label="List of United States local bus agencies by ridership"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785686" start="54242" end="54267" title="Hagley Museum and Library" label="Hagley Museum and Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262350" wikidata="Q3051501" url="?curid=262350" title="Elliott Bay">
<text>Elliott Bay is a part of the Central Basin region of Puget Sound. It is in the U.S. state of Washington, extending southeastward between West Point in the north and Alki Point in the south. Seattle was founded on this body of water in the 1850s and has since grown to encompass it completely. The waterway it provides to the Pacific Ocean has served as a key element of the city&#x27;s economy, enabling the Port of Seattle to become one of the busiest ports in the United States.

==History==

The Duwamish people have lived in the vicinity of Elliott Bay and the Duwamish River for thousands of years and had established at least 17 settlements by the time white settlers came in the 1850s. Among the earliest white settlements was by the Denny Party at New York Alki, which is in the present-day neighborhood of Alki in West Seattle, however after a hard winter they shifted across Elliott Bay near the present-day Pioneer Square, which became Seattle. Over the years the city expanded to cover all of the waterfront on Elliott Bay and codified it as one of its fairways (a navigable waterway).

The bay was named during the Wilkes expedition in 1841, after an uncertain namesake. Candidates include members of the expedition: ship&#x27;s chaplain Jared Elliott, ship&#x27;s boy George Elliott, and midshipman Samuel Elliott. The last has been deemed the most likely namesake. Commodore Jesse Elliott has also been proposed as a possible source of the name. The bay has been referred to as Duwamish Bay and Seattle Harbor, especially before the US Board on Geographic Names officially settled on the name &quot;Elliott Bay&quot; in 1895.

A local legend says that the Puget Sound Mosquito Fleet, which peaked in the early 20th century, was so-named by a Seattleite who looked out over Elliott Bay and remarked that the activity resembled that of mosquitoes. Two notable sinkings related to the Mosquito Fleet occurred in the bay: the &quot;Dix&quot; in 1906, taking with it dozens of lives, and the &quot;Multnomah&quot; in 1911. Eventually these commercial passenger services faded as automobiles and ferries rose in popularity.

The last remaining model of the Boeing 307 Stratoliner ditched into Elliott Bay in 2002 during a final test flight from Boeing Field to Everett. The craft, named the &quot;Flying Cloud&quot;, had been the subject of an eight-year restoration project meant to ready it for display at the National Air and Space Museum. Despite the incident, the aircraft was again restored, flew to the Smithsonian, and was put on display.

Seattle&#x27;s Crystal Pool Natatorium used water pumped in from the Bay.

==Features==

West Point and Alki Point are the headlands into Puget Sound recognized as the northern and southern entrances of Elliott Bay respectively. A line drawn between these two points demarcates the bay to the east from the open sound to the west. More precisely, the bay has been defined as being east from a line drawn from Duwamish Head north to Magnolia Bluff. The Duwamish River empties into the southeastern part of the bay. This area was extensively modified by human development in the 20th century to channelize the river and fill in tideflats to create Harbor Island, which was once the world&#x27;s largest artificial island. West of the river delta the land juts north into the bay at Duwamish Head. To the east running north and northwest is the heart of Seattle, the Alaskan Way Seawall, the Central Waterfront, and Smith Cove.

Elliott Bay is home to the Port of Seattle, which, in 2002, was the 9th busiest port in the United States by TEUs of container traffic and the 46th busiest in the world. Cruise ship business, serving Alaskan cruises, became increasingly important in the 2000s. The bay is also home to Colman Dock, the main Seattle terminal of the state&#x27;s ferry system, the largest in the country. Sailings regularly depart from Seattle to Bainbridge Island and Bremerton. The Seattle–Winslow (Bainbridge Island) route is the most heavily used in the state ferry system in terms of number of vehicles and passengers transported. The King County Water Taxi, a passenger ferry, runs across the bay, connecting Downtown Seattle with West Seattle (Seacrest Dock) and Vashon Island.
Two marinas are in Elliott Bay. The larger of them is the privately owned Elliott Bay Marina, in the Magnolia/Interbay neighborhoods at Smith Cove, with 1,200 slips. Bell Harbor Marina, operated by the Port of Seattle, is in the Central Waterfront along Belltown. Up to 70 vessels can be moored there.

Numerous piers extend into the bay, especially along Seattle&#x27;s Central Waterfront. Piers 57 and 59 house tourist destinations, including the Seattle Great Wheel and the Seattle Aquarium. On Pier 67 is The Edgewater Hotel. Pier 86 is a major grain shipping terminal operated by the Louis Dreyfus Group. Grain is carried to docked cargo ships by passing over Elliott Bay Trail and a narrow shoreline park, which also features a public fishing pier near Smith Cove. In the cove is Terminal 91, which has served a variety of purposes over the years, including storage for imported automobiles and fish, and most recently became a dock for Alaskan cruise ships. To the south, in West Seattle&#x27;s Seacrest Park, is another public fishing pier and a dive site.

As a prominent aspect of Seattle&#x27;s geography, the bay has frequently been referenced in media. &quot;The Real World: Seattle&quot;, the 1998 season of the MTV reality television series, was filmed on Pier 70 on the bay. The fictional Elliott Bay Towers, home of Frasier Crane on the TV series &quot;Frasier&quot;, are named after the bay. In &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot;, there is an episode arc in an early season in the series where intern Dr. Meredith Grey, played by Ellen Pompeo, almost dies following a near-drowning when she falls into the bay after being kicked by a patient she is tending to at the scene of a passenger ferry and freight container ship collision; she is rescued just in time by Dr. Derek Shepherd, her friend and the hospital&#x27;s neurosurgery chief. In Season 3 of the Seattle-set crime drama &quot;The Killing&quot;, suspect Ray Seward is incarcerated in the fictional Elliott Bay Penitentiary. A simplified map of Elliott Bay is used as the &quot;Maps&quot; icon in Microsoft&#x27;s Windows Phone 7 Smartphone Operating System. Microsoft has its headquarters in the Seattle metropolitan area.

==Ecology==

Elliott Bay has been a focus for environmental concern. Urban and industrial development along its shores, and on the banks of the Duwamish River that leads into it, have caused concern over the levels of contaminants entering the water. On the southern shoreline are two Superfund cleanup sites: Harbor Island and the former location of Lockheed West Seattle. Several other sites have been designated for cleanup, including the Pacific Sound Resources site, and others along the lower Duwamish.

The downtown waterfront offers a poor habitat for the juvenile salmon that migrate from the Duwamish River, due to the darkness under the piers and the lack of food along the vertical Alaskan Way Seawall. The seawall redevelopment project aims to improve the habitat by installing underwater structures to create shallows where salmon can find food and glass blocks in the sidewalk (cantilevered over the bay) so that sunlight can illuminate the shallows even at the piers. Another issue that is currently prevalent in Elliott Bay is noise pollution. The level of noise that is currently present in Elliott Bay is legally considered to be harassment of marine mammals (Van, 2016; Welch, 2013; Wilson, 2015).

Marine vehicles enter and exit the port twenty-four hours a day. This noise is continuous, and this can cause distress to marine mammals (Van, 2016; Welch, 2013; Wilson, 2015).

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3051501" start="0" end="11" title="Elliott Bay" label="Elliott Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="53" end="64" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="93" end="103" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567436" start="137" end="147" title="West Point (Seattle)" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196540" start="165" end="175" title="Alki Point" label="Alki Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="190" end="197" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="325" end="338" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231262" start="408" end="423" title="Port of Seattle" label="Port of Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q491721" start="499" end="514" title="Duwamish tribe" label="Duwamish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q751663" start="565" end="579" title="Duwamish River" label="Duwamish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q15061637" start="741" end="752" title="Denny Party" label="Denny Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196540" start="815" end="819" title="Alki Point, Seattle" label="Alki"/>
<link wikidata="Q731067" start="823" end="835" title="West Seattle" label="West Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388921" start="918" end="932" title="Pioneer Square, Seattle" label="Pioneer Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="947" end="954" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138251" start="1065" end="1073" title="Fairway (navigation)" label="fairways"/>
<link wikidata="Q119129" start="1128" end="1145" title="Wilkes expedition" label="Wilkes expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186302" start="1390" end="1403" title="Jesse Elliott" label="Jesse Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148422" start="1548" end="1576" title="US Board on Geographic Names" label="US Board on Geographic Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258929" start="1671" end="1697" title="Puget Sound Mosquito Fleet" label="Puget Sound Mosquito Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231675" start="1943" end="1946" title="Dix (steamboat)" label="Dix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935170" start="2008" end="2017" title="Multnomah (sternwheeler)" label="Multnomah"/>
<link wikidata="Q890178" start="2166" end="2188" title="Boeing 307 Stratoliner" label="Boeing 307 Stratoliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875716" start="2254" end="2266" title="Boeing Field" label="Boeing Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q392599" start="2270" end="2277" title="Everett, Washington" label="Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="2421" end="2450" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q113641974" start="2572" end="2595" title="Crystal Pool Natatorium" label="Crystal Pool Natatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567436" start="2646" end="2656" title="West Point (Seattle)" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196540" start="2661" end="2671" title="Alki Point" label="Alki Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317643" start="2966" end="2979" title="Duwamish Head" label="Duwamish Head"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2989" end="3003" title="Magnolia Bluff" label="Magnolia Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q751663" start="3009" end="3023" title="Duwamish River" label="Duwamish River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3150" end="3160" title="river engineering#Channelization" label="channelize"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="3183" end="3192" title="tideflats" label="tideflats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127308" start="3203" end="3216" title="Harbor Island (Seattle)" label="Harbor Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708668" start="3421" end="3440" title="Alaskan Way Seawall" label="Alaskan Way Seawall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062012" start="3446" end="3464" title="Central Waterfront, Seattle" label="Central Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545112" start="3470" end="3480" title="Smith Cove (Washington)" label="Smith Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231262" start="3510" end="3525" title="Port of Seattle" label="Port of Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="3563" end="3567" title="seaport" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q488021" start="3592" end="3596" title="twenty-foot equivalent unit" label="TEUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="3600" end="3617" title="container ship" label="container traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="3653" end="3664" title="Cruise ship" label="Cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="3683" end="3689" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147721" start="3768" end="3779" title="Colman Dock" label="Colman Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500373" start="3814" end="3839" title="Washington State Ferries" label="state&amp;#x27;s ferry system"/>
<link wikidata="Q803903" start="3911" end="3928" title="Bainbridge Island, Washington" label="Bainbridge Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q695417" start="3933" end="3942" title="Bremerton, Washington" label="Bremerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442220" start="3948" end="3989" title="Seattle–Winslow Ferry" label="Seattle–Winslow (Bainbridge Island) route"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061005" start="4104" end="4126" title="King County Water Taxi" label="King County Water Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q745358" start="4179" end="4195" title="Downtown Seattle" label="Downtown Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q731067" start="4201" end="4213" title="West Seattle" label="West Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505272" start="4234" end="4247" title="Vashon Island" label="Vashon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="4253" end="4259" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365619" start="4323" end="4341" title="Elliott Bay Marina" label="Elliott Bay Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731842" start="4350" end="4358" title="Magnolia, Seattle" label="Magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045533" start="4359" end="4367" title="Interbay, Seattle" label="Interbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545112" start="4385" end="4395" title="Smith Cove (Washington)" label="Smith Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q967732" start="4503" end="4511" title="Belltown, Seattle" label="Belltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442108" start="4698" end="4717" title="Seattle Great Wheel" label="Seattle Great Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849544" start="4726" end="4742" title="Seattle Aquarium" label="Seattle Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731577" start="4758" end="4777" title="The Edgewater (Seattle, Washington)" label="The Edgewater Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593509" start="4798" end="4812" title="grain trade" label="grain shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q833111" start="4838" end="4857" title="Louis Dreyfus Group" label="Louis Dreyfus Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5251" end="5264" title="Seacrest Park" label="Seacrest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440296" start="5303" end="5312" title="Seacrest cove 2" label="dive site"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5421" end="5444" title="The Real World: Seattle" label="The Real World: Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="5475" end="5478" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="5479" end="5497" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405761" start="5582" end="5595" title="Frasier Crane" label="Frasier Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="5619" end="5626" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="5668" end="5687" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q429828" start="5769" end="5782" title="Meredith Grey" label="Meredith Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q215849" start="5794" end="5806" title="Ellen Pompeo" label="Ellen Pompeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403922" start="6105" end="6113" title="The Killing (season 3)" label="Season 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q28214" start="6151" end="6162" title="The Killing (U.S. TV series)" label="The Killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="6320" end="6329" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854343" start="6337" end="6352" title="Windows Phone 7" label="Windows Phone 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114947" start="6420" end="6445" title="Seattle metropolitan area" label="Seattle metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="6494" end="6515" title="environmental concern" label="environmental concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="6733" end="6742" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q133325" start="7021" end="7027" title="Oncorhynchus" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708668" start="7142" end="7161" title="Alaskan Way Seawall" label="Alaskan Way Seawall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529373" start="7311" end="7322" title="glass block" label="glass block"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="7341" end="7351" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262354" wikidata="Q984803" url="?curid=262354" title="Raglan, New Zealand">
<text>Raglan ( or ) is a small beachside town located west of Hamilton, New Zealand on State Highway 23. It is known for its surfing, and volcanic black sand beaches.
== History ==

The Ngāti Māhanga iwi occupied the area around Raglan in the late 18th century. There are at least 81 archaeological sites in the area, mainly near the coast. Limited radiocarbon dating puts the earliest sites at about 1400AD. The Māori people named the site (&quot;the long pursuit&quot;). One tradition says that Tainui priest, Rakataura, crossed Whāingaroa on his way to Kāwhia. Another says it was among the places the early Te Arawa explorer, Kahumatamomoe, with his nephew Īhenga, visited on their expedition from Maketū.

The first Europeans to settle in the area, the Rev James and Mary Wallis, Wesleyan missionaries, were embraced and welcomed by local Māori in 1835. European settlement, including large scale conversion of land to pasture, began in the mid-1850s after a large sale of land by Chief Wiremu Neera Te Awaitaia.

The name &quot;Raglan&quot;, adopted in 1858, honours Fitzroy Somerset, 1st Lord Raglan (1788–1855), who had commanded the British forces in the Crimean War of 1853–1856.

The Raglan economy initially featured flax and timber exports, followed by farming which remains the mainstay of the area.

Raglan&#x27;s first coach link to Hamilton began in 1880 and a telegraph wire was put up beside the road in 1884. In 1904 Raglan was linked to Hamilton telephone exchange. Mains electricity came in 1935 and a sewage scheme in 1977.

Tourism and the arts are significant contributors to the current economy. Raglan and District Museum/ Te Whare Taonga o Whāingaroa contains historic artefacts and archives from the region. A new museum building was built in 2011. Additionally, the Raglan and District Museum&#x27;s online collection can be accessed here.

=== Traffic ===
A government subsidy was given in 1878, to promote the start of regular steamer services from Manukau Harbour, which took about 8 hours. Until the main road was metalled in 1921, most goods travelled by sea. The wharf remained important until the 1950s, peaking in 1954, with 15,462 tons, handled by 38 ships. One of the problems was the shallow bar at the entrance to the harbour. For example, the &quot;Holmburn&quot; was stuck there for 26 hours in 1962. However, like other small ports, the main problem was the introduction of the inter-island roll-on roll-off ferries in 1962, with 40 Watersiders Union members made redundant in 1972, though cement volumes increased to a peak of 41,351 tons in 1974. Again the bar was a problem for the larger cement ships and, since &quot;John Wilson&quot; (1961-85 long, wide, deep, 1679 Grt) made the last call on 7 July 1982, the only goods landed at the harbour have been fish from the fishing boats.

=== Wharves ===
Until 1874 goods were transferred off the beach below Cliff Street and small boats moored in a boat harbour, cut off from the harbour by construction of a sluice-gate under Wallis Street causeway in about 1918. The new road gave access to a new dairy factory and the wharf opened in 1921. A small wooden jetty and storage shed beside Cliff Street was built in 1874. That was replaced by a stone jetty about to the west in 1881, which remains in place at the foot of the main street. A 250yd wooden pier was built in 1889 to the east at the end of James Street, enabling the larger Northern Steamship vessels to moor in deep water, beside a larger storage shed. Two totara piles remain from that Long Wharf, which was replaced by the current concrete wharf, opened in 1921. The wharf was enlarged for construction of a cement silo for Golden Bay Cement in 1967 and a further silo was built in 1973. Cement was supplied for the construction of Huntly power station and the Kaimai tunnel. A fire destroyed the 1921 shed in 2010. A pontoon was added to the east side of the wharf in 2023 as part of a $2.5m Provincial Growth scheme and steps on the other side, with an additional $3.2m of Better Off funding.

=== Airfield ===
The town became the scene of public civil disobedience campaigns in the 1970s. In 1941, during World War II (1939–1945), the New Zealand Government took local ancestral land from indigenous Māori owners to construct a military airfield. When no longer required for defence purposes, part of the land, a block, was not returned to the owners, but instead was transferred to Raglan County Council in 1953 and became the public Raglan golf-course in 1968.

There ensued widespread protest and attempts to reoccupy the land; in 1978, 20 Māori protesters were arrested on the ninth hole of the golf course. The land was eventually returned to the owners. 150 people were involved in the protest. 
It became a focus for local job-training and employment programs, as well as for the Māori sovereignty movement. In 2021 the council suggested return of the rest of the land could still &quot;take a number of years&quot;. Fencing of the airfield in 2021 halved its width and resulted in a petition to close it.

On August 21, 2022, local councillors unanimously voted to begin the process of returning the airfield land to its original Māori owners.

=== Local government ===
Raglan Highway Board existed from 1868 and merged with the Karioi Board between 1888 and 1892. Raglan Town Board started in 1878 and merged with the highways boards into Raglan County Council in 1889. It was re-inaugurated as Raglan Town Board in 1906 and continued until 1938, when the Board again merged into the County Council. In 1954 Raglan became a county township, administered by a committee of 7 under the jurisdiction of the county council. On 26 March 1957 Raglan Town Committee resigned due to the unsympathetic attitude of the council. Within a month more than 100 ratepayers had petitioned the Governor-General to establish a town board. The Local Government Act 1974 brought about Raglan Community Council, which was replaced by Raglan Community Board in 1989, when Waikato District Council was formed.

=== Demographics ===
In 1859 the local magistrate, F. D. Fenton, reported the population of Whāingaroa as 424. That was the number shown in the 1858 census for the Ngāti Mahanga population of Raglan. That accords with Ferdinand von Hochstetter&#x27;s account of his 1859 tour, when he said that the Māori population was estimated at 400 and said that he had been told there were 122 Europeans, including 20 farmer-families. Hochstetter said there were six or eight houses, with a tavern and a store in Raglan and a Māori village and an old pā at Horea on the north shore. Many of the Europeans were evacuated in 1860 and again in 1863, when war threatened and it was said 95 inhabitants remained.

After that, as the graph below shows, Raglan&#x27;s population recovered slowly until the main road from Hamilton was completely metalled in 1921 and then grew again after completion of tar-sealing in 1961.

The population of the Raglan ward (covering most of the harbour catchment area) was 4680 in 2006. It had increased to 4920 in 2013.
&lt;graph&gt;{
 &quot;version&quot;: 2,
 &quot;width&quot;: 850,
 &quot;height&quot;: 200,
 &quot;padding&quot;: &quot;auto&quot;,
 &quot;data&quot;: [
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;table&quot;,
 &quot;values&quot;: [
 &quot;year&quot;: 1878,
 &quot;population&quot;: 68
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1881,
 &quot;population&quot;: 70
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1886,
 &quot;population&quot;: 56
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1891,
 &quot;population&quot;: 83
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1896,
 &quot;population&quot;: 137
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1901,
 &quot;population&quot;: 114
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1906,
 &quot;population&quot;: 154
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1911,
 &quot;population&quot;: 246
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1916,
 &quot;population&quot;: 217
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1921,
 &quot;population&quot;: 302
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1931,
 &quot;population&quot;: 350
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1936,
 &quot;population&quot;: 377
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1945,
 &quot;population&quot;: 518
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1951,
 &quot;population&quot;: 895
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1961,
 &quot;population&quot;: 1013
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1971,
 &quot;population&quot;: 1058
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1981,
 &quot;population&quot;: 1414
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1991,
 &quot;population&quot;: 2316
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 1996,
 &quot;population&quot;: 2634
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 2001,
 &quot;population&quot;: 2667
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 2006,
 &quot;population&quot;: 2637
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 2013,
 &quot;population&quot;: 2736
 {
 &quot;year&quot;: 2018,
 &quot;population&quot;: 3279
 ]
 {
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;annotation&quot;,
 &quot;values&quot;: [
 &quot;start&quot;: 2000,
 &quot;end&quot;: 2000,
 &quot;text&quot;: &quot;&quot;
 {
 &quot;start&quot;: 2000,
 &quot;end&quot;: 2000,
 &quot;text&quot;: &quot;&quot;
 ]
 ],
 &quot;scales&quot;: [
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;ordinal&quot;,
 &quot;range&quot;: &quot;width&quot;,
 &quot;zero&quot;: false,
 &quot;domain&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;table&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;year&quot;
 },
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;linear&quot;,
 &quot;range&quot;: &quot;height&quot;,
 &quot;nice&quot;: true,
 &quot;domain&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;table&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;population&quot;
 },
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;color&quot;,
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;ordinal&quot;,
 &quot;domain&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;annotation&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;text&quot;
 &quot;range&quot;: [
 &quot;#ddd&quot;,
 &quot;#ffc0cb&quot;
 }
 &quot;axes&quot;: [
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;format&quot;: &quot;d&quot;,
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;Year&quot;,
 &quot;ticks&quot;: 15
 {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;population&quot;,
 &quot;grid&quot;: true
 ],
 &quot;marks&quot;: [
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;rect&quot;,
 &quot;from&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;annotation&quot;
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;enter&quot;: {
 &quot;x&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;start&quot;
 &quot;x2&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;end&quot;
 &quot;y&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 0
 &quot;y2&quot;: {
 &quot;signal&quot;: &quot;height&quot;
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;color&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;text&quot;,
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;steelblue&quot;
 &quot;width&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;band&quot;: &quot;true&quot;,
 &quot;offset&quot;: -1
 }
 },
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;line&quot;,
 &quot;from&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;table&quot;
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;enter&quot;: {
 &quot;interpolate&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;monotone&quot;
 &quot;x&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;year&quot;
 &quot;y&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;population&quot;
 &quot;stroke&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;steelblue&quot;
 &quot;strokeWidth&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 3
 }
 },
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;symbol&quot;,
 &quot;from&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;table&quot;
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;enter&quot;: {
 &quot;x&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;year&quot;
 &quot;y&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;population&quot;
 &quot;stroke&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;steelblue&quot;
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;white&quot;
 &quot;size&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 30
 }
 },
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;text&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;enter&quot;: {
 &quot;x&quot;: {
 &quot;signal&quot;: &quot;width&quot;,
 &quot;mult&quot;: 0.5
 &quot;y&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: -10
 &quot;text&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;population&quot;
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;black&quot;
 &quot;fontSize&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 16
 &quot;align&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;center&quot;
 &quot;fontWeight&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;bold&quot;
 }
 }
 &quot;legends&quot;: [
 &quot;fill&quot;: &quot;color&quot;,
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;symbols&quot;: {
 &quot;strokeWidth&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 0
 },
 &quot;legend&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 5
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;white&quot;
 }
 }
}&lt;/graph&gt;

The figures and sources are:
Raglan covers and had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2.

Before the 2023 census, the town had a smaller boundary, covering . Using that boundary, Raglan had a population of 3,279 at the 2018 New Zealand census, an increase of 573 people (21.2%) since the 2013 census, and an increase of 651 people (24.8%) since the 2006 census. There were 1,251 households, comprising 1,602 males and 1,677 females, giving a sex ratio of 0.96 males per female. The median age was 39.6 years (compared with 37.4 years nationally), with 672 people (20.5%) aged under 15 years, 477 (14.5%) aged 15 to 29, 1,620 (49.4%) aged 30 to 64, and 507 (15.5%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 82.9% European/Pākehā, 26.5% Māori, 2.9% Pacific peoples, 2.5% Asian, and 2.7% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

The percentage of people born overseas was 21.4, compared with 27.1% nationally.

Although some people chose not to answer the census&#x27;s question about religious affiliation, 61.8% had no religion, 25.1% were Christian, 1.3% had Māori religious beliefs, 0.3% were Hindu, 0.2% were Muslim, 0.8% were Buddhist and 2.4% had other religions.

Of those at least 15 years old, 732 (28.1%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, and 402 (15.4%) people had no formal qualifications. The median income was $27,200, compared with $31,800 nationally. 426 people (16.3%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 1,173 (45.0%) people were employed full-time, 522 (20.0%) were part-time, and 87 (3.3%) were unemployed.

Growth by about 500 households is expected by 2045 and to 12,500 by 2070, with several new suburbs.

Property prices have risen sharply since 2000, for example by 49.6% from 2014 to 2017 and a further 42% to 2020. That coincides with a decline in the Māori proportion of the population –

By 2018 there were 6 fewer unoccupied private dwellings at 471, but those occupied had increased to 1,275.

Employment and commuting increased between 2006 and 2013, as shown in this table.

===Marae===

Raglan has several marae within , affiliated with hapū of Waikato Tainui:
* Poihākena Marae and Tainui a Whiro meeting house is a meeting place for Ngāti Tāhinga and Tainui hapū
* Te Kōpua Marae is a meeting place of Tainui hapū and does not have a meeting house, as it was destroyed on 12 August 1941 to create the airfield
* Te Kaharoa or Aramiro Marae and Te Kaharoa meeting house is a meeting place of Ngāti Māhanga and Ngāti Tamainupō, near the head of the Waitetuna valley

The hapū of Ngāti Tamainupō also have a meeting place, Mai Uenuku ki te Whenua Marae, in the inner harbour, between Te Uku and Waingaro.

In 2018, it produced a local history book about prominent Waikato chief Ngaere and how Ngāruawāhia and the Hakarimata Ranges were named in the late 1600s.

In October 2020, the Government committed $414,300 from the Provincial Growth Fund to upgrade Mai Uenuku ki te Whenua Marae, creating 8 jobs.

==Geography==

Raglan is associated with Whāingaroa Harbour (also known as Raglan Harbour) on the west coast of the Waikato region in New Zealand&#x27;s North Island. The harbour catchment extends as far north as Glen Afton, covers and the harbour covers and has , , or , of coastline. It runs 12 km inland from the entrance, for the most part is less than 2 km wide, has a high-tide area of , a low-tide area of , 2–4 m tidal range, with a spring-tide range of 2.8 m and neap 1.8 m, spring tide flow around 46 x 106 m3 and neap 29 x 106 m3. A 2005 survey said on average water stays in the harbour 1.1 days at spring-tides, but a 2015 study showed a median residence time for whole estuary of 39.4 days with median river flows, ranging between 18 and 45 days. It is the northernmost of three large inlets in the Waikato coast (the others, also drowned river valleys, are Aotea Harbour and Kawhia Harbour). 15 significant rivers and streams run into the harbour, including the largest, Waingaro and Waitetuna, accounting for 60% of catchment area, and the smaller Opotoru and Tawatahi rivers. Total length of the streams is .

A study for Regional Council said, &quot;Whāingaroa Harbour began to fill with sediment at least 8000 years before present (B.P.) and before the sea had reached its present level 6500 years B.P. Rapid sedimentation in the harbour before 6500 years B.P. is attributed to the formation of now relict intertidal shore platforms up to 700-m wide and ≤10 m below present-day mean high water level. These coastal landforms were rapidly formed 8000-6500 years B.P. by physical weathering of soft mudstone cliffs and wave action. Consequently, all but the upper two metres of the present day sediment column was deposited before 6000 years B.P. and thousands of years before the arrival of Maori some 700 years ago. Today, the harbour has largely infilled with catchment sediment up to ~8-m thick, with 70% of its high tide surface area being intertidal.&quot; It concluded that most sediment is now swept up to 20 km out to sea.

70% of the land in the harbour catchment is used for farming, 20% of it is under native vegetation, 14% under forestry, 7% mānuka/kānuka and 0.3% wetlands. 68% of land has slopes greater than 1 in 4.

Southwest of the township stands the extinct volcano of Mt Karioi. According to Māori legend Karioi was a jilted Māori Princess who, upon discovering that love was lost, lay down and rests.

North of the harbour mouth there are extensive dunes and dune-dammed lakes. Like the beaches, the dunes are rich in ironsand and have been considered for mining several times. Threats of seabed mining following passage of the Foreshore and Seabed Act 2004 resulted in formation of the opposition group KASM, based in Raglan (see also Mining in New Zealand and Sand mining).

The area is also home to the popular tourist destination, Bridal Veil Falls, which is located 20 kilometres southeast of the township and the unusual Lake Disappear 4 km further on.

=== Suburbs ===
==== Raglan East ====
Raglan East was Raglan&#x27;s first suburb. It was formed after Henry Chamberlin sold his estate in 1863.

==== Raglan West ====
Raglan West developed after the farm containing the site of the Wesleyan Nihinihi mission station (see History above) was surveyed between 1940 and 1952. 

==== Rangitahi ====
Rangitahi was the name of a farm. A concrete bridge from Raglan West replaced a tidal causeway in 2019 and work started on developing 259 residential lots. Over 550 houses are being built in stages on .

== Climate ==
Average annual rainfall at Raglan 1984–2004 was 1.354m a year. Average temperature and rainfall graphs show an average high of 24C in February and an average low of 8C in July. Raglan usually has no more than a degree of frost and then only for a few hours on occasional winter mornings.

== Education ==
Raglan Area School is a co-educational state composite school covering years 1 to 13, with a roll of as of There have been schools at Raglan since 1866. The current school opened as Raglan District High School in 1937.

There are also primary schools in the nearby settlements of Te Mata, Te Uku and Waitetuna, it is very common in recent years for students to move from the Te Mata, Te Uku and Waitetuna primary schools to RAS when they reach high school due to it being a nearby, bicultural and accepting school full of students that have often already met their contemporaries from Te Mata, Te Uku and Waitetuna.
==Surf breaks==


Raglan is best known for its surf. Eight kilometres from the Raglan township is a series of surf breaks including Indicators, Whale Bay, Manu Bay, Vortex Bay. Manu Bay was featured in the 1966 movie &quot;The Endless Summer&quot; and in the 2010 movie &quot;Last Paradise&quot;. The traditional name for Manu Bay is &#x27;Waikeri&#x27;, meaning surging or swirling waters. The former native reserve was bought for a recreation reserve in 1971.

Indicators is a left hand point break that breaks for up to 600m, from 2 to 10 feet+ (Hawaiian scale). It is a long-walled, fast wave with occasional barrels, particularly on the low tide. It picks up a lot of swell and is very consistent. On big days the wave can link up with the next break called Whale Bay.

Whale Bay is a left hand point break that breaks up to 200m in length, from about 2 to 8 feet+. It has two sections, an inside hollow section up to about 4 feet that breaks very close to the rocks, and an outside, slower section from 4 feet up. It has been rumoured by locals to link up with the next break further down-Manu Point-but only on very large swells, making a potential ride of up to 2 km from the top of Indicators, which locals say has only been achieved once.

Manu Bay is a left hand point break which works from 2 to 10 feet+, breaking over 300m. It has alternate hollow and wall sections, occasional barrels, and is usually about 2/3 the size of Indicators.

Vortex Bay is a soft peak east of the boat ramp that sometimes breaks on low tide when the swell is too large for the main three points.

There is also a beach break further down from Manu Point. Ruapuke is another beach break well to the west around the point.

Raglan has hosted a world championship surfing event at Manu Bay in 1998. Raglan is also home to New Zealand&#x27;s first sanctioned surf school, the Raglan Surfing School which was established in 1999.

== Arts ==

Visual artists hold regular exhibitions at the Raglan Old School Art Centre. Fabric artists show their creations in the biennial ArtoWear competition. There is also a Raglan Arts Trail Guide with an Open Studio Weekend in late January. For Matariki there are displays of Māori art. Local art is on display in the Show Off Gallery, Kanuka Design, Matapihi Gallery, local cafes and the Raglan Old School Arts Centre. The Arts Centre is in a 19th-century heritage building, the former Raglan School.

== Markets ==
There is a regular market on the second Sunday of every month at the Raglan Old School Arts Centre in Stewart Street. This Raglan Creative Market specialises in local crafts, food and art.

==Music==
Raglan has a live music scene. The International Soundsplash Eco Reggae Festival ran yearly in summer on the Wainui Reserve, between 2001 and 2008 and more recently, and attracted some of the biggest names in roots, reggae and dub, as well as local acts.

The main venue in Raglan for live music is the Yot Club, a regular stop for NZ musicians on national tours. There is also live music at the Orca Restaurant and Bar, the Harbour View Hotel, the Raglan Club and The Old School.

The New Zealand reggae bands Cornerstone Roots and Zionhill were formed in Raglan.

== Walking ==
Whāingaroa has a variety of walks, from an easy stroll over the footbridge to the more strenuous Mount Karioi tracks. Walking has been a popular activity here since at least 1915, when the guidebook said, &quot;An hour&#x27;s walk brings one to the harbour entrance and to the sea coast. Here there is a wide sandy beach with a background of bush-covered cliffs, and the picturesque Mount Karioi close at hand&quot; and went on, &quot;Many suitable landing places are to be found where parties may leave the launch for a ramble ashore or may picnic ‘neath the shade of the kowhai trees&quot;. (see also Walking trip resources below)
== Cycling ==
Several sections of a Town2Surf cycle lane have been built, which will link the town with Ngarunui Beach, and Te Ara Kākāriki Ocean Trails opened on 3 December 2016, providing about of mountain bike trails in a pine forest on Wainui Reserve. A to bike race, mainly on gravel roads around Mt Karioi, took place each July, from 2009 to 2021. About from Raglan, Pipiwharauroa Way has of cycle/walking track, which links to a very difficult paper road to Waitetuna.

== Environment ==

Whāingaroa has a high proportion of environmentalists, as evidenced by the existence of several high-profile environmental groups. The proportion of environmentalists in Raglan is indicated by the size of the Green Party vote, which was 28% in 2011 and rose to 30% in 2014 (266 of 867 in the Taranaki-King Country constituency vote and 40 of 152 in Hauraki-Waikato). In 2017 it dropped to 20% (433), but the Labour vote rose from 18% to 40% (872), when Labour also highlighted environmental issues.

The environmentalism has been recognised in local government policy as, &quot;passionate about the arts and protecting its environment&quot;.

=== Whāingaroa Harbour Care ===
Whāingaroa Harbour Care has planted more than 2 million trees since it started in 1995.

After discussions in 1994 with the local MP and Minister for the Environment, Simon Upton, about the poor environmental state of the harbour, a meeting was held on 24 March 1995, leading to the formation of Whāingaroa Harbour Care Incorporated Society in July 1995. A plant nursery was set up on Wainui Reserve to collect eco-sourced (with genes better adapted to local conditions) local seeds, grow them into native trees and plant them densely beside streams, to reduce run-off of nutrients and other pollutants by up to 60%. By 2013 over 40 farmers had fenced and planted about of riparian areas.

(see also Environmental organisations below)

==Recycling==

Recycling in Raglan is managed by a non-profit organization called Xtreme Zero Waste. Xtreme&#x27;s stated goal is to create a waste management system for the Raglan/Whāingaroa community in which none of the waste is stored in landfills. The organization was founded in 2000, after Raglan&#x27;s landfill closed and the town decided to find an alternative to transporting its waste elsewhere. Xtreme Waste has recycled an increasing volume and percentage of waste every year, and as of 2010, it diverts nearly three-quarters of the town&#x27;s waste from reaching the landfill. It operates a recycling centre, which is open to the public and offers group tours.

Actor Antonio Te Maioha, who lives in Raglan, has publicly spoken about his own involvement and Raglan&#x27;s leadership in recycling. He mentioned that Raglan is one of the few towns in New Zealand with recycling bins in the main street, and describes how people he knew became involved in recycling because of Xtreme Waste&#x27;s programs.

== Water supply ==

Raglan&#x27;s water supply comes from a well and the nearby Waipatukahu (or Riki) Spring between Te Hutewai Rd and Omahina Creek, about south of Raglan, where water which has sunk into the volcanic rocks, seeps along the contact with the Tertiary beds.

Water is chlorinated, pumped to a tank and distributed through about of pipes. Tanks at Bow St () and Cornwall Rd, () maintain pressure. Demand has been forecast at per day by 2034, based on a Waikato University population prediction assuming consumption of /person/day. However, in December 2015 use was averaging a day. The capacity of the spring is per day. Consent allows up to /day (the remainder maintains a flow in the short stream below the spring) from the spring and /day from the well. Despite using less than half the consented water, water meters are planned to be installed and operational by 2017. When last rated Raglan&#x27;s water got a poor &#x27;Ed&#x27; (unsatisfactory level of risk) rating, but work was done in 2014 to upgrade the quality.

=== History ===

The spring was long used as a source of fresh water. In 1862 a dam was built and it was used to power an waterwheel for a flaxmill. In the early 1950s the spring was again used to power a water-wheel, this time pumping water for use on the farm.

Several residents had bores drilled, but over half (1000) relied on tank water. A 2½ in. bore behind the Harbour View Hotel had /day rising to about below the surface, though rather hard and tinged with iron. Of its the first 50 ft. was in clay, 4 ft. in hard blue shingle tightly packed with a minimum of sandy matrix and 106 ft in papa. The deep, 3 in. bore for the dairy factory, 70 ft. above sea-level in Rose St, was polluted with ammoniacal nitrogen and chlorides too were high.

As early as 1927 the government was being asked for help with water and sewage. In 1938, ratepayers petitioned the council for a water supply and in 1938 DSIR reported on Waipatukahu Spring where, &quot;Beautifully clear water rises in a pool perhaps 6 ft. across on the floor of Omahina Creek at a point some up from the south end of the tidal flat and a few chains above sea-level&quot; and flow had been measured at /day, close to the 4,800 mentioned above.

In 1938 the Council said the annual cost of a loan would be £700 for an estimated total cost of £10,000. Another sewage and water scheme was considered in 1949, but still the cost of a loan was too high. Despite pollution, the Rose St bore was connected to the low areas of town and the camping ground. Council put in a new pump, but it could only pump /day, so in the 1959 a bore was drilled at Warihi Park, but abandoned in 1962 due to problems with flow and gas in the water. A 1959 £100,000 estimate for Riki springs supply was still considered too expensive.
Finally, in 1961 Council got a £62,000 loan to bring water from Riki Springs, for a pump to lift water up the hill to tanks (another large reservoir was added in 1981), from where it ran by gravity to the top of Bow St.

In October 1963, 4 weeks of dry weather resulted in council carting water to fill empty tanks. By Christmas 1963 household tanks were being filled by long hoses connected to the half-finished mains. On 8 July 1964, the first householders were invited to apply for a supply. There were problems with Christmas peak supplies and an upgrade was installed in 1972. In 1981 an extra reservoir was built in Cornwall Rd quarry.

In the late 1980s, the Community Arts Council got a mural painted on the water tower. It was restored in 2015.
== Sewage ==
Since 1976 sewage from the town has been pumped to a treatment works to the west, with the treated effluent pumped, mainly on outgoing tides, into the mouth of the harbour. Ultra violet treatment was added in 2008 and aquamats (high surface–area polymer filters) and other upgrades in 2017, but the resource consent conditions for total suspended solids and faecal coliforms are still being breached. A proposal to use subsurface drip field irrigation, rather than disposal to sea is being considered, but may be postponed again.

==Notable people==

*Angeline Greensill (born 1948), Māori political rights campaigner and academic
*Anna Coddington, contemporary musician
*Antonio Te Maioha (born 1970), actor
*Dave Currie (born 1945), sports administrator
*Joan Fear (1932–2022), painter
*Hallyburton Johnstone (1897–1970), MP and farmer
*David Pretty (1878–1947), champion axeman and athlete
*Edward Puttick (1890–1976), retired soldier
*Eva Rickard (1925–1997), Māori rights campaigner
*Cort and Annie Jane Schnackenberg, 1860s–1870s missionaries
*Jordan Riki (2000–2017), Brisbane Broncos, Māori All Stars

== See also ==
* Raglan Chronicle, local newspaper
* List of radio stations in Waikato
* Hauauru ma raki proposed windfarm
* Surf Life Saving Northern Region
* Strawberry Fields Music Festival, held at venues around Raglan in the 1990s and until the early 2000s (decade).
* Raglan Harbour Board Empowering Act
* Futuro, fibreglass &quot;spaceship&quot; house (moved to Christchurch in 2015)

==References==
==External links==

*Raglan Weather
*Raglan Area School

=== Environmental organisations ===
* Whāingaroa Harbour Care 
* Whāingaroa Environment Centre
* Karioi restoration project
* Te Mauri Tau
* Whāingaroa Environmental Defence
*Friends of Wainui Bush Park

=== Transportation ===
*Civil Aviation Authority bulletin on safety at Raglan airfield
*Public transportation from Raglan to Hamilton

=== Walking trip resources ===
* 1:50,000 map, also with walking access information
* Walks on Wainui Reserve
* Department of Conservation brochure for Karioi, Bryant Reserve, Karamu Walkway, Bridal Veil and Pirongia
* Heritage strolls in Raglan

===Webcams===
*Raglan Beach webcams: Raglan A and Raglan B, NIWA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q984803" start="0" end="6" title="Raglan, New Zealand" label="Raglan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200028" start="56" end="77" title="Hamilton, New Zealand" label="Hamilton, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988184" start="81" end="97" title="New Zealand State Highway 23" label="State Highway 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q25659619" start="180" end="193" title="Ngāti Māhanga" label="Ngāti Māhanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="407" end="419" title="Māori people" label="Māori people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388714" start="491" end="497" title="Tainui (canoe)" label="Tainui"/>
<link wikidata="Q111269742" start="506" end="515" title="Rakataura" label="Rakataura"/>
<link wikidata="Q864717" start="605" end="613" title="Te Arawa" label="Te Arawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347259" start="624" end="637" title="Kahumatamomoe" label="Kahumatamomoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q96217229" start="655" end="661" title="Īhenga" label="Īhenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886343" start="696" end="702" title="Maketu" label="Maketū"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146013" start="756" end="777" title="James and Mary Wallis" label="James and Mary Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026919" start="986" end="1010" title="Wiremu Neera Te Awaitaia" label="Wiremu Neera Te Awaitaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335138" start="1067" end="1100" title="Fitzroy Somerset, 1st Lord Raglan" label="Fitzroy Somerset, 1st Lord Raglan"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="1158" end="1169" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q111310792" start="1223" end="1227" title="Flax in New Zealand" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891869" start="1975" end="1990" title="Manukau Harbour" label="Manukau Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618162" start="2042" end="2050" title="Gravel road" label="metalled"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926325" start="2227" end="2230" title="Mouth bar" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666118" start="2417" end="2454" title="Interislander" label="inter-island roll-on roll-off ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765854" start="2472" end="2489" title="Maritime Union of New Zealand" label="Watersiders Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q24971783" start="3425" end="3443" title="Northern Steamship Company" label="Northern Steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q164276" start="3509" end="3515" title="Podocarpus totara" label="totara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3678" end="3695" title="Tarakohe#Tarakohe cement" label="Golden Bay Cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945709" start="3786" end="3806" title="Huntly Power Station" label="Huntly power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15232543" start="3815" end="3828" title="Kaimai Tunnel" label="Kaimai tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535923" start="3872" end="3879" title="Floating dock (jetty)" label="pontoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488117" start="3947" end="3964" title="Provincial Growth Fund" label="Provincial Growth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4029" end="4039" title="Water Services Reform Programme#2022" label="Better Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="4103" end="4121" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4162" end="4174" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="4246" end="4256" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q107804169" start="4285" end="4302" title="List of former Royal New Zealand Air Force stations" label="military airfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4440" end="4461" title="Waikato District Council#Raglan County Council" label="Raglan County Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4844" end="4870" title="Māori protest movement#Raglan Golf Course" label="Māori sovereignty movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5468" end="5478" title="List of former territorial authorities in New Zealand#Town districts" label="Town Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664063" start="5891" end="5916" title="Local Government Act 1974 (New Zealand)" label="Local Government Act 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608192" start="5986" end="6001" title="Community boards in New Zealand" label="Community Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q71867562" start="6016" end="6040" title="Waikato District Council" label="Waikato District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480688" start="6105" end="6117" title="Francis Dart Fenton" label="F. D. Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026919" start="6218" end="6231" title="Wiremu Neera Te Awaitaia" label="Ngāti Mahanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q64294" start="6272" end="6297" title="Ferdinand von Hochstetter" label="Ferdinand von Hochstetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919478" start="6695" end="6698" title="Invasion of the Waikato" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="12793" end="12816" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="12862" end="12873" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="12923" end="12934" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="13289" end="13295" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="13303" end="13308" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="13315" end="13330" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pacific peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="13337" end="13342" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="13636" end="13645" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950631" start="13656" end="13679" title="Religion of Māori people" label="Māori religious beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="13691" end="13696" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="13708" end="13714" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="13726" end="13734" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q186685" start="14714" end="14719" title="marae" label="marae"/>
<link wikidata="Q675182" start="14745" end="14749" title="hapū" label="hapū"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060677" start="14753" end="14767" title="Waikato Tainui" label="Waikato Tainui"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060677" start="14843" end="14856" title="Ngāti Tāhinga" label="Ngāti Tāhinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q25659619" start="15101" end="15114" title="Ngāti Māhanga" label="Ngāti Māhanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060677" start="15119" end="15134" title="Ngāti Tamainupō" label="Ngāti Tamainupō"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660395" start="15157" end="15166" title="Waitetuna" label="Waitetuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378782" start="15291" end="15297" title="Te Uku" label="Te Uku"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660390" start="15302" end="15310" title="Waingaro" label="Waingaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021852" start="15385" end="15391" title="Ngaere" label="Ngaere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488117" start="15529" end="15551" title="Provincial Growth Fund" label="Provincial Growth Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q139918" start="15728" end="15735" title="Waikato" label="Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="15765" end="15777" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="15791" end="15800" title="catchment" label="catchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567558" start="15825" end="15835" title="Glen Afton" label="Glen Afton"/>
<link wikidata="Q616220" start="16484" end="16497" title="Aotea Harbour" label="Aotea Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q838734" start="16502" end="16516" title="Kawhia Harbour" label="Kawhia Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960157" start="16598" end="16606" title="Waingaro River (Waikato)" label="Waingaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960510" start="16611" end="16620" title="Waitetuna River" label="Waitetuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264197" start="16676" end="16683" title="Opotoru River" label="Opotoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689238" start="16688" end="16696" title="Tawatahi River" label="Tawatahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q239829" start="17030" end="17036" title="relict" label="relict"/>
<link wikidata="Q480902" start="17048" end="17063" title="Wave-cut platform" label="shore platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="17228" end="17236" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="17743" end="17760" title="native vegetation" label="native vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520028" start="17785" end="17791" title="mānuka" label="mānuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q311632" start="17792" end="17798" title="kānuka" label="kānuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371058" start="17922" end="17928" title="Karioi" label="Karioi"/>
<link wikidata="Q546879" start="17943" end="17955" title="Māori mythology" label="Māori legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478377" start="18123" end="18128" title="Lake Waitamoumou" label="lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394005" start="18170" end="18178" title="ironsand" label="ironsand"/>
<link wikidata="Q939183" start="18241" end="18254" title="deep sea mining" label="seabed mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468759" start="18280" end="18309" title="Foreshore and Seabed Act 2004" label="Foreshore and Seabed Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18388" end="18409" title="Mining in New Zealand#Opposition" label="Mining in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18414" end="18425" title="Sand mining#New Zealand" label="Sand mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q913539" start="18487" end="18504" title="Bridal Veil Falls (Waikato)" label="Bridal Veil Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475615" start="18579" end="18593" title="Lake Disappear" label="Lake Disappear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062699" start="18714" end="18730" title="Henry Chamberlin" label="Henry Chamberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808540" start="19758" end="19765" title="Te Mata, Waikato District" label="Te Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378782" start="19767" end="19773" title="Te Uku" label="Te Uku"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660395" start="19778" end="19787" title="Waitetuna" label="Waitetuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808540" start="19853" end="19860" title="Te Mata, Waikato District" label="Te Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378782" start="19862" end="19868" title="Te Uku" label="Te Uku"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660395" start="19873" end="19882" title="Waitetuna" label="Waitetuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808540" start="20063" end="20070" title="Te Mata, Waikato District" label="Te Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378782" start="20072" end="20078" title="Te Uku" label="Te Uku"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660395" start="20083" end="20092" title="Waitetuna" label="Waitetuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q931146" start="20317" end="20335" title="The Endless Summer" label="The Endless Summer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20370" end="20383" title="Last Paradise" label="Last Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375722" start="21864" end="21872" title="Ruapuke" label="Manu Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q455596" start="22264" end="22272" title="Matariki" label="Matariki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="22295" end="22300" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055458" start="23222" end="23240" title="New Zealand reggae" label="New Zealand reggae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23247" end="23264" title="Cornerstone Roots" label="Cornerstone Roots"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23269" end="23277" title="Zionhill" label="Zionhill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23419" end="23425" title="Karioi#Walks" label="Karioi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23919" end="23941" title="#Walking trip resources" label="Walking trip resources"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24148" end="24168" title="Trail riding#Mountain biking" label="mountain bike trails"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24322" end="24339" title="Te Uku Wind Farm#Pipiwharauroa Way" label="Pipiwharauroa Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132715" start="24400" end="24410" title="paper road" label="paper road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="24481" end="24498" title="Environmentalism" label="environmentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327761" start="24654" end="24665" title="Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24737" end="24758" title="Taranaki-King Country#2014 election" label="Taranaki-King Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682782" start="24794" end="24809" title="Hauraki-Waikato" label="Hauraki-Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866590" start="25257" end="25285" title="Ministry for the Environment (New Zealand)" label="Minister for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25287" end="25298" title="Simon Upton#Cabinet minister" label="Simon Upton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25681" end="25688" title="Surface runoff#Environmental effects" label="run-off"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25820" end="25847" title="#Environmental organisations" label="Environmental organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045082" start="25938" end="25955" title="Xtreme Waste" label="Xtreme Zero Waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="25998" end="26014" title="waste management" label="waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q605406" start="26540" end="26557" title="Antonio Te Maioha" label="Antonio Te Maioha"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="27135" end="27143" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075344" start="27160" end="27171" title="Water chlorination" label="chlorinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315821" start="27512" end="27519" title="Resource consent" label="Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q111310792" start="28055" end="28063" title="Flax in New Zealand" label="flaxmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="28202" end="28207" title="Water well" label="bores"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552508" start="28248" end="28258" title="Rainwater tank" label="tank water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="28513" end="28517" title="Mudstone" label="papa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="28616" end="28635" title="ammoniacal nitrogen" label="ammoniacal nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513775" start="28820" end="28824" title="Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (New Zealand)" label="DSIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q646008" start="30632" end="30644" title="Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation" label="Ultra violet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30705" end="30720" title="Polypropylene#Clothing" label="polymer filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315821" start="30758" end="30774" title="resource consent" label="resource consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995966" start="30790" end="30812" title="total suspended solids" label="total suspended solids"/>
<link wikidata="Q918223" start="30817" end="30833" title="Fecal coliform" label="faecal coliforms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30878" end="30899" title="Drip irrigation#Subsurface drip irrigation" label="subsurface drip field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762758" start="31011" end="31029" title="Angeline Greensill" label="Angeline Greensill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766926" start="31091" end="31106" title="Anna Coddington" label="Anna Coddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q605406" start="31131" end="31148" title="Antonio Te Maioha" label="Antonio Te Maioha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228620" start="31169" end="31180" title="Dave Currie" label="Dave Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q114673482" start="31216" end="31225" title="Joan Fear" label="Joan Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643241" start="31248" end="31269" title="Hallyburton Johnstone" label="Hallyburton Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238704" start="31298" end="31310" title="David Pretty (bushman)" label="David Pretty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344925" start="31353" end="31367" title="Edward Puttick" label="Edward Puttick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415161" start="31398" end="31409" title="Eva Rickard" label="Eva Rickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769319" start="31457" end="31481" title="Annie Jane Schnackenberg" label="Annie Jane Schnackenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q98289656" start="31509" end="31520" title="Jordan Riki" label="Jordan Riki"/>
<link wikidata="Q665111" start="31534" end="31550" title="Brisbane Broncos" label="Brisbane Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590525" start="31552" end="31567" title="Māori All Stars" label="Māori All Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283109" start="31586" end="31602" title="Raglan Chronicle" label="Raglan Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635925" start="31622" end="31655" title="List of radio stations in Waikato" label="List of radio stations in Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682296" start="31658" end="31673" title="Hauauru ma raki" label="Hauauru ma raki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645866" start="31694" end="31726" title="Surf Life Saving Northern Region" label="Surf Life Saving Northern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622425" start="31729" end="31761" title="Strawberry Fields (New Zealand festival)" label="Strawberry Fields Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31843" end="31878" title="List of Statutes of New Zealand (1949–1957)#1954" label="Raglan Harbour Board Empowering Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q571755" start="31881" end="31887" title="Futuro" label="Futuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="31938" end="31950" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371058" start="32524" end="32530" title="Karioi" label="Karioi"/>
<link wikidata="Q913539" start="32564" end="32575" title="Bridal Veil Falls (Waikato)" label="Bridal Veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950639" start="32580" end="32588" title="Mount Pirongia" label="Pirongia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466498" start="32679" end="32683" title="NIWA" label="NIWA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262358" wikidata="Q1027437" url="?curid=262358" title="Caloris Planitia">
<text>Caloris Planitia is a plain within a large impact basin on Mercury, informally named Caloris, about in diameter. It is one of the largest impact basins in the Solar System. &quot;Calor&quot; is Latin for &quot;heat&quot; and the basin is so-named because the Sun is almost directly overhead every second time Mercury passes perihelion. The crater, discovered in 1974, is surrounded by the Caloris Montes, a ring of mountains approximately tall.

==Appearance==
Caloris was discovered on images taken by the &quot;Mariner 10&quot; probe in 1974. Its name was suggested by Brian O&#x27;Leary, astronaut and member of the &quot;Mariner 10&quot; imagery team. It was situated on the terminator—the line dividing the daytime and nighttime hemispheres—at the time the probe passed by, and so half of the crater could not be imaged. Later, on January 15, 2008, one of the first photos of the planet taken by the &quot;MESSENGER&quot; probe revealed the crater in its entirety.

The basin was initially estimated to be about in diameter, though this was increased to based on subsequent images taken by &quot;MESSENGER&quot;. It is ringed by mountains up to high. Inside the crater walls, the floor of the crater is filled by lava plains, similar to the maria of the Moon. These plains are superposed by explosive vents associated with pyroclastic material. Outside the walls, material ejected in the impact which created the basin extends for , and concentric rings surround the crater.

In the center of the basin is a region containing numerous radial troughs that appear to be extensional faults, with an unrelated crater, Apollodorus, located near the center of the pattern. The exact cause of this pattern of troughs is not currently known. The feature is named Pantheon Fossae.

==Formation==

The impacting body is estimated to have been at least 100 km (62 miles) in diameter.

Bodies in the inner Solar System experienced a heavy bombardment of large rocky bodies in the first billion years or so of the Solar System. The impact that created Caloris must have occurred after most of the heavy bombardment had finished, because fewer impact craters are seen on its floor than exist on comparably-sized regions outside the crater. Similar impact basins on the Moon such as the Mare Imbrium and Mare Orientale are believed to have formed at about the same time, possibly indicating that there was a &#x27;spike&#x27; of large impacts towards the end of the heavy bombardment phase of the early Solar System. Based on &quot;MESSENGER&quot;″s photographs, Caloris&#x27; age has been determined to be between 3.8 and 3.9 billion years.

A gravitational high, also known as a mascon, is centered on Caloris Planitia. Most large impact basins on the moon, such as Mare Imbrium and Mare Crisium, are also the site of mascons.

==Antipodal chaotic terrain and global effects==

The giant impact believed to have formed Caloris may have had global consequences for the planet. At the exact antipode of the basin is a large area of hilly, grooved terrain, with few small impact craters that are known as chaotic terrain (also &quot;weird terrain&quot;). It is thought by some to have been created as seismic waves from the impact converged on the opposite side of the planet. Alternatively, it has been suggested that this terrain formed as a result of the convergence of ejecta at this basin&#x27;s antipode. This hypothetical impact is also believed to have triggered volcanic activity on Mercury, resulting in the formation of smooth plains. Surrounding Caloris is a series of geologic formations thought to have been produced by the basin&#x27;s ejecta, collectively called the Caloris Group.

==Emissions of gas==
Mercury has a very tenuous and transient atmosphere, containing small amounts of hydrogen and helium captured from the solar wind, as well as heavier elements such as sodium and potassium. These are thought to originate within the planet, being &quot;out-gassed&quot; from beneath its crust. The Caloris basin has been found to be a significant source of sodium and potassium, indicating that the fractures created by the impact facilitate the release of gases from within the planet. The unusual terrain is also a source of these gases.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Geology of Mercury
* Skinakas basin

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1027437" start="0" end="16" title="Caloris Planitia" label="Caloris Planitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="22" end="27" title="planitia" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="43" end="55" title="impact basin" label="impact basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="59" end="66" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027437" start="85" end="92" title="Caloris Planitia" label="Caloris"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="103" end="111" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981763" start="130" end="171" title="List of largest craters in the Solar System" label="largest impact basins in the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="194" end="199" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="210" end="214" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="259" end="262" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="324" end="334" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31340" start="389" end="403" title="Caloris Montes" label="Caloris Montes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="415" end="423" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q59131" start="513" end="523" title="Mariner 10" label="Mariner 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q986622" start="571" end="589" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q331824" start="679" end="689" title="Terminator (solar)" label="terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q182539" start="911" end="920" title="MESSENGER" label="MESSENGER"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="1246" end="1251" title="lunar mare" label="maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="1259" end="1263" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421954" start="1573" end="1590" title="extensional fault" label="extensional fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782177" start="1619" end="1630" title="Apollodorus (crater)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893453" start="1760" end="1775" title="Pantheon Fossae" label="Pantheon Fossae"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="2135" end="2148" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="2277" end="2289" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q488143" start="2294" end="2308" title="Mare Orientale" label="Mare Orientale"/>
<link wikidata="Q220717" start="2671" end="2677" title="Mass concentration (astronomy)" label="mascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="2758" end="2770" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q168416" start="2775" end="2787" title="Mare Crisium" label="Mare Crisium"/>
<link wikidata="Q505356" start="2981" end="2989" title="Antipodal point" label="antipode"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="3190" end="3202" title="seismic wave" label="seismic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="3460" end="3477" title="volcano" label="volcanic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023667" start="3672" end="3685" title="Caloris Group" label="Caloris Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="3790" end="3798" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="3803" end="3809" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="3828" end="3838" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="3876" end="3882" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="3887" end="3896" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207482" start="4275" end="4293" title="Geology of Mercury" label="Geology of Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535433" start="4296" end="4304" title="Skinakas (hypothetical basin)" label="Skinakas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262361" wikidata="Q2744334" url="?curid=262361" title="Lake Sammamish">
<text>Lake Sammamish is a freshwater lake east of Seattle in King County, Washington, United States. The lake is long and wide, with a maximum depth of and a surface area of . It lies east of Lake Washington and west of the Sammamish Plateau, and stretches from Issaquah in the south to Redmond in the north. At Issaquah it is fed by Issaquah Creek, and at Redmond it drains to Lake Washington via the Sammamish River, named after the native people who once lived along its entire length.

The Lake Sammamish watershed stretches from Redmond through Bellevue, and Issaquah to Preston and Hobart, and consists of numerous creeks which flow into the lake. Issaquah Creek is the largest tributary, furnishing over 70% of the lake&#x27;s inflow.

==Development==
The area surrounding Lake Sammamish has been, in recent times, the most rapidly growing suburban district in the Greater Seattle Metropolitan Area. During the late 1990s and early 2000s, the cities of Redmond, Snoqualmie, Fall City, Issaquah and Bellevue have grown substantially. The city of Sammamish was incorporated in 1999 because of suburban growth.

==Ecology and conservation==
Historically, runoff from the high precipitation in the lake&#x27;s watershed (nearly twice the 35 inches that Seattle gets each year) was absorbed by the surrounding forests. Loose, sponge-like forest soils virtually eliminated runoff during winter storms and recharged groundwater aquifers which then released fresh water to streams in the dry summer months. With rapid urbanization the forests have been replaced by impervious surfaces—roofs, roads, parking lots—and stormwater runoffs have increased flooding. The stormwater runoff carries sediment loads and toxic pollutants into streams and ultimately the lake, which generally has a negative impact on lake water clarity as well as fishes and wildlife.

In May, 2010 the federal government asked the town of Sammamish to restrict development within from the lakeshore to protect local salmon and steelhead (&quot;Oncorhyncus mykiss&quot;) species. The report did not include Lake Sammamish kokanee salmon (&quot;Oncorhyncus nerka&quot;) among the species in trouble, although environmentalists and scientists said development along Lake Sammamish and tributary creeks have pushed the fish to the brink of extirpation. Despite resistance to the report by the city of Sammamish, Issaquah already limits development within of the lake, Issaquah Creek and the East Fork of Issaquah Creek under the Shoreline Management Program. It is estimated that fewer than 100 Kokanee salmon remain in Lake Sammamish.

===Beavers===
The recent return of beaver (&quot;Castor canadensis&quot;) to Lake Sammamish worries City of Issaquah and Lake Sammamish State Park officials who state that the mammals will cause flooding and burrow under roadways. These officials are recommending relocation of the beaver families. On July 6, 2010, officials of the City of Issaquah asked Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife to tear out a beaver dam on Tibbetts Creek in Lake Sammamish State Park because of concerns about potential flooding and barriers to salmon migration.

In contrast, research on watersheds in the Northern United States and Canada shows that beavers provide ecological benefits by creating ponds that increase fish and bird abundance and diversity. Research in the Stillaguamish River basin, approximately north of Lake Sammamish, found that extensive loss of beaver ponds resulted in an 89% reduction in coho salmon smolt summer production and an almost equally detrimental 86% reduction in critical winter habitat carrying capacity.

==Recreation and parks==

Lake Sammamish is bordered by Marymoor Park at the lake&#x27;s north end, Lake Sammamish State Park at its south end, and the East Lake Sammamish Trail. Lake Sammamish State Park provides nine public boat launches that can be accessed through a separate park entrance, for a fee, with parking and restroom facilities on site.

The public can access the lake&#x27;s west shores at Redmond&#x27;s &quot;&quot;. The privately owned Vasa Park Resort, located in Bellevue, provides access from the west for a fee. Vasa Park offers one ramp for launching watercraft. Several housing developments own small, private parks that provide lake access for their residents.

The main leisure activities include rowing, fishing, waterskiing, wakeboarding, wakesurfing, tubing, and jet skiing.

There is a public slalom course for waterskiing at the far north end of the lake, running from the west to the east. In the mid-1980s, local radio personality Pat O&#x27;Day proposed that the Seafair Cup hydroplane races be moved to Lake Sammamish from Lake Washington, an effort that was unsuccessful.

Lake Sammamish offers fishing enthusiasts a variety of species to pursue, including perch, smallmouth bass, largemouth bass, cutthroat trout, salmon, and steelhead trout, among others.

==Events==
*Serial killer Ted Bundy abducted two women in broad daylight from the beach at Lake Sammamish State Park on July 14, 1974, by faking an injury and asking for their help.
*Wife killer Randy Roth drowned his fourth wife Cynthia at Lake Sammamish in 1991 after taking off in a raft from Redmond&#x27;s Idylwood Park.

==References==
==External links==
*
*Lake Sammamish Overview and Detailed Graphs, King County, Washington
*Save Lake Sammamish website
*Lake Sammamish Regional Information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2744334" start="0" end="14" title="Lake Sammamish" label="Lake Sammamish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="20" end="30" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="31" end="35" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="44" end="51" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q108861" start="55" end="78" title="King County, Washington" label="King County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323525" start="186" end="201" title="Lake Washington" label="Lake Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q988209" start="218" end="235" title="Sammamish, Washington" label="Sammamish Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q40251" start="256" end="264" title="Issaquah, Washington" label="Issaquah"/>
<link wikidata="Q223718" start="281" end="288" title="Redmond, Washington" label="Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088099" start="328" end="342" title="Issaquah Creek" label="Issaquah Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409639" start="396" end="411" title="Sammamish River" label="Sammamish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409645" start="429" end="442" title="Sammamish people" label="native people"/>
<link wikidata="Q214164" start="544" end="552" title="Bellevue, Washington" label="Bellevue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475221" start="570" end="577" title="Preston, Washington" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508550" start="582" end="588" title="Hobart, Washington" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="874" end="881" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000951" start="963" end="973" title="Snoqualmie, Washington" label="Snoqualmie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514432" start="975" end="984" title="Fall City, Washington" label="Fall City"/>
<link wikidata="Q988209" start="1046" end="1055" title="Sammamish, Washington" label="Sammamish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="1609" end="1626" title="stormwater runoff" label="stormwater runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="1981" end="1987" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="1992" end="2001" title="Rainbow trout" label="steelhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q44064" start="2086" end="2100" title="Sockeye salmon" label="kokanee salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="2633" end="2639" title="North American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477630" start="2719" end="2744" title="Lake Sammamish State Park" label="Lake Sammamish State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349527" start="3360" end="3379" title="Stillaguamish River" label="Stillaguamish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q866283" start="3611" end="3628" title="carrying capacity" label="carrying capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781612" start="3687" end="3700" title="Marymoor Park" label="Marymoor Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477630" start="3731" end="3756" title="Lake Sammamish State Park" label="Lake Sammamish State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328774" start="3783" end="3808" title="East Lake Sammamish Trail" label="East Lake Sammamish Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="4355" end="4361" title="rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="4363" end="4370" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="4372" end="4383" title="waterskiing" label="waterskiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q376040" start="4385" end="4397" title="wakeboarding" label="wakeboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021379" start="4399" end="4410" title="wakesurfing" label="wakesurfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978323" start="4412" end="4418" title="Tubing (recreation)" label="tubing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175316" start="4424" end="4434" title="Personal water craft" label="jet skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143857" start="4596" end="4610" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Day" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440320" start="4629" end="4640" title="Seafair Cup" label="Seafair Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q122714" start="4641" end="4651" title="hydroplane (boat)" label="hydroplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323525" start="4690" end="4705" title="Lake Washington" label="Lake Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q600262" start="4825" end="4830" title="perch" label="perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q536224" start="4832" end="4847" title="smallmouth bass" label="smallmouth bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q755105" start="4849" end="4864" title="largemouth bass" label="largemouth bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717060" start="4866" end="4881" title="cutthroat trout" label="cutthroat trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="4883" end="4889" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q64437771" start="4895" end="4910" title="steelhead trout" label="steelhead trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q192218" start="4953" end="4962" title="Ted Bundy" label="Ted Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292409" start="5122" end="5132" title="Randy Roth" label="Randy Roth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262364" wikidata="Q1139040" url="?curid=262364" title="Crater (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[crater]] is a landform appearing as a depression.

Crater may also refer to:

==Music==
*&quot;Crater&quot; (Daniel Menche and Mamiffer album), 2016
*&quot;Crater&quot; (Fission album), 2004

==Places==

*Crati or Crater, a river in southern Italy
*Crater, California, United States
*Crater (Aden), a district in Yemen

==Film==
* &quot;Crater&quot;, a 2023 film

==Other uses==
*Crater (constellation), in astronomy
*&quot;The Crater&quot; (novel), 1847, by James Fenimore Cooper
*Joseph Force Crater (), New York judge who disappeared

==See also==
*Crate (disambiguation)
*Crater lake (disambiguation)
*Cratering (disambiguation)
*Krater, a Greek vessel used to mix wine and water (the original meaning)
*Makhtesh, a crater-like formation created by erosion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1139040" start="2" end="12" title="Crater (disambiguation)" label="[[crater]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139040" start="55" end="61" title="Crater (disambiguation)" label="Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117954" start="93" end="146" title="Crater (Daniel Menche and Mamiffer album)" label="&amp;quot;Crater&amp;quot; (Daniel Menche and Mamiffer album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420952" start="154" end="188" title="Crater (Fission album)" label="&amp;quot;Crater&amp;quot; (Fission album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q660005" start="209" end="214" title="Crati" label="Crati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182609" start="253" end="271" title="Crater, California" label="Crater, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263449" start="288" end="301" title="Crater (Aden)" label="Crater (Aden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324772" start="341" end="347" title="Crater (film)" label="Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q9282" start="384" end="406" title="Crater (constellation)" label="Crater (constellation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865365" start="422" end="452" title="The Crater (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Crater&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263399" start="486" end="505" title="Joseph Force Crater" label="Joseph Force Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16423" start="556" end="578" title="Crate (disambiguation)" label="Crate (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176342" start="580" end="608" title="Crater lake (disambiguation)" label="Crater lake (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28150144" start="610" end="636" title="Cratering (disambiguation)" label="Cratering (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q476968" start="638" end="644" title="Krater" label="Krater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361343" start="712" end="720" title="Makhtesh" label="Makhtesh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262372" wikidata="Q242326" url="?curid=262372" title="Bohol Sea">
<text>The Bohol Sea, also called the Mindanao Sea, is a sea located between the Visayas and Mindanao islands in the Philippines. It lies south of Bohol and Leyte and north of Mindanao. Siquijor and Camiguin are its two major islands. 

The major cities along the coastline of the sea are Cagayan de Oro, Iligan, Butuan, Dumaguete, Ozamiz and Tagbilaran.

The sea connects to the Philippine Sea through the Surigao Strait, to the Camotes Sea both through the Canigao Channel and Cebu Strait, and to the Sulu Sea through the strait between Negros Island and Zamboanga Peninsula.

==Scuba diving==
The Bohol Sea is home to a large variety of premier scuba diving locations, dive charter boats, and hotels that cater to divers. Around the area of Tagbilaran and Balicasag Island there are numerous wall dives that range from . Water temperatures are very warm and most divers use a 3/2 short wetsuit to dive the location.

Sea life is abundant and includes clownfish, lionfish, barracuda, dolphins, huge coral formations, and other common tropical sea life. Rorquals, including blue whales, have returned to the Bohol Sea, which is a rare trend in any Asian waters.

==Gallery==


==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q242326" start="4" end="13" title="Bohol Sea" label="Bohol Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q242326" start="31" end="43" title="Bohol Sea" label="Mindanao Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q211436" start="74" end="81" title="Visayas" label="Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="86" end="94" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="110" end="121" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13752" start="140" end="145" title="Bohol" label="Bohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q211377" start="150" end="155" title="Leyte (island)" label="Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13879" start="179" end="187" title="Siquijor" label="Siquijor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13769" start="192" end="200" title="Camiguin" label="Camiguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104157" start="240" end="246" title="Cities of the Philippines" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="274" end="277" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645" start="282" end="296" title="Cagayan de Oro" label="Cagayan de Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q285488" start="298" end="304" title="Iligan" label="Iligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686" start="306" end="312" title="Butuan" label="Butuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q873377" start="314" end="323" title="Dumaguete" label="Dumaguete"/>
<link wikidata="Q263837" start="325" end="331" title="Ozamiz" label="Ozamiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826" start="336" end="346" title="Tagbilaran" label="Tagbilaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q159183" start="373" end="387" title="Philippine Sea" label="Philippine Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632248" start="400" end="414" title="Surigao Strait" label="Surigao Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q540179" start="423" end="434" title="Camotes Sea" label="Camotes Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q672777" start="452" end="467" title="Canigao Channel" label="Canigao Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454050" start="472" end="483" title="Cebu Strait" label="Cebu Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q160194" start="496" end="504" title="Sulu Sea" label="Sulu Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q212777" start="532" end="545" title="Negros Island" label="Negros Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13682" start="550" end="569" title="Zamboanga Peninsula" label="Zamboanga Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="641" end="653" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826" start="737" end="747" title="Tagbilaran" label="Tagbilaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q178330" start="752" end="768" title="Balicasag Island" label="Balicasag Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="876" end="889" title="Wetsuit#Types" label="short wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q472616" start="947" end="956" title="clownfish" label="clownfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q475711" start="958" end="966" title="lionfish" label="lionfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q193921" start="968" end="977" title="barracuda" label="barracuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="979" end="987" title="dolphins" label="dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="994" end="999" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q232829" start="1048" end="1055" title="Rorqual" label="Rorqual"/>
<link wikidata="Q42196" start="1068" end="1078" title="blue whale" label="blue whale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262376" wikidata="Q1426" url="?curid=262376" title="Roger Federer">
<text>Roger Federer ( , ; born 8 August 1981) is a Swiss former professional tennis player. He was ranked as the world No. 1 in men&#x27;s singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) for 310 weeks (second-most of all time), including a record 237 consecutive weeks, and finished as the year-end No. 1 five times. Federer won 103 singles titles on the ATP Tour, the second most since the start of the Open Era in 1968, including 20 major men&#x27;s singles titles (among which a record eight men&#x27;s singles Wimbledon titles, and an Open Era joint-record five men&#x27;s singles US Open titles) and six year-end championships.

For nearly two decades, Federer was a leading figure in men&#x27;s tennis alongside Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic, collectively known as the Big Three. A Wimbledon junior champion in 1998 and former ball boy, Federer won his first major singles title at Wimbledon in 2003 at age 21. For the next several years Federer was the dominant player in men&#x27;s tennis, playing in 20 out of 24 major singles finals between 2004 and 2009. He won three of the four majors and the Tour Finals in 2004, 2006, and 2007, as well as five consecutive titles at both Wimbledon and the US Open. Federer completed the career Grand Slam at the 2009 French Open after three consecutive runner-up finishes to Nadal, his main rival until 2010. At age 27, he surpassed Pete Sampras&#x27; record of 14 major men&#x27;s singles titles at Wimbledon in 2009.

Federer and Stan Wawrinka led the Switzerland Davis Cup team to their first title in 2014, following their Olympic doubles gold victory at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. He also won a silver medal in singles at the 2012 London Olympics, finishing runner-up to Andy Murray. After a half-year hiatus in 2016 to recover from knee surgery, Federer returned to tennis, winning three more majors over the next two years, including the 2017 Australian Open over Nadal and a record eighth singles title at the 2017 Wimbledon Championships. At the 2018 Australian Open, Federer became the first man to win 20 major singles titles and shortly after the oldest ATP world No. 1 at the time, at age 36. In September 2022, he retired from professional tennis following the Laver Cup.

A versatile all-court player, Federer&#x27;s grace on the court made him popular among tennis fans. Originally lacking self-control as a junior, he transformed his on-court demeanor to become well-liked for his graciousness, winning the Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award 13 times. He also won the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year award a joint-record five times. Outside of competition, Federer played an instrumental role in the creation of the Laver Cup team competition. He is also an active philanthropist. He established the Roger Federer Foundation, which targets impoverished children in southern Africa, and has raised funds in part through the Match for Africa exhibition series. By the end of his career, Federer was routinely one of the top-ten highest-paid athletes in any sport, and ranked first among all athletes with $100 million in endorsement income in 2020.
==Early life==
Federer was born on 8 August 1981 in Basel, Switzerland. A member of the Federer family, his Swiss father, Robert Federer, is from Berneck in the canton of St. Gallen and his Afrikaner mother, Lynette Federer (née Durand), is from Kempton Park, Gauteng, in South Africa. He has one sibling, his older sister, Diana, the mother of twins. Since Federer&#x27;s mother is South African, he holds both Swiss and South African citizenship. He is related to Swiss prelate Urban Federer as well as Swiss politician and philanthropist Barbara Schmid-Federer.

As youngsters, Federer and his elder sister Diana used to accompany their parents, both of whom worked for Ciba-Geigy Pharmaceuticals, to the company&#x27;s private tennis courts at the weekends, where he first played tennis at the age of three.

Soon after enrolling in school at the age of six, Federer became the best in his age group. Feeling that Federer had outgrown the Ciba club and needed to be amongst better juniors, his mother Lynette enrolled him at age eight in the elite junior programme of the Old Boys Tennis Club in Basel, where he received his initial tennis instruction from veteran Czech coach Adolf Kacovsky. Federer began using a one-handed backhand from an early age not only because Kacovsky was a fan of it, but also because all of his childhood idols — Stefan Edberg, Boris Becker, and later Pete Sampras — used the stroke too. From ages 8 to 10, Federer received group and individual training from Kacovsky. At age 10, Federer began being taught at the club by Australian former tennis player Peter Carter. Federer has credited Carter for his &quot;entire technique and coolness&quot;.

Federer grew up playing many sports, such as badminton, basketball, football, and tennis, but he was most taken by the latter two. He also tried skiing and swimming and spent hours playing soft tennis on the street. He credits his hand–eye coordination to the wide range of sports he played as a child. In 1993, Federer won the under-12 Swiss national junior championships in Lucerne. Becoming the best junior in the country helped him decide to become a professional tennis player, so he stopped playing football at age twelve to concentrate solely on tennis, where he felt he had more control over his victories or defeats, as opposed to team sports where he relied more on the performances of his teammates. Federer was also a ball boy at his hometown Basel event, the Swiss Indoors in 1992 and 1993, and even received a medal after the 1993 final, together with the other ballboys, from tournament champion Michael Stich.

He was brought to train at the Swiss National Tennis Center, then located in Ecublens in the canton of Vaud, between 1995 and 1997. It was in this new setting that he learned French at the age of 14. He completed his compulsory education at La Planta secondary school in Chavannes-près-Renens and obtained his certificate in July 1997, in the upper division, commercial studies section.

==Tennis career==
===1990s and 2000s===
====1995–1998: Junior years====

In 1995, at age 13, Federer won the U14 Swiss national junior championship and was subsequently invited to train at the prestigious National Tennis Centre in the French-speaking Écublens, where he enrolled shortly after his 14th birthday. There, he had the opportunity to combine three hours of tennis training per day along with education, but Federer had little interest in studying and struggled to balance his education with his tennis commitments. Speaking little French and struggling with living away from home, Federer found his first months at Écublens depressing. He was the youngest player in the group and also felt singled out as the &quot;Swiss German&quot; by many of the students and staff at the academy, experienced mild bullying, and was often on the verge of packing his bags and returning home. Federer credits this difficult period of his life as the reason for his independent spirit.

Federer played his first ITF junior match in July 1996, at the age of 14, at a grade-2 tournament in Switzerland. He then played in the 1996 NEC World Youth Cup Final in Zürich against tennis players like Lleyton Hewitt. In January 1997, at age 15, Federer won both the indoor and outdoor U18 Swiss national championship, defeating the Yves Allegro who was three years older than him, in both finals. In May, Federer won his first-ever ITF junior title on the clay courts of a second-category tournament in Prato, doing so without the loss of a set. In September, Federer earned the first 12 ATP points of his career in a four-week Swiss satellite tournament in Bossonnens, thus making his debut in the ATP rankings at No. 803, just five spots ahead of future rival Lleyton Hewitt.

His main accomplishments as a junior player came at Wimbledon in 1998, when he won both the Boys&#x27; singles final over Irakli Labadze, and the Boys&#x27; doubles final, teamed with Olivier Rochus, defeating the team of Michaël Llodra and Andy Ram. Federer then reached the US Open Junior final, which he lost to David Nalbandian. This was the only occasion Federer lost a final on the junior circuit. He then brought his junior career to an end at the prestigious Junior Orange Bowl in Miami, where he defeated Nalbandian in the semifinals and Guillermo Coria in the final. By the end of 1998 he had attained the No. 1 junior world ranking and was named ITF Junior World Champion. He ended his junior career at the end of 1998 with a high ranking of No. 1 in singles and No. 7 in doubles (both achieved on 31 December 1998) and a win–loss record of 78–20 in singles and 36–21 in doubles.

Junior Grand Slam results – Singles:

Australian Open: SF (1998)
French Open: 1R (1998)
Wimbledon: W (1998)
US Open: F (1998)

Junior Grand Slam results – Doubles:

Australian Open: SF (1998)
French Open: 1R (1998)
Wimbledon: W (1998)
US Open: 1R (1998)

====1998–2002: Early professional career====
In July 1998, an almost 17-year-old Federer made his ATP debut at the Swiss Open Gstaad, in his home country of Switzerland, losing to No. 88 Lucas Arnold Ker in the first round. Later that year, he won his first ATP match against Guillaume Raoux in Toulouse. He then received a wildcard to the 1998 Swiss Indoors in his hometown in Basel, where he lost in the first round to former world No. 1 Andre Agassi. He finished 1998 ranked 301st in the world.

In April 1999, Federer made his Davis Cup debut in a World Group first round against Italy, defeating Davide Sanguinetti. In August, Federer won his first-ever professional title on the Challenger tour in Segovia, pairing with Sander Groen to beat Ota Fukárek and Alejandro Hernández in the final, which was played on Federer&#x27;s 18th birthday. Despite losing in the first rounds of both the French Open and Wimbledon and having just turned 18, he entered the world’s Top 100 for the first time on 20 September 1999. Later that month, Federer won his first and only singles ATP Challenger title in Brest, defeating Max Mirnyi in the final. In his first full year as a professional, Federer jumped up to world No. 64, and in doing so at 18 years and four months of age, he became the youngest player in the year-ending world top 100.

His first Grand Slam win came at the Australian Open, where he defeated former World No. 2 Michael Chang. His first singles final came at the Marseille Open in February 2000, where he lost to fellow Swiss Marc Rosset. Federer then entered the Top 50 in March and ended 2000 ranked 29th in the world. Federer made his Olympic debut at Sydney, where he surprised many by reaching the semifinals, where he lost to Tommy Haas and then to Arnaud Di Pasquale in the bronze medal match. In January 2001, Federer won the Hopman Cup representing Switzerland, along with world No. 1 Martina Hingis. The duo defeated the American pair of Monica Seles and Jan-Michael Gambill in the finals. Federer later said that his experience with Hingis &quot;definitely helped me to become the player I am today.&quot;

In 2001, Federer won his first singles title at the 2001 Milan Indoor tournament, where he defeated Julien Boutter in the final. Federer then reached his first Grand Slam quarterfinal at the French Open, losing to former world No. 2 and eventual finalist Àlex Corretja. His international breakthrough came at the Wimbledon Championships, when the 19-year-old Federer faced the four-time defending champion and all-time Grand Slam leader Pete Sampras in the fourth round. Federer defeated the No. 1 seed in a five-set match to snap Sampras&#x27; 31-match win streak at Wimbledon before losing in the quarter-finals to Tim Henman.
In 2002, Federer reached his first Masters final at the Miami event, where he lost to Andre Agassi, but then won his first Masters title in Hamburg, defeating Marat Safin in the final; the victory put him in the top 10 for the first time. On 1 August, Federer suffered the devastating loss of his long-time Australian coach and mentor, Peter Carter, in a car crash in South Africa. Although he suffered first-round losses in the three tournaments he entered immediately after Carter&#x27;s death, Federer gathered himself and began playing with more determination than ever after that. After reaching the fourth round of the US Open, he won the Vienna Open, jumping from No. 13 at the end of September to No. 7 in the rankings by early November, which allowed him to qualify for the year-end Masters Cup for the first time, where he won all of his matches in the round-robin stage before losing to then-world no. 1 and eventual champion Lleyton Hewitt in the semifinals. At age 21, he ended 2002 ranked as the world No. 6.

====2003: Grand Slam breakthrough at Wimbledon====

In 2003, Federer won his first Grand Slam singles title at Wimbledon, beating Andy Roddick in the semifinals and Mark Philippoussis in the final. In doing so, he joined the likes of Björn Borg, Pat Cash and Stefan Edberg as the only singles players to win both the junior and senior Wimbledon titles. In August he had a chance to take over the No. 1 ranking for the first time from Andre Agassi if he made it to the Montreal final. However, he fell in the semifinals to Roddick, in a final-set tiebreaker, leaving him 120 points behind Agassi. This, coupled with early losses to David Nalbandian at Cincinnati and the US Open, denied Federer the chance to become No. 1 in 2003.

Federer won his first and only doubles Masters event in Miami with Max Mirnyi, beating the pair of Leander Paes and David Rikl in the final. He then reached the singles final of the Rome Masters on clay, which he lost to Félix Mantilla. Federer reached nine finals on the ATP Tour and won seven of them on four different surfaces, including the 500 series events at Dubai and Vienna, defeating Jiří Novák and Carlos Moyá in the respective finals. Lastly, Federer won the year-end championships over Andre Agassi, finishing the year as world No. 2, narrowly behind Andy Roddick by only 160 points.

====2004: Imposing dominance====

In 2004, Federer won three Grand Slam singles titles, becoming the first person to do so in a single season since Mats Wilander in 1988. His first major hard-court title came at the Australian Open over Marat Safin, making him the world No. 1 for the first time. He then won the Indian Wells on hardcourts and the Hamburg Masters on clay, beating Tim Henman and Guillermo Coria in the finals respectively, snapping the latter&#x27;s 31-match winning streak on clay. Federer won his second Wimbledon crown over Andy Roddick.

At the Summer Olympics in Athens, Federer was the clear favorite after claiming the world No. 1 ranking for the first time earlier in the year. However, he lost in the second round to 18-year-old Tomáš Berdych. He then won the Canada Masters, defeating Roddick in the final. At the US Open, Federer defeated the 2001 champion, Lleyton Hewitt, for his first title there. Federer also won his first tournament on home soil by capturing the Swiss Open in Gstaad and he wrapped up the year by winning the year-end championships for the second time after beating Hewitt in the final.

His 11 singles titles were the most of any player in two decades, and his record of 74–6 was the best since Ivan Lendl in 1986.

====2005: Consolidating dominance====

In 2005, Federer failed to reach the finals of the first two Grand Slam tournaments, losing the Australian Open semifinal to eventual champion Safin after holding match points, and the French Open semifinal to eventual champion Rafael Nadal. However, Federer reestablished his dominance on grass, winning Wimbledon for a third time by defeating Andy Roddick. At the US Open, Federer defeated Andre Agassi in the latter&#x27;s last major final.

Federer also took four Masters wins: Indian Wells, Miami and Cincinnati on hard court, and Hamburg on clay. The win in Miami was particularly noteworthy as it was the first final contested between Federer and Nadal. Federer recovered from two sets down to take the final in five sets. Furthermore, Federer won two ATP 500 series events at Rotterdam and Dubai. Federer lost the year-end championships to David Nalbandian in five sets while playing through a foot injury that sidelined him for almost the rest of the season after September. He maintained his position as No. 1 for the entire season.

That year, Federer won 11 singles titles, which tied his mark during the 2004 season. Federer&#x27;s 81 match victories were the most since Pete Sampras in 1993, and his record of 81–4 (95.2%) remains the third-best winning percentage in the Open Era behind John McEnroe&#x27;s 1984 and Jimmy Connors&#x27;s 1974.

====2006: Career-best season====

The 2006 season was statistically the best season of Federer&#x27;s career. In November 2011, Stephen Tignor, chief editorial writer for Tennis.com, ranked Federer&#x27;s 2006 season as statistically the second-best season of all time during the Open Era, behind Rod Laver&#x27;s Grand Slam year of 1969.

Federer won 12 singles titles (the most of any player since Thomas Muster in 1995 and John McEnroe in 1984) and had a match record of 92–5 (the most wins since Ivan Lendl in 1982). Federer reached the finals in an astounding 16 of the 17 tournaments he entered during the season.

In 2006, Federer won three Grand Slam singles titles and reached the final of the other, with the only loss coming against Nadal in the French Open. This was Federer and Nadal&#x27;s first meeting in a Grand Slam final. He was the first man to reach all four finals in a calendar year since Rod Laver in 1969. Federer defeated Nadal in the Wimbledon Championships final. In the Australian Open, Federer defeated Marcos Baghdatis, and at the US Open, Federer defeated 2003 champion Roddick. In addition, Federer reached six Masters finals, winning four on hard surfaces and losing two on clay to Nadal. Federer, however, consistently pushed Nadal to the limit on clay throughout the season taking him to fourth-set tiebreakers in Monte-Carlo and Paris, and a thrilling match in Rome that went to a deciding fifth-set tiebreaker.

Federer won one ATP 500 series event in Tokyo and captured the year-end championships for the third time in his career, again finishing the year as world No. 1. Federer only lost to two players during 2006, to Nadal four times in finals, and to 19-year-old Andy Murray in the second round of the 2006 Cincinnati Masters, in what was Federer&#x27;s only defeat before the final of a tournament that year. Federer finished the season on a 29-match winning streak, as well as winning 48 of his last 49 matches after the French Open.

Near the end of the season, he won his hometown tournament, the Swiss Indoors in Basel, Switzerland for the first time, having finished runner up in 2000 and 2001, and missing the tournament in 2004 and 2005 due to injuries.

====2007: Holding off young rivals====

In 2007, Federer reached all four Grand Slam singles finals, winning three of them again. At the Australian Open, he became the first man since Björn Borg in 1980 to win a major without dropping a set, beating Fernando González in the final. Federer captured his fourth Dubai crown to extend his winning streak to 41 matches, the longest of his career and only five shy of the all-time record. Federer then entered Indian Wells as the three-time defending champion, but his streak ended in controversy when he was defeated by Guillermo Cañas, who had failed a drug test for illegal doping. This surprising first-round loss marked the first time that he was defeated since August 2006, a period spanning over seven months.

During the clay season, Federer snapped Nadal&#x27;s 81-match winning streak on clay, an Open-era record, in the final of the Hamburg Masters after turning the match around from a set down, including a final set bagel. This win convinced some that Federer could win the French Open to become the first man in almost 40 years to hold all four majors simultaneously, but instead he lost in a four-set final to Nadal again. At Wimbledon, Federer defeated Nadal for a second consecutive year in the final, this time in a thrilling five-set encounter that many analysts hailed as the greatest Wimbledon final since 1980. This victory equaled him with Björn Borg for the record of five consecutive Wimbledon championships.

At the Canada Masters, Federer lost in the final to Novak Djokovic in a final-set tiebreaker upset. Federer rebounded in Cincinnati to capture his fifth title of the year. Federer entered the US Open as the three-time defending champion and faced Djokovic in the final. This time, Federer prevailed in a close straight-set match. This victory moved him ahead of Laver and Borg for third on the all-time list of major championship victories. He closed out the year with victories in Basel and the year-end championships in Shanghai.

He finished the season as the year-end No. 1 for the fourth year in a row, compiling an impressive 68–9 record. After his phenomenal triple Grand Slam season yet again, Federer became the only player in history to win three majors in a year for three years (2004, 2006, 2007). It was the third consecutive season that Federer held the No. 1 ranking for all 52 weeks of the year.

====2008: Illness, Olympic gold, and fifth US Open====

Federer&#x27;s success in 2008 was severely hampered by a lingering bout of mononucleosis, which he suffered during the first half of the year. At the Australian Open Federer lost in the semifinals to eventual winner Djokovic, which ended his record of 10 consecutive finals. He lost twice in Masters finals on clay to Nadal, at Monte Carlo and Hamburg. Federer captured three titles playing in 250-level events at Estoril, Halle, and Basel. Federer was defeated by Nadal in two Grand Slam finals, the French Open and Wimbledon, which was regarded as the best match of tennis history by many, when he was going for six straight wins to break Björn Borg&#x27;s record. He came back from two sets down to force a fifth set, where he fell just two points from the title.

At the Olympic Games, Federer and Stan Wawrinka won the gold medal in doubles by beating the Bryan brothers American team in the semifinals and the Swedish duo of Simon Aspelin and Thomas Johansson in the final. However, Federer could reach only the quarterfinals in the singles draw, bowing out to then No. 8 James Blake, thus ceding his No. 1 ranking to Nadal after being at the top for a record 237 consecutive weeks. Federer captured his only Grand Slam of 2008 at the US Open, defeating Andy Murray in the final.

At the end of the year, Federer suffered a back injury, which caused him to withdraw from the Paris Masters and resulted in a poor showing at the year-end championship, where he was eliminated in the round-robin stage. This marked the only time in his career that he was eliminated before the semifinals. Federer ended the year ranked No. 2.

====2009: Career Grand Slam and major title record====
Federer began the 2009 season with a loss to Nadal in the final of the Australian Open in a hotly contested five-set match. Federer struggled following the defeat in Melbourne and entered the clay season without a title.
Federer&#x27;s season turned around in the final Masters event of the clay season when he defeated Nadal on clay for only the second time to capture the Madrid Masters. After Nadal&#x27;s unexpected defeat to Robin Söderling, Federer became the overwhelming favorite to win the elusive French Open. In his next match, he came from two sets and break point down in the third set to defeat Tommy Haas in five sets. He also fought back from a two-sets-to-one deficit against a young Juan Martín del Potro to win a five-setter in the semifinals. In the final, he defeated Söderling in straight sets to finally capture the Coupe des Mousquetaires and career Grand Slam. This victory also tied him with Pete Sampras for the most Grand Slam singles titles at 14.

In Wimbledon, Federer faced long-time rival Andy Roddick in the final in what was their eighth and final meeting at a Grand Slam. The final was historic for being the longest Grand Slam final in terms of games played with Federer prevailing 16–14 in a record-setting fifth set, thus winning his 15th Grand Slam singles title and breaking the all-time record of Pete Sampras. Federer continued his summer run by winning his third Cincinnati Masters, defeating Novak Djokovic in the final. For the third consecutive year, Federer defeated Djokovic in the semifinals of the US Open. On the penultimate point, he hit what many consider to be the greatest shot of his career, a tweener winner, to set up match points. Federer was defeated by del Potro in the final despite falling just two points from the title in the fourth set.

Federer finished the season as the year-end No. 1 for the fifth time in his career.

===2010s===

====2010: Fourth Australian Open====
Federer started the year with a win at the Australian Open, where he defeated Andy Murray in the final, extending the Grand Slam singles record to sixteen titles and matching Andre Agassi&#x27;s record of four Australian Open titles. Since 2005 Wimbledon, Federer had made 18 out of 19 finals in Grand Slam tournaments, a period of sustained excellence unparalleled in the Open Era. This tournament, however, marked the end of his dominance at the majors.

At the French Open, Federer won his 700th tour match and 150th tour match on clay. However, he failed to reach a Grand Slam semifinal for the first time since the 2004 French Open, losing to Söderling in the quarterfinals and relinquishing his No. 1 ranking, having been just one week away from equaling Pete Sampras&#x27;s record of 286 weeks as world No. 1. In a huge upset at Wimbledon, Federer lost in the quarterfinals again to Tomáš Berdych and fell to No. 3 in the rankings for the first time in six years and eight months.

Towards the middle of July, Federer hired Pete Sampras&#x27;s old coach, Paul Annacone, on a trial basis to put his tennis game and career back on track. At the US Open, Federer reached the semifinals, where he lost a five-set match to Novak Djokovic after holding two match points. Federer reached four Masters finals prevailing against Mardy Fish at Cincinnati.

Federer finished the year in strong form, winning indoor titles at the Stockholm Open, Swiss Indoors and the ATP Finals in London, beating Djokovic and Nadal in the finals of the latter two. It remains the only tournament in his career in which Federer defeated all fellow members of the Big Four. In 2010, Federer finished in the top two for the eighth consecutive season.

====2011: Tour Finals title record====

The year 2011 was a lean year for Federer, although great by most player&#x27;s standards. He was defeated in straight sets in the semifinals of the Australian Open by eventual champion Novak Djokovic. At the French Open semifinals, Federer ended Djokovic&#x27;s undefeated streak of 43 consecutive wins with a four-set victory, but he then lost in the final to Rafael Nadal. At Wimbledon, Federer lost in the quarterfinals to Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. It marked the first time in his career that he had lost a Grand Slam match after winning the first two sets.

At the US Open, Federer lost in the semifinals to Novak Djokovic in five sets after winning the first two sets for the second time in 2011. In a repeat of the previous year&#x27;s semifinal event, Federer again squandered two match points, this time on his own serve. The loss meant that it was the first time since 2002 that Federer had not won any of the four Grand Slam titles.

Federer finished the season successfully in the indoor season, winning his last three tournaments of the year at the Swiss Indoors, Paris Masters and ATP Finals, forming a 16-match winning streak. Federer finished the year ranked No. 3.

====2012: Wimbledon title, return to No. 1, and Olympic silver====

Federer began the 2012 season by reaching the semifinal of the Australian Open, which he lost to Nadal. He then won the Rotterdam Open for the first time since 2005, defeating del Potro in the final. In the Dubai Championships, he defeated Murray in the final. Federer then won the Indian Wells Masters after defeating Nadal in the semifinals, and John Isner in the final.

Federer went on to compete at the Madrid Masters on the new blue clay surface, where he beat Tomáš Berdych in the final, thus regaining the No. 2 ranking from Rafael Nadal. In the French Open, Federer reached the semifinals before losing to Djokovic in straight sets, in a rematch of the previous year&#x27;s semifinal.

At Wimbledon, Federer played a five-set match in the third round against Julien Benneteau on his way to winning the tournament, defeating Djokovic in the semifinals and then Murray in a four-set final to win his seventh Wimbledon championship, tying Sampras&#x27; Open Era record. With this victory, Federer returned to the top spot in the world rankings and, in doing so, broke Sampras&#x27; record of 286 weeks atop the list. In the 2012 Summer Olympics, Federer defeated Del Potro in a 4-hour 26-minute semifinal by winning 19–17 in the third and final set. Clearly exhausted from his clash with Del Potro, Federer then lost the final to Murray in a surprisingly lopsided match, thus winning a silver medal for his country.

In August, Federer won the Cincinnati Masters, beating Djokovic in the final. In the US Open, Federer was defeated by Tomáš Berdych in the quarterfinals. At the Shanghai Masters, after defeating Wawrinka in the third round, Federer confirmed his 300th week at No. 1, thus becoming the first player to reach this milestone. Federer ended the season by reaching the final of the ATP Finals, where he lost to Djokovic.

====2013: Injury struggles and fall in rankings====

Federer developed back injuries in March and July and his ranking dropped from No. 2 to No. 6. Federer&#x27;s first and only title of 2013 came at the Gerry Weber Open, defeating Mikhail Youzhny in the final. With the victory in Halle, he tied John McEnroe for the third-most ATP titles won by a male player in the Open Era. Federer, however, was unable to maintain his form into Wimbledon, suffering his worst Grand Slam tournament defeat since 2003 in the second round against Sergiy Stakhovsky. This loss ended Federer&#x27;s record streak of 36 consecutive quarterfinals at Grand Slam tournaments, and it also meant that he would drop out of the top 4 for the first time since July 2003.

After Wimbledon, Federer continued to be upset early in tournaments in Hamburg and Gstaad because of a serious back injury through October, when he announced that he was parting ways with Paul Annacone, his coach for the last three years. Federer made the final in Basel, succumbing to Juan Martín del Potro in three sets, and indicated it was a mistake to have played certain tournaments while suffering from a back injury.

On 27 December 2013, Federer announced that Stefan Edberg was joining his team as co-coach with Severin Lüthi.

====2014: Davis Cup glory====

At the Australian Open, Federer defeated Tsonga and Murray to reach his 11th consecutive semifinal in Melbourne, before losing to Rafael Nadal in straight sets. At the Dubai Championships, he defeated Djokovic in the semifinals and Berdych in the final to win his sixth Dubai crown. Federer then reached the Indian Wells final, but lost to Djokovic in a final-set tiebreaker. The emergence of countryman Stanislas Wawrinka as a Grand Slam singles champion in 2014 renewed hope for Federer in his Davis Cup quest, and the pair both committed to playing each tie in the Davis Cup. Their commitment paid off as wins over Serbia, Kazakhstan (in which Federer won the first deciding rubber of his Davis Cup career), and Italy allowed the Swiss team to advance to the final for the first time since 1992.

During the clay season, Federer took a wild card into the Monte-Carlo Masters, defeating Djokovic on his way to the final, which he lost to Wawrinka. At the Halle Open, Federer reached both the singles and the doubles finals, beating Alejandro Falla in the singles final. At Wimbledon, Federer reached a record ninth final, but he was defeated by Djokovic in an epic five-set match.

Federer reached the final of the Canadian Open, where he was defeated by Tsonga. Federer then defeated Spain&#x27;s David Ferrer in three sets to capture his sixth Cincinnati crown. He then reached the semifinals at the US Open but lost in straight sets to eventual champion Marin Čilić.

At Shanghai Masters, Federer saved five match points against Leonardo Mayer in the second round before defeating Djokovic in the semifinals to end his 28-match unbeaten run on Chinese soil. He then beat Gilles Simon to win his second Shanghai final. The victory saw Federer return to the No. 2 ranking for the first time since May 2013. Federer then won the Swiss Indoors for a record sixth title, defeating David Goffin in the final. Federer also reached the finals of the 2014 ATP Finals to face Djokovic again, but withdrew from the final because of another back injury.

Despite his injury, Federer finished the season on a high by defeating Richard Gasquet to clinch the Davis Cup for Switzerland for the first time in its history. The final was held at the Stade Pierre-Mauroy in Lille, France, attracting over 27,000 spectators per match; this broke attendance record for the highest ever officially sanctioned competition tennis match.

====2015: 1,000th victory and finals at the US Open and Wimbledon====

Federer started his 2015 season by winning the Brisbane International, defeating Milos Raonic in the final, thereby becoming only the third man in the Open Era to have 1,000 or more wins, joining Jimmy Connors and Ivan Lendl, as well as the first man in the Open Era to win at least one title in each of 15 consecutive years. At the Dubai Championships, Federer successfully defended his title with a straight-set victory over Djokovic in the final. He then reached the Indian Wells final, which he lost to defending champion Djokovic.

In May, Federer won the inaugural Istanbul Open clay-court tournament, ending a title drought on red clay since the 2009 French Open. He then reached the Italian Open final, but was unable to win his first title there, losing to Djokovic in the final. In the French Open, he lost in the quarterfinals by the eventual champion Stan Wawrinka. As the new expanded grass season began, Federer won his record eighth Gerry Weber Open and became only the third man in the Open Era to win a title eight times. At Wimbledon, Federer defeated Murray in straight sets in the semifinals to advance to his tenth Wimbledon final, which he lost to Djokovic in four sets in a rematch of the previous year&#x27;s final.

Federer defeated Murray and Djokovic in straight sets to win the Cincinnati Masters for the seventh time. This marked the first time that Federer defeated the top two players in the world at the same event. At the US Open, he advanced to his first final there since 2009 without dropping a set, including a win over Stan Wawrinka in the semifinals. In the final, he was once again beaten by top seed Djokovic in four sets. Federer then won the Swiss Indoors, defeating Nadal in the final.

In December, Federer announced that Stefan Edberg would be replaced by Croatian former world No. 3 player Ivan Ljubičić, with countryman Severin Lüthi remaining his head coach. Federer revealed that Edberg originally signed on to the coaching team for one season only in 2014 but agreed to stay on in 2015.

====2016: Knee surgery, back injury, and long recovery hiatus====

Federer started his season in the Brisbane International as the defending champion. However, in a rematch of the previous year&#x27;s final, he lost in the final to Milos Raonic in straight sets. At the Australian Open, he lost in the semifinals to eventual champion Novak Djokovic in four sets. The day after his loss to Djokovic, Federer sustained a knee injury and in early February, he underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair a torn meniscus in his knee and missed the tournaments in Rotterdam, Dubai, and Indian Wells in February and March. Due to a stomach virus, he had to withdraw from the Miami Open, thus prolonging his time on the sidelines.

Federer made his comeback at the Monte-Carlo Masters, losing in the quarterfinals to Tsonga in three sets. He then participated in the Italian Open where he lost in the third round to Dominic Thiem. His withdrawal from the French Open broke a record run of 65 consecutive participations in the main draw of Grand Slam tournaments, stretching back to the 2000 Australian Open.

Still suffering from recurring knee pain during the grass season, he lost in the semifinals of Stuttgart and Halle. In Wimbledon, Federer came back from two sets down to defeat Marin Čilić in the quarterfinals, equalling Jimmy Connors&#x27;s all-time records of 11 Wimbledon semifinals and 84 match wins. He then suffered his first defeat in a Wimbledon semifinal in a five-set loss to Raonic, re-injuring his knee in the fifth set.

On 26 July, Federer announced that he would miss the Summer Olympics and the remainder of the 2016 season to recover fully from his knee injury. The sudden withdrawal not only implied that 2016 would be Federer&#x27;s first season since 2000 in which he failed to win a title, but it also meant that he would have to drop out of the top ten for the first time in fourteen years. This, combined with a grand slam drought spanning over four years, led to many analysts believing that his outstanding career was finally coming to an end and that he would never win any major titles again.

====2017: Renaissance with Australian Open and Wimbledon titles====

Federer&#x27;s 2017 season marked a return to Grand Slam wins since 2012, the most titles since 2007, and the highest win percentage since 2006. Statistically, this season was his best since 2007.

His withdrawal from most of the 2016 season led his ranking to slip to No. 17 at the start of the season, his lowest in over fifteen years. At the Australian Open, Federer defeated top-10 players Tomáš Berdych and Kei Nishikori on his way to the semifinals, making Federer the oldest man to compete in a grand slam semifinal since Jimmy Connors in 1991. There, he defeated Wawrinka in five sets, making him the oldest player to compete in a Grand Slam final since Ken Rosewall in 1974. Coming back from a break down in the fifth set, Federer defeated Rafael Nadal to win his first major since 2012. The final also marked Federer&#x27;s 100th match at the Australian Open, and Federer&#x27;s first-ever Grand Slam victory over Nadal outside of the grass courts. With this victory, he also re-entered the top ten.

In March, Federer won his 90th career title at Indian Wells, defeating Wawrinka in the final. In Miami, Federer defeated Nadal in the final in straight sets and climbed to No. 4 in the ATP rankings. This marked the third time Federer had won the Sunshine Double.

Due to concerns about his longevity, Federer decided that he would skip the entire clay-court season. He returned to the tour at Stuttgart, where he suffered a shock defeat to Tommy Haas in the second round despite holding match points, the lowest-ranked player (No. 302) to beat him since No. 407 Bjoern Phau in 1999. He rebounded the following week by winning a record-extending ninth title at the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, doing so without the loss of a set. Federer then won Wimbledon without dropping a set, defeating Marin Čilić in the final to win a record-breaking eighth Wimbledon title and his record-extending 19th major title overall, becoming the oldest male player to win Wimbledon in the Open era. Federer became the second man in the Open era to win Wimbledon without dropping a set after Björn Borg in 1976.

At the opening of the summer hard court swing, Federer lost the final of the Canada Masters to Alexander Zverev after injuring his back during the match. Due to the injury, he opted to withdraw from the Cincinnati Masters to be fit for the US Open. However, Federer lost to Juan Martín del Potro in the quarterfinals at the US Open.

In September, Federer represented Team Europe in the inaugural Laver Cup, a tournament that he had founded. Federer won both his singles matches against Sam Querrey and Nick Kyrgios, defeating the latter in the champion&#x27;s tiebreak (saving a match point) to seal the cup for Europe. The tournament was also notable for Federer playing doubles with long-time rival Rafael Nadal for the first time, defeating the Team World duo of Querrey and Jack Sock. With three wins and seven points, Federer was the most accomplished player of the tournament.

At the Shanghai Masters Federer captured his third Masters title of the season, defeating No. 1 Rafael Nadal in the final. This was Federer&#x27;s fifth straight victory over Nadal in their rivalry and his 94th career title, drawing him level with 2nd-placed Ivan Lendl. Federer then defeated Juan Martín del Potro in the final of the Swiss Indoors to surpass Ivan Lendl in number of career titles. Federer qualified for the 2017 ATP Finals, but was beaten by David Goffin in the semifinals in three sets.

====2018: 20th major title and oldest No. 1====
Federer started his season by winning his second Hopman Cup title, this time partnering with Belinda Bencic, after having won previously in 2001 with Martina Hingis. The Swiss team won all its ties and Federer won every match he played, defeating the German pair, Alexander Zverev and Angelique Kerber, in the final 2–1. At the Australian Open, Federer reached the final without dropping a set, and successfully defended his title beating Marin Čilić in a five-set final. It was Federer&#x27;s sixth title at the Australian Open, equaling the then record held by Roy Emerson and Novak Djokovic, which was surpassed by Djokovic in 2019. He also became the first man to win twenty Grand Slam titles. It was also the first time since the 2008 US Open that Federer successfully defended a major title.

In mid-February, Federer defeated Grigor Dimitrov to win his third Rotterdam Open title and return to No. 1 in the ATP rankings. At 36 years and 195 days of age, he became the oldest ATP world No. 1 by more than three years, a record that stood until Novak Djokovic broke the record in 2024. He also broke the ATP record for the longest span between two successive reigns at No. 1 at 5 years and 106 days. In March, Federer entered the Indian Wells Masters, where he defeated Chung Hyeon in the semifinals for a career-best start to a season at 17–0, beating his previous best start at 16–0 in 2006. Despite holding three championship points, Federer was defeated by Juan Martín del Potro in a close three-set final. After a second-round exit to Thanasi Kokkinakis in Miami, Federer announced that he would miss the clay court season, including the French Open, for the second consecutive season, thus allowing Nadal to regain his No. 1 ranking.

In June, Federer regained the No. 1 ranking at the Stuttgart Open, which he won after defeating Milos Raonic in the final. However, he lost his No. 1 ranking for the last time in the following week when he failed to defend his Halle Open title, losing in the final to Borna Ćorić in three sets. At Wimbledon, Federer was seeded first at a Grand Slam for the first time since the 2012 US Open, but he lost in the quarterfinals to Kevin Anderson in five sets, despite being two sets up and having a match point in the third.

Federer next played in Cincinnati, where he lost in the final to Novak Djokovic, who won a record Career Golden Masters. The loss ended Federer&#x27;s run of 100 consecutive service holds and 14-match winning streak in Cincinnati. At the US Open, Federer was upset by John Millman in the 4th round, citing extreme conditions of heat and humidity that took a toll on his body. Federer then played at the Laver Cup where he successfully helped Team Europe defend their title, winning both his singles matches against Nick Kyrgios and John Isner. He also paired up with Djokovic in doubles for the first time in his career, losing their match against Jack Sock and Kevin Anderson in three sets.

At the Swiss Indoors in October, Federer defended his title with a straight-sets win over Marius Copil in the final, winning his 9th title at the event and his 99th career singles title. At the Paris Masters, Federer lost in the semifinals to Djokovic. At the ATP Finals, Federer lost in straight sets to Alexander Zverev in the semifinal.

====2019: Record third Hopman Cup, 100th title, 1,200th match win and 12th Wimbledon final====
Federer opened his campaign by retaining the Hopman Cup alongside Belinda Bencic, becoming the first player to win the mixed-gender event three times. They again defeated Zverev and Kerber of Germany in the final and won the final tie by a tiebreak in the decisive set (5–4). At the Australian Open, Federer was upset by Stefanos Tsitsipas in four close sets. After the match, Federer announced he would play the clay court season for the first time since 2016. At the Dubai Championships, Federer defeated Tsitsipas in straight sets in the final to win his 100th career singles title, thus becoming only the second man after Jimmy Connors to reach the three figure mark in the Open Era. Federer then reached the finals of both Indian Wells, where he lost to Dominic Thiem, and Miami, where he defeated John Isner.

Federer played his first clay court tournament in three years at the Madrid Open, where after securing his 1200th career win in the third round against Gaël Monfils, he lost in the quarterfinals to Dominic Thiem, despite having two match points in the second set. Federer played at the French Open for the first time in 4 years. In the quarterfinals, he avenged his loss to Wawrinka at the same stage of the tournament 4 years ago, but then lost in the semifinals to defending and 11-time champion Nadal.

Federer began his grass court season at the Halle Open where he won his tenth title at the event, defeating David Goffin in the final in straight sets. This marked the first time Federer had won a singles tournament ten times or more. At Wimbledon, Federer defeated Nadal in their 40th and final professional meeting to reach his record 12th final at the tournament. This was also the first time Federer played Nadal at Wimbledon since the 2008 Wimbledon final, and at , Federer became the oldest man to reach a major final since Ken Rosewall in the 1974 US Open. Federer then faced Djokovic in the final, against whom he lost in a five-set thriller lasting 4 hours and 57 minutes, despite having two championship points on serve in the fifth set. The match also marked the first time a fifth set tiebreaker was played at 12 games all and was the longest final in Wimbledon history.

Federer next played at the Cincinnati Masters and reached the third round where he lost in straight sets to Andrey Rublev. This was his quickest defeat in 16 years, taking just 62 minutes. At the US Open, Federer lost in the quarterfinals to No. 78 Grigor Dimitrov in five sets. At the Laver Cup in Geneva, Federer won singles matches against Kyrgios and Isner to help the European team capture their third consecutive title. At the Shanghai Masters, Federer lost in the quarterfinals to Alexander Zverev. At the Swiss Indoors, Federer played the 1500th match of his career in the first round, beating Peter Gojowczyk in less than an hour. In the final, he defeated Alex de Minaur in straight sets for a record-extending tenth Swiss Indoors title. At the ATP Finals, Federer rebounded from an opening match loss to Dominic Thiem to defeat Matteo Berrettini and Djokovic (his first win over Djokovic since 2015) in straight sets to qualify for the semifinals. He then lost the semifinal to Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets.

===2020s===

====2020–2022: Final years====
Federer began his 2020 season at the Australian Open, where he reached the semifinals after saving seven match points in his five-set quarterfinal win over Tennys Sandgren. Federer then lost his semifinal match to Djokovic in straight sets, having sustained a groin injury earlier in the tournament. In February, Federer underwent arthroscopic surgery for a right knee injury and subsequently withdrew from the Dubai Championships, Indian Wells, Miami Open and the French Open to give time for his knee to recover for the grass season. On 10 June, due to a setback from his initial rehabilitation from the knee injury, Federer announced that he had to have an additional arthroscopic procedure on his right knee, vowing to return in 2021. This was only the second year in Federer&#x27;s career since he won his first title that he finished without a title.

In January 2021, Federer withdrew from the Australian Open due to still recovering from knee surgery and strict COVID-19 quarantine measures in Australia. On 8 March, Novak Djokovic surpassed him for the most career weeks spent as the ATP number 1 ranked player. On 10 March, he made his return to the ATP Tour at the Qatar Open, where he won his first ATP match in 14 months against Dan Evans before losing to Nikoloz Basilashvili in the quarterfinals. At the French Open, Federer withdrew from the tournament before his fourth-round match citing knee problems, giving a walkover to Matteo Berrettini. In Halle, he lost in the second round to Félix Auger-Aliassime, with their 19-year age difference being the biggest in Federer&#x27;s 1,521 career matches.

At Wimbledon, the nearly 40-year-old Federer became the oldest Wimbledon quarterfinalist in the Open Era, breaking the record held by Ken Rosewall, but he was then upset by 14th seed Hubert Hurkacz in straight sets. This was the first time in 19 years at Wimbledon he had lost in straight sets, and only the second time he had lost a set 6–0 in the 21st century (the previous occasion was against Nadal in the 2008 French Open final). On 15 August, Federer announced that he underwent another knee surgery after a further injury during the grass-court season. He withdrew from the US Open, but he hoped to make a return to the tour in 2022.

Federer did not play in a singles tournament after Wimbledon 2021, and dropped out of the top 50 on 13 June 2022. On 11 July 2022, he became unranked for the first time since his professional debut. However, Federer announced that he was set to return to the tour at the 2022 Laver Cup in September. On 15 September 2022, he announced his impending retirement from professional tennis on the ATP Tour, noting that the Laver Cup would be his final ATP event. He stated that he &quot;will play more tennis in the future, of course, but just not in Grand Slams or on the tour.&quot; His final match resulted in a three-set loss in doubles partnering long-time rival and friend Rafael Nadal against Jack Sock and Frances Tiafoe. The match was his 1750th on the tour.

==Rivalries==
===Federer vs. Nadal===
Federer and Rafael Nadal played each other 40 times, with Nadal winning 24 of their matches and Federer winning 16. Federer performed better than Nadal on grass (winning three matches to Nadal&#x27;s one) and on hard courts (winning 11 matches to Nadal&#x27;s nine), while Nadal dominated the matchup on clay (winning 14 matches to Federer&#x27;s two). Because tournament seedings are based on rankings, 24 of their matches were in tournament finals, included an all-time record nine major finals (tied with Djokovic–Nadal matches). Federer and Nadal played each other from 2004 to 2019, and their rivalry is a significant part of both men&#x27;s careers. The last encounter was at the 2019 Wimbledon Championships, where Federer won to reach the final.

Federer and Nadal held the top two rankings on the ATP Tour from July 2005 until 17 August 2009, when Nadal fell to No. 3 (Andy Murray became the new No. 2), and again from 11 September 2017 until 15 October 2018 (Novak Djokovic became the new No. 2). They are the only pair of men to have ever finished six consecutive calendar years at the top. Federer was ranked No. 1 for a record 237 consecutive weeks beginning in February 2004. Nadal, who is five years younger, ascended to No. 2 in July 2005 and held it for 160 consecutive weeks, before surpassing Federer in August 2008.

From 2006 to 2008, Federer and Nadal played each other in every French Open final and every Wimbledon final. They then met in the 2009 Australian Open final, the 2011 French Open final and the 2017 Australian Open final. Nadal won six of the nine, losing the first two Wimbledon finals and the second Australian Open final. Four of these finals were five-set matches (2007 and 2008 Wimbledon, 2009 and 2017 Australian Open), with the 2008 Wimbledon final being lauded as the greatest match ever by many long-time tennis analysts.

===Federer vs. Djokovic===
Federer and Novak Djokovic played one another 50 times, with Djokovic winning 27 matches and Federer winning 23. They are tied 4–4 on clay, while Federer trails 18–20 on hard-courts and 1–3 on grass. The Federer–Djokovic rivalry is the second most prolific rivalry in men&#x27;s major history; Federer and Djokovic played each other 17 times at Grand Slam tournaments, while Djokovic and Nadal have played each other 18 times at Grand Slam tournaments.

Federer and Djokovic first played each other in a Grand Slam final at the 2007 US Open where No. 1 Federer emerged victorious in straight sets. Federer ended Djokovic&#x27;s 28 straight wins in China at the 2014 Shanghai Open, and he also ended Djokovic&#x27;s perfect 41–0 start to the 2011 season in the semifinals of the French Open, but Djokovic avenged this loss at the 2011 US Open in five sets after saving two match points against Federer for the second straight year. In the semifinals of the 2012 Wimbledon, Federer beat defending champion and No. 1 Djokovic in four sets. The two played three Wimbledon finals in 2014, 2015, and 2019, with Djokovic emerging victorious in all of them and even saving two match points in the latter final, which lasted almost 5 hours. The pair also met in the final of the 2015 US Open and once more Djokovic prevailed in four sets. Some experts have included the rivalry between Federer and Djokovic as one of the best rivalries in the Open Era.

===Federer vs. Murray===
Federer and Andy Murray played each other 25 times, with Federer winning 14 matches and Murray winning 11. Federer leads 12–10 on hard courts and 2–1 on grass; the two never met on clay. After Federer won the first professional match they played, Murray dominated the first half of the rivalry, leading 8–5 in 2010, while the second half of the rivalry was dominated by Federer, who leads 9–3 from 2011 onwards. The two have met six times at the majors, with Federer leading 5–1. Their first three major matches were finals, with Federer winning all three of these matches; at the 2008 US Open and the 2010 Australian Open, both of which he won in straight sets, and at the 2012 Wimbledon Championships in which Murray took the opening set, but went on to lose in four sets.

Federer and Murray met in the final of the 2012 Summer Olympics, in which Murray defeated Federer in straight sets, denying Federer a career Golden Slam. Murray also leads 6–3 in ATP 1000 tournaments, 2–0 in finals. They have also met five times at the ATP Finals, with Murray winning in Shanghai in 2008, and Federer in London in 2009, 2010, 2012, and 2014.

===Federer vs. Roddick===

Federer and Andy Roddick played each other 24 times, and Federer won their head-to-head matchup 21 matches to three. Roddick lost his No. 1 ranking to Federer after Federer won his first Australian Open in 2004. Their rivalry included four Grand Slam event finals (three at Wimbledon and one at the US Open), all of which were won by Federer. Roddick himself said that the Federer-Roddick rivalry was not much of a rivalry because it was so one-sided.

===Other rivalries===
Federer and Lleyton Hewitt played 27 times, with Federer winning 18 of their matches and Hewitt winning nine. Other head-to-head matchups include Federer-David Nalbandian (Federer won 11 matches to Nalbandian&#x27;s eight) Federer-Marat Safin (Federer won 10 matches to Safin&#x27;s two), Federer-Andre Agassi (Federer won eight matches to Agassi&#x27;s three), Federer-Stan Wawrinka (Federer won 23 matches to Wawrinka&#x27;s three), Federer-Juan Martín del Potro (Federer won 18 matches to del Potro&#x27;s seven), Federer-Tomáš Berdych (Federer won 20 matches to Berdych&#x27;s six), and Federer-Jo-Wilfried Tsonga (Federer won 12 matches to Tsonga&#x27;s six).

==Legacy==

Federer has won the third most Grand Slam tournament titles (20), trailing Rafael Nadal (22) and Novak Djokovic (24). He has been in 31 major finals (the second most after Djokovic), including a record ten consecutive Grand Slam tournament finals. He has earned a men&#x27;s doubles gold medal, and a men&#x27;s singles silver medal at the Olympics in 2008 and 2012, respectively. He won a record eight Wimbledon titles, including a joint-record five in a row, and he won an Open Era joint-record five US Open titles, including a record five in a row. He has held the world No. 1 spot in the ATP rankings for the second-longest amount of time for a male player (310 weeks). Federer was ranked among the top eight players in the world continuously for 14 years and two weeks — from 14 October 2002 until 31 October 2016, when injuries forced him to skip much of the 2016 season.

Federer has won the ATP Player of the Year five times (2004–07, 2009), and has been named the ITF World Champion five times (2004–07, 2009). He has been voted by his peers to receive the tour Sportsmanship Award a record 13 times (2004–09, 2011–17) and voted by tennis fans to receive the ATP Fans&#x27; Favorite award for 19 consecutive years (2003–21). — both indicative of respect and popularity. He also won the Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year Award twice (2006, 2013), the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year award five times (2005–08, 2018), the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year a record four times, and the Laureus World Comeback of the Year award once, following his 2017 comeback season. He has been named the Swiss Sports Personality of the Year a record seven times.

Federer has huge popularity in the world of sport, and is considered by many to be the greatest tennis player of all time. Between 2009 and 2018, many players and analysts considered him to be the greatest player ever. He was also called the greatest athlete of his generation by some sports reporters after he won his 19th and 20th major titles. In 2005, Rod Laver described Federer as an &quot;unbelievable talent&quot;, &quot;capable of anything&quot;, and that &quot;he could be the greatest tennis player of all time&quot;. When he finally won the French Open in 2009, former world No. 1s Björn Borg and Pete Sampras both hailed him as &quot;the greatest player that played the game&quot;, though in 2021 Sampras said the greatest was now Djokovic. Federer himself has downplayed these claims, stating in 2012 that it is impossible to compare tennis players from different eras and that past champions are needed to pave the way for future champions.

In 2014, Frank Sedgman ranked Federer number two, behind Jack Kramer, in his greatest male tennis players of all-time list in his autobiography &#x27;Game, Sedge and Match&#x27;. In 2018, Tennis.com listed him as the greatest male player of the Open Era. In May 2020, the Tennis Channel ranked Federer as the greatest male tennis player of all time. In May 2021, Serena Williams described Federer as a &quot;genius&quot; and the &quot;greatest&quot;. In July 2021, BBC Sport users picked Federer as the greatest male tennis player of all time. During an interview with &quot;L&#x27;Équipe&quot; in July 2021, Richard Gasquet said &#x27;aesthetics and grace&#x27; are more important than the number of Grand Slam titles when it comes to deciding who is the greatest. He named Federer, Djokovic and Nadal as the three best players in history, but singled out Roger Federer as the greatest.

Federer helped to lead a revival in tennis known by many as the Golden Age, leading to increased interest in the sport and higher revenues for many tennis venues. Rising revenues led to exploding prize money: When Federer first won the Australian Open in 2004, he earned $985,000. When he won in 2018, the prize had increased to AUD 4million.

==Player profile==
===Playing style===
Federer&#x27;s versatility has been described by Jimmy Connors as follows: &quot;In an era of specialists, you&#x27;re either a clay court specialist, a grass court specialist, or a hard court specialist... or you&#x27;re Roger Federer.&quot;
An elite athlete, Federer was an all-court, all-around player known for his speed, fluid style of play, and exceptional shot-making. Federer mainly played from the baseline but was also comfortable at the net, being one of the best volleyers in the game. He had a powerful, accurate smash, very effectively performed rare elements of professional tennis, such as the backhand smash and skyhook, half-volley, jump smash (slam dunk) and an aggressive serve return known affectionately as SABR (Sneak Attack By Roger, a half-volley attack on an opponent&#x27;s second serve). The writer, David Foster Wallace, compared the brute force of Federer&#x27;s forehand motion with that of &quot;a great liquid whip&quot;, while John McEnroe referred to Federer&#x27;s forehand as &quot;the greatest shot in our sport&quot;.

Federer played with a single-handed backhand, which gave him great variety. He employed the slice, occasionally using it to lure his opponent to the net and deliver a passing shot. Federer could also fire topspin winners and possessed a &quot;flick&quot; backhand with which he could generate pace with his wrist; the &quot;flick&quot; backhand was usually used to pass opponents who came to the net. He averaged 90% of service games won throughout his career, often coming up victorious in clutch or pressure service games. His serve was difficult to read, as he always used a similar ball toss regardless of what type of serve he was going to hit and where he aimed to hit it. He was often able to produce big serves on key points in a match. His first serve averaged about 200km/h (125mph), but he was capable of serving at 220km/h (137mph). Federer was also accomplished at serve and volleying, and employed this tactic frequently in his early career.

Later in his career, Federer added the drop shot to his arsenal and could perform a well-disguised drop shot off both wings. He sometimes used a between-the-legs shot, which is colloquially referred to as a &quot;tweener&quot; or &quot;hotdog&quot;. His most notable use of the tweener was in the semifinals of the 2009 US Open against Novak Djokovic, bringing him triple match point. Federer is one of the top players who successfully employed the &quot;squash shot&quot;. After Stefan Edberg joined his coaching team at the start of the 2014 season, Federer played a more offensive game, attacking the net more often and improving his volleys. In the lead-up to the 2015 US Open, Federer successfully added a new unique shot to his arsenal called SABR (Sneak Attack by Roger), in which he charged forward to receive a second serve and hit a return on the service line. With the switch to a bigger 97-inch racket from a 90-inch racquet, Federer gained easier serving and better defense on both wings with fewer shanks; however, he experienced diminished control and power on his forehand, slice backhand and dropshot.

===Demeanor and attitude===
Federer was noted for his cool demeanor and emotional control on the court. Most of his professional game has been characterized by a lack of outbursts or emotional frustration at errors, giving him an advantage over less controlled opponents. In 2016, Federer declared: 

Originally lacking self-control as a junior, he transformed his on-court demeanor to become well-liked for his graciousness. Despite clearly possessing talent from a young age, Federer tended to allow his emotions to get the best of him, causing his game to falter. On some occasions, this emotional state escalated into counter-productive actions such as racket abuse. Rarely a day went by when he would not throw his racquet against the fence in his search to play the &quot;perfect game&quot;. Federer later confessed to having been a hot head at a young age as he often erupted if he hit a dumb shot. Despite this fragile temperament, Federer still impressed his then-coach Adolf Kacovsky, who said that during defeats he never gave up and was willing to learn from his mistakes afterwards. By the time he became professional, Federer had learned to temper his emotions, but still, he struggled to adapt to the work ethic and compromising mindset needed to be a competitive professional player.

In 2007, Rod Laver described him as follows: &quot;One thing is for sure: he&#x27;s the best player of his time and one of the most admirable champions on the planet. That&#x27;s certainly something worth crowing over. The beauty is, Roger Federer won&#x27;t&quot;.

===Coaches===
From ages 8 to 10, Federer received group and individual training from veteran Czech coach Adolf Kacovsky. Reflecting on Federer, Kacovsky said &quot;The private lessons, which were partly funded by the club. Roger was a quick learner. When you wanted to teach him something new, he was able to pick it up after three or four tries, while others in the group needed weeks&quot;. At age 10, Federer began working with Peter Carter. Between the ages of 10 and 14, Federer spent more time with Carter than with his own family, working daily on all aspects of his game. Building on the work done earlier by Kacovsky, Carter helped perfect Federer&#x27;s technique, along with teaching him the strategy and psychology required to play the game to a high level. Federer has credited Carter for his &quot;entire technique and coolness&quot;.

In 1999, when Federer decided to play full-time on the ATP tour, he chose Peter Lundgren rather than Carter as his traveling coach, and they worked together until the end of 2003 before finally splitting. On 1 August 2002, Carter died in a car crash in South Africa. According to his autobiography, when Federer heard the news of Carter’s death, &quot;he was never so upset in his life&quot;, while an Australian newspaper reported that when Federer heard the news, he &quot;left his hotel and ran through the streets, bawling and hysterical&quot;. About Carter&#x27;s funeral, Federer stated: &quot;Any defeat in tennis is nothing compared to such a moment&quot;. His death had a deep impact on Federer, who would even call it &quot;a wake-up call&quot;, before winning his first major in the following year, Wimbledon, which he dedicated to Carter.

Federer&#x27;s playing style has been greatly influenced by his coaches over the years. For instance, he has credited his infamous SABR technique to his coach Severin Lüthi, who encouraged him to develop it and use it in big matches.

His other coaches were Tony Roche (2005–2007), Severin Lüthi (2007–2022), José Higueras (2008), Paul Annacone (2010–2013), Stefan Edberg (2014–2015), and Ivan Ljubičić (2016–2022).

===Equipment===
Federer began the 2014 season by changing rackets for the first time in his career. He switched from his longtime frame of 90 square inches to one measured at 97 square inches. He had long been at a comparative disadvantage in equipment to almost the entire tour, including his top rivals Nadal and Djokovic, who used more powerful frames of between 95 and 100 square inches. After that, Federer played with his signature Wilson Pro Staff RF97 Autograph racquet. It had a 97 square inch head, 16x19 string pattern, 366 gram strung weight, 340 gram swing weight, 68 RA stiffness, and 9 point head light balance. Federer strings his racquets using Wilson Natural Gut 16 gauge for his main strings and Luxilon ALU Power Rough 17 gauge (polyester) for his cross strings. In an interview in November 2017, Federer stated his favorite stringing tension is mains &amp; crosses.

As a junior player, Federer played with a Wilson Pro Staff 6.0 85 square inch head racquet. He switched to a bigger custom-built Wilson 90 square inch head racquet in 2003. His grip size was inches (L3). When asked about string tensions, Federer stated &quot;this depends on how warm the days are and with what kind of balls I play and against who I play. So you can see– it depends on several factors and not just the surface; the feeling I have is most important.&quot;

===Apparel===
Federer first signed with Nike footwear and apparel in 1994. For the 2006 championships at Wimbledon, Nike designed a jacket emblazoned with a crest of three tennis racquets, symbolising the three Wimbledon Championships he had previously won, and which was updated the next year with four racquets after he won the Championship in 2006. At Wimbledon 2008, and again in 2009, Nike continued this trend by making him a personalised cardigan that also had his own logo, an R and an F joined, which was originally designed by his wife, Mirka.

Federer&#x27;s contract with Nike expired in March 2018, and he later signed a deal with Uniqlo. It was reported that Uniqlo signed Federer for roughly $300million for 10 years ($30million per year), as opposed to Nike&#x27;s previous deal with Federer, which was reportedly for roughly $10million per year. Since 2021, Federer has worn tennis shoes produced by On, a Swiss-based athletic shoe and sports apparel manufacturer in which he became a shareholder in November 2019. A limited edition lifestyle shoe named &quot;The Roger&quot; was released by On in July 2020.

==Off the court==
===In popular culture===
Federer was nicknamed the &quot;Federer Express&quot; (shortened to &quot;Fed Express&quot; or &quot;FedEx&quot;), and the &quot;Swiss Maestro&quot;. He was referred to as &quot;King Roger&quot; on occasion. Federer was also called &quot;The Swiss Perfection&quot;, &quot;The Master&quot;, &quot;His Majesty&quot;, among other names. Throughout the 2007 US Open, the American press nicknamed him Darth Federer for his all-black attire (which included tuxedo-striped shorts) and the tournament played &quot;The Imperial March&quot; from &quot;Star Wars&quot; when he was announced onto the court for each of his matches.

Due to his performance on the court and his off-court personality, &#x27;Time&#x27; magazine) named Federer one of the 100 most influential persons in the world in 2007 and 2010. In May 2009, Federer placed 22 positions ahead of US President Barack Obama on Forbes magazine&#x27;s most powerful celebrities list. On winning the 2009 French Open and completing the career Grand Slam, Federer became the first male tennis player to grace the cover of &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; since Andre Agassi in 1999. He was also the first non-American player to appear on the cover of the magazine since Stefan Edberg in 1992. He again made the cover of &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; following his record-breaking 8th Wimbledon title and second Grand Slam of 2017, becoming the first male tennis player to be featured on the cover since his previous appearance in 2009.

In 2011, in the Reputation Institute&#x27;s study of the World&#x27;s most respected, admired, and trusted personalities, Federer ranked No. 2 just behind Nelson Mandela. In July 2016, Federer ranked No. 1 on the list of the most recognizable people from Switzerland, surpassing personalities such as Albert Einstein and William Tell. In a poll of more than 9,000 people from 15 countries, Federer topped the list with 916 votes, 600 more votes than the country&#x27;s national hero, William Tell, who came second with 316 and Einstein who ranked third with 204.

Throughout his career, Federer was featured in several memorable TV ads, such as one for Switzerland&#x27;s largest telecommunications company Sunrise in 2015, for the Italian pasta-maker Barilla in 2019, and for German car giant Mercedes-Benz in 2016 which featured Federer playing the role of various tennis legends, namely Rod Laver, John McEnroe, Andre Agassi and Borg, thus appearing with fake chest hair, golden hair extensions, smashing his racquet and having meltdowns on the court.

In January 2017, Federer was named the Most Marketable Sports Person for 2016 by researchers at the London School of Marketing. He earned £49.2 million in endorsements and sponsorships.

At the 2017 Indian Wells Masters, the trio of Federer, Grigor Dimitrov, and Tommy Haas made headlines for performing the classic 80s song &quot;Hard to Say I&#x27;m Sorry&quot; by American pop group Chicago. Because all of them were one-handed backhand players, the trio were termed the &quot;Backhand Boys&quot;. The performance also featured a cameo from Novak Djokovic, along with Haas&#x27; father-in-law and world-renowned record producer David Foster, playing the piano. Federer can also play the piano, having taken lessons as a child.

In 2018, Federer teamed up with DJ Money Mark and Wilson Tennis for the vinyl release of Federer&#x27;s first non-charting, non-single &quot;Play Your Heart Out&quot;, a song that lays miscellaneous tennis-related sounds over an electronic track. It was all recorded in the Mojave Desert reportedly with Federer&#x27;s new Wilson ProStaff RF97 the sole instrument involved.

In December 2019, Federer was voted by &quot;GQ&quot; readers the Most Stylish Man of the Decade (2010–2019).

In May 2020, Federer became the first tennis player to reach the top of &quot;Forbes&quot; list of highest-paid athletes in the world, with $106.3 million in total earnings from salary, winnings and endorsements. Between 2012 and 2021, he was in the top-10 every year.

On 31 October 2022, a book entitled &quot;The Roger Federer Effect: Rivals, Friends, Fans and How the Maestro Changed their Lives&quot;, written by Simon Cambers and Simon Graf, was published by Pitch. It is a compilation of more than 40 exclusive interviews with players, coaches, rivals, fans, friends, and people from outside tennis, including the world of music, film, and even politics about how Federer changed their lives.

Federer is a big outdoors fan and has posted many of his hiking experiences in the Swiss Alps on social media. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Federer became an unpaid spokesman for Switzerland Tourism. Federer starred in several advertisements for Switzerland Tourism alongside many Hollywood stars. In 2023, Federer starred alongside South African comedian Trevor Noah in another film for Switzerland Tourism, this one titled &quot;The Grand Train Tour of Switzerland: The Ride of a Lifetime&quot;.

A documentary film, titled &quot;&quot;, was released on Amazon Prime Video on 20 June 2024. The film follows the last 12 days of Federer&#x27;s career, culminating with the 2022 Laver Cup.

===Homages and tributes===
Federer has been honored for a multitude of reasons several times throughout his career: In 2012, the city of Halle, in Germany, unveiled &quot;Roger-Federer-Allee&quot; in recognition of Federer&#x27;s success on the grass at the Gerry Weber Open. In 2016, the city of Biel renamed the street in which the national centre for Swiss Tennis where Federer trained as a junior is located, in his honour as &quot;1 Allée Roger Federer&quot;. In October 2021, Basel, the city of his birth, honored Federer with the launch of a new tram named &quot;The Federer Express&quot;, which is adorned with pictures representing iconic moments from his career.

On 24 November 2017, Federer received an honorary doctorate from his home university, the University of Basel, in recognition of his role in increasing the international reputation of Basel and Switzerland, and for his work for children in Africa through his charitable foundation.

In December 2019, Federer became the first living person to be celebrated on Swiss coins. His face will be on the 20-franc coin and in May 2020, Swissmint issued a Federer 50-franc gold coin featuring a different design. This was actually the second time that his image was put on an item of frequent circulation in Switzerland, since in 2007, the Swiss Post in Basel released a special edition stamp for Federer, and three years later, in 2010, Federer was awarded a special edition stamp by Austria&#x27;s Postal Service.

On 20 July 2020, Federer was featured by Swiss National Museum in their 100-part chronicle of Swiss history and culture.

On June 9, 2024, Federer received a Doctorate degree in Humane Letters from Dartmouth, following his commencement address to the Class of 2024. He said: &quot;I just came here to give a speech, but I get to go home as Dr. Roger.&quot;

===Philanthropy===
In 2003, he established the Roger Federer Foundation to help disadvantaged children and to promote their access to education and sport.

Since May 2004, citing his close ties with South Africa (his mother is South African) he has been supporting the South Africa-Swiss charity IMBEWU, which helps children better connect to sports as well as social and health awareness. In 2005, he visited South Africa to meet children who had benefited from his support.

He was appointed a Goodwill Ambassador by UNICEF in April 2006 and has appeared in UNICEF public messages to raise public awareness of AIDS.

At the 2005 Pacific Life Open in Indian Wells, Federer arranged an exhibition with several top players from the ATP and WTA tour called Rally for Relief, whose proceeds went to the victims of the tsunami caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In December 2006, he visited Tamil Nadu, one of the areas in India most affected by the tsunami. Also in 2005, he auctioned his racquet from his US Open championship to aid victims of Hurricane Katrina.

In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Federer arranged a collaboration with fellow top tennis players for a special charity event during the 2010 Australian Open called &#x27;Hit for Haiti&#x27;, whose proceeds went to Haiti earthquake victims. He participated in a follow-up charity exhibition during the 2010 Indian Wells Masters, which raised $1million.

The Nadal vs. Federer &quot;Match for Africa&quot; in 2010 in Zürich and Madrid raised more than $4million for the Roger Federer Foundation and Fundación Rafa Nadal. In January 2011, Federer took part in Rally for Relief, an exhibition to raise money for the victims of the Queensland floods. In 2014, the &quot;Match for Africa 2&quot; between Federer and Stan Wawrinka, again in Zürich, raised £850,000 for education projects in Southern Africa.

In the 2018 &quot;Match for Africa&quot; in San Jose, California, Federer paired up with Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates in a doubles clash against Jack Sock and NBC Today show host Savannah Guthrie. He and Gates won, and notably, Federer even won one point on his knees after returning two shots while on the ground.

===Sponsorships and endorsements===
He is endorsed by Japanese clothing company Uniqlo and Swiss companies , Credit Suisse, On, Rolex, Lindt, Sunrise, and Jura Elektroapparate. In 2008, Federer partnered with German car giant Mercedes-Benz, and in 2010, this endorsement was extended into a global partnership deal. Federer, who has been the brand ambassador for Lindt since 2009, gelled perfectly with the brand&#x27;s fundamental values of Swissness, premiumness, and quality. Federer joined hands with Sunrise, Switzerland&#x27;s largest telecommunications company, in 2014, and since then, they have regularly collaborated to create a slew of interesting campaigns harping on Swiss values of excellence and precision.

His other sponsors include Gillette, Wilson, Barilla, and Moët &amp; Chandon. Previously, he was an ambassador for Nike, NetJets, Emmi AG, and Maurice Lacroix.

===Involvement in football===
He grew up supporting FC Basel and the Swiss national team. In May 2022, when the Swiss national team was preparing to begin their UEFA Nations League campaign against the Czech Republic, Federer made a surprise visit to meet every member of the team, including head coach Murat Yakin at Bad Ragaz, and to unveil Puma’s new jersey for the team ahead of the 2022 FIFA World Cup.

==Personal life==
===Family and children===
Federer is married to former Women&#x27;s Tennis Association player Miroslava Federer (née Vavrinec), whom he met while they were both competing for Switzerland at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. Usually called Mirka, she retired from the tour in 2002 because of a foot injury. They were married at Wenkenhof Villa in Riehen near Basel on 11 April 2009, surrounded by a small group of close friends and family. In 2009, she gave birth to identical twin girls. They had another pair of twins in 2014, this time fraternal twin boys. Their children were baptized in the Catholic faith by Federer&#x27;s distant cousin Monsignor Urban Federer, who is the Abbot of Einsiedeln Abbey.

When they met, Mirka&#x27;s dedication to training far out-stripped his own, since she was training for up to six hours a day while Federer was unable to do the same because he would &quot;lose interest within an hour&quot;. At the time, Federer used to watch her training, but was &quot;more just admiring it rather than thinking I could do the same one day, to be quite honest&quot;. It was quite some time until he developed a similar mentality to that of Mirka&#x27;s.

===Residences===
Federer owns an apartment in Dubai. A major factor in his decision to purchase this property was the hot weather in Dubai, since training at high temperatures would help him to get accustomed to playing in extreme heat. He also owns two properties in his native Switzerland, one of which is a modern ski chalet in the Swiss Alps, and the other a penthouse apartment in Zürich.

Federer is sponsored by Mercedes-Benz and has said that his favourite vehicle is the Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG Roadster.

===Military service===
Like all male Swiss citizens, Federer was subject to compulsory military service in the Swiss Armed Forces, which was mandatory for all able-bodied male citizens when they reached the age of majority, and so Federer was drafted when he turned 18 in 1999. However, he was soon discharged due to a chronic back problem.

In 2003, he was ruled &quot;unsuitable&quot; and was subsequently exempted from his military service obligation. Instead, he served in the civil protection force and was required to pay 3% of his taxable income.

===Religion and Multilingualism===
Federer was raised as a Roman Catholic and met Pope Benedict XVI while playing the 2006 Italian Open tournament in Rome and was quoted as saying &quot;This was just the perfect day&quot;. Growing up in nearby Birsfelden, Riehen, and then Münchenstein, close to the French and German borders, Swiss German is thus his native language, but he also speaks Standard German, French and English fluently as well as functional Italian and a few phrases of Swedish. Federer frequently conducts press conferences in German, French and English.

===Health===
In 1999, the then-18-year-old Federer was discharged from compulsory military service due to a chronic back problem. Throughout his 20-year career, Federer only conceded three singles walkovers, all due to back injury. In March 2008, Federer revealed that he had recently been diagnosed with mononucleosis and that he may have suffered from it as early as December 2007. Despite being cleared to compete, Federer suffered a significant dip in fitness due to his struggle with mononucleosis.

Federer underwent three procedures on his knees, the first two on his left knee, in 2016 and 2020, and the third on his right knee in 2022. When he injured his knee in 2016, Federer underwent knee surgery where a key portion of tissue was removed. He was able to return to top-level play for years. However, trimming the meniscus changes the burden on the tibia, which often leads to eventual pain, more surgery, more pain, and retirement. Though it often takes a few years to fully manifest, the surfaces may eventually erode and arthritis may set in. In Federer’s case, different injuries over the years may have combined to take their toll.

Federer employed a multi-faceted training programme that made use of every muscle. That included everything from medicine ball throws to racquet drills.

==Career statistics==
===Grand Slam tournament performance timeline===


===Year–End Championships performance timeline===


===Olympic gold medal matches===
==Records==
===All-time tournament records===

=== Guinness World Records ===
As of 2019, Federer holds the third highest number of Guinness World Records within one discipline, a total of 30, which include 18 performance based records.

===Open Era records===
* These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis.
* Records in bold indicate peerless achievements.



==See also==

* Roger Federer career statistics
* List of career achievements by Roger Federer
* List of Grand Slam men&#x27;s singles champions
* Tennis Masters Series records and statistics
* List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players (since 1973)
* World number 1 ranked male tennis players (all time, based on recognized tennis authorities)
* All-time tennis records – Men&#x27;s singles
* Open Era tennis records – Men&#x27;s singles (since 1968)
* ATP Tour records (since 1990)
* ATP Awards
* 2004 Summer Olympics national flag bearers
* 2008 Summer Olympics national flag bearers

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

===Video===
* &quot;Wimbledon Classic Match: Federer vs Sampras&quot;. Standing Room Only, DVD release date: 31 October 2006, run time: 233 minutes, .
* &quot;Wimbledon 2007 Final: Federer vs. Nadal (2007)&quot;. Kultur White Star, DVD release date: 30 October 2007, run time: 180 minutes, .
* &quot;Wimbledon–The 2008 Finals: Nadal vs. Federer&quot;. Standing Room Only, DVD release date: 19 August 2008, run time: 300 minutes, .

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="0" end="13" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="71" end="77" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="107" end="118" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players" label="world No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="148" end="183" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="205" end="228" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players#Weeks at No. 1" label="second-most of all time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="293" end="307" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players#Year-end No. 1 players" label="year-end No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q300008" start="358" end="366" title="ATP Tour" label="ATP Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="407" end="415" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="438" end="443" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Tournaments" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="517" end="526" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="588" end="595" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="612" end="634" title="ATP Finals" label="year-end championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="721" end="733" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="738" end="752" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747134" start="780" end="789" title="Big Three (tennis)" label="Big Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887825" start="822" end="826" title="1998 Wimbledon Championships – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q378627" start="906" end="910" title="2003 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1240" end="1257" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Career Grand Slam" label="career Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q741573" start="1265" end="1281" title="2009 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2009 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202961" start="1339" end="1349" title="Federer–Nadal rivalry" label="main rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="1386" end="1398" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q751798" start="1466" end="1470" title="2009 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="1485" end="1498" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q674139" start="1507" end="1533" title="Switzerland Davis Cup team" label="Switzerland Davis Cup team"/>
<link wikidata="Q14916861" start="1558" end="1562" title="2014 Davis Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q757054" start="1616" end="1637" title="Tennis at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s doubles" label="2008 Beijing Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q581788" start="1684" end="1704" title="Tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2012 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10125" start="1729" end="1740" title="Andy Murray" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q22956224" start="1898" end="1918" title="2017 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2017 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344123" start="1971" end="1999" title="2017 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2017 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993124" start="2008" end="2028" title="2018 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2018 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q110388660" start="2228" end="2237" title="2022 Laver Cup" label="Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2477" end="2510" title="ATP World Tour Awards#Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award" label="Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808301" start="2537" end="2572" title="Laureus World Sports Award for Sportsman of the Year" label="Laureus World Sportsman of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q26694763" start="2689" end="2698" title="Laver Cup" label="Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786224" start="2896" end="2912" title="Match for Africa" label="Match for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="3172" end="3177" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q114043965" start="3208" end="3222" title="Federer family" label="Federer family"/>
<link wikidata="Q67225" start="3266" end="3273" title="Berneck, St. Gallen" label="Berneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q12746" start="3281" end="3301" title="canton of St. Gallen" label="canton of St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="3310" end="3319" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576076" start="3366" end="3387" title="Kempton Park, Gauteng" label="Kempton Park, Gauteng"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3392" end="3404" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427409" start="3600" end="3613" title="Urban Federer" label="Urban Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125397" start="3661" end="3683" title="Barbara Schmid-Federer" label="Barbara Schmid-Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q195765" start="4196" end="4216" title="TC Old Boys" label="Old Boys Tennis Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="4220" end="4225" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364175" start="4339" end="4358" title="one-handed backhand" label="one-handed backhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="4466" end="4479" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76334" start="4481" end="4493" title="Boris Becker" label="Boris Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="4505" end="4517" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968483" start="4707" end="4719" title="Peter Carter (tennis)" label="Peter Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="4846" end="4855" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="4857" end="4867" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="4869" end="4877" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="4946" end="4952" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="4957" end="4965" title="swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515947" start="4990" end="5001" title="soft tennis" label="soft tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q565578" start="5032" end="5053" title="Eye–hand coordination" label="hand–eye coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="5177" end="5184" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5531" end="5539" title="Ball boy#Tennis" label="ball boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q299174" start="5573" end="5586" title="Swiss Indoors" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q60109" start="5712" end="5725" title="Michael Stich" label="Michael Stich"/>
<link wikidata="Q69716" start="5805" end="5813" title="Écublens, Vaud" label="Ecublens"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="5831" end="5835" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="5903" end="5909" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q52714" start="5999" end="6020" title="Chavannes-près-Renens" label="Chavannes-près-Renens"/>
<link wikidata="Q69716" start="6367" end="6375" title="Écublens, Vaud" label="Écublens"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="7268" end="7274" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="7303" end="7317" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q664843" start="7434" end="7446" title="Yves Allegro" label="Yves Allegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377" start="7605" end="7610" title="Prato" label="Prato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7736" end="7756" title="Satellite tournament#Tennis" label="satellite tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q68429" start="7760" end="7770" title="Bossonnens" label="Bossonnens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887825" start="7973" end="7991" title="1998 Wimbledon Championships – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="Boys&amp;#x27; singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126952" start="8003" end="8017" title="Irakli Labadze" label="Irakli Labadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883546" start="8027" end="8045" title="1998 Wimbledon Championships – Boys&amp;#x27; doubles" label="Boys&amp;#x27; doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q312511" start="8065" end="8079" title="Olivier Rochus" label="Olivier Rochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q295488" start="8103" end="8117" title="Michaël Llodra" label="Michaël Llodra"/>
<link wikidata="Q335318" start="8122" end="8130" title="Andy Ram" label="Andy Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638851" start="8157" end="8171" title="1998 US Open – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="US Open Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="8196" end="8212" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313402" start="8348" end="8366" title="Junior Orange Bowl (tennis)" label="Junior Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="8370" end="8375" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q295478" start="8428" end="8443" title="Guillermo Coria" label="Guillermo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q104876621" start="8855" end="8859" title="1998 French Open – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887825" start="8875" end="8879" title="1998 Wimbledon Championships – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638851" start="8893" end="8897" title="1998 US Open – Boys&amp;#x27; singles" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880719" start="8982" end="8986" title="1998 French Open – Boys&amp;#x27; doubles" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883546" start="9002" end="9006" title="1998 Wimbledon Championships – Boys&amp;#x27; doubles" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978938" start="9143" end="9160" title="1998 Rado Open" label="Swiss Open Gstaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q128397" start="9215" end="9231" title="Lucas Arnold Ker" label="Lucas Arnold Ker"/>
<link wikidata="Q974288" start="9304" end="9319" title="Guillaume Raoux" label="Guillaume Raoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775425" start="9323" end="9331" title="1998 Grand Prix de Tennis de Toulouse – Singles" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703721" start="9368" end="9386" title="1998 Davidoff Swiss Indoors – Singles" label="1998 Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="9468" end="9480" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9580" end="9617" title="1999 Davis Cup World Group#Switzerland vs. Italy" label="World Group first round against Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q555641" start="9629" end="9647" title="Davide Sanguinetti" label="Davide Sanguinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109657" start="9732" end="9739" title="Open Castilla y León" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070530" start="9754" end="9766" title="Sander Groen" label="Sander Groen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750288" start="9775" end="9786" title="Ota Fukárek" label="Ota Fukárek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714572" start="9791" end="9810" title="Alejandro Hernández (tennis)" label="Alejandro Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069842" start="9922" end="9933" title="1999 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q707414" start="9938" end="9947" title="1999 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="10128" end="10133" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q221359" start="10145" end="10155" title="Max Mirnyi" label="Max Mirnyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q782212" start="10401" end="10416" title="2000 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53370" start="10455" end="10468" title="Michael Chang" label="Michael Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025558" start="10506" end="10520" title="2000 Open 13" label="Marseille Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q123298" start="10569" end="10580" title="Marc Rosset" label="Marc Rosset"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="10681" end="10688" title="Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q589310" start="10698" end="10704" title="Tennis at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="10775" end="10785" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q552507" start="10798" end="10816" title="Arnaud Di Pasquale" label="Arnaud Di Pasquale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627708" start="10877" end="10887" title="2001 Hopman Cup" label="Hopman Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134720" start="10937" end="10951" title="Martina Hingis" label="Martina Hingis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173633" start="10991" end="11003" title="Monica Seles" label="Monica Seles"/>
<link wikidata="Q53545" start="11008" end="11027" title="Jan-Michael Gambill" label="Jan-Michael Gambill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150532" start="11213" end="11230" title="2001 Milan Indoor" label="2001 Milan Indoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q937634" start="11261" end="11275" title="Julien Boutter" label="Julien Boutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048960" start="11352" end="11363" title="2001 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q46308" start="11416" end="11429" title="Àlex Corretja" label="Àlex Corretja"/>
<link wikidata="Q935601" start="11474" end="11497" title="2001 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="11598" end="11610" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q221737" start="11778" end="11788" title="Tim Henman" label="Tim Henman"/>
<link wikidata="Q58466" start="11846" end="11857" title="2002 NASDAQ-100 Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Miami event"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="11876" end="11888" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782828" start="11930" end="11937" title="2002 Hamburg Masters – Singles" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="11949" end="11960" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968483" start="12126" end="12138" title="Peter Carter (tennis)" label="Peter Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048938" start="12415" end="12422" title="2002 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634280" start="12435" end="12446" title="2002 CA-TennisTrophy – Singles" label="Vienna Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115234" start="12582" end="12593" title="2002 Tennis Masters Cup – Singles" label="Masters Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q378627" start="12925" end="12934" title="2003 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s Singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="12944" end="12956" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q310949" start="12979" end="12997" title="Mark Philippoussis" label="Mark Philippoussis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="13048" end="13058" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q298644" start="13060" end="13068" title="Pat Cash" label="Pat Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="13073" end="13086" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="13248" end="13260" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="13445" end="13461" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749591" start="13465" end="13475" title="2003 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters – Singles" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q965872" start="13484" end="13491" title="2003 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869381" start="13601" end="13606" title="2003 NASDAQ-100 Open – Men&amp;#x27;s doubles" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q296282" start="13644" end="13656" title="Leander Paes" label="Leander Paes"/>
<link wikidata="Q559917" start="13661" end="13671" title="David Rikl" label="David Rikl"/>
<link wikidata="Q449730" start="13766" end="13780" title="Félix Mantilla (tennis)" label="Félix Mantilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715700" start="13911" end="13916" title="2003 Dubai Tennis Championships – Singles" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634285" start="13921" end="13927" title="2003 CA-TennisTrophy – Singles" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q356768" start="13939" end="13949" title="Jiří Novák" label="Jiří Novák"/>
<link wikidata="Q193361" start="13954" end="13965" title="Carlos Moyá" label="Carlos Moyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983537" start="14016" end="14038" title="2003 Tennis Masters Cup – Singles" label="year-end championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q16475" start="14291" end="14304" title="Mats Wilander" label="Mats Wilander"/>
<link wikidata="Q779654" start="14359" end="14374" title="2004 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="14380" end="14391" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644820" start="14456" end="14468" title="2004 Pacific Life Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782835" start="14491" end="14506" title="2004 Hamburg Masters – Singles" label="Hamburg Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q295478" start="14539" end="14554" title="Guillermo Coria" label="Guillermo Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q248965" start="14659" end="14681" title="2004 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="second Wimbledon crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="14687" end="14699" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q734997" start="14709" end="14724" title="Tennis at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="14728" end="14734" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q193665" start="14898" end="14911" title="Tomáš Berdych" label="Tomáš Berdych"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654836" start="14929" end="14943" title="2004 Canada Masters – Singles" label="Canada Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048953" start="14984" end="14991" title="2004 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="15029" end="15043" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q299439" start="15140" end="15150" title="Swiss Open (tennis)" label="Swiss Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="15390" end="15400" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q782368" start="15546" end="15561" title="2005 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="15678" end="15690" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q384929" start="15755" end="15764" title="2005 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="15795" end="15807" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q731509" start="15816" end="15823" title="2005 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="15842" end="15854" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="16298" end="16314" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="16634" end="16646" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="16752" end="16764" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="16781" end="16794" title="Jimmy Connors" label="Jimmy Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q720452" start="16980" end="16990" title="Tennis.com" label="Tennis.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="17106" end="17115" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q846700" start="17566" end="17577" title="2006 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074654" start="17770" end="17793" title="2006 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q782420" start="17808" end="17823" title="2006 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q207084" start="17842" end="17858" title="Marcos Baghdatis" label="Marcos Baghdatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q912506" start="17871" end="17878" title="2006 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q10125" start="18516" end="18527" title="Andy Murray" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094776" start="18555" end="18578" title="2006 Cincinnati Masters" label="2006 Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q299174" start="18854" end="18867" title="Swiss Indoors" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q751802" start="19153" end="19168" title="2007 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="19200" end="19210" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q208517" start="19266" end="19283" title="Fernando González" label="Fernando González"/>
<link wikidata="Q14538387" start="19471" end="19483" title="2007 Pacific Life Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q310384" start="19582" end="19597" title="Guillermo Cañas" label="Guillermo Cañas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782840" start="19905" end="19920" title="2007 Hamburg Masters – Singles" label="Hamburg Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q30337019" start="19991" end="19996" title="Bagel (tennis)" label="bagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q571270" start="20049" end="20060" title="2007 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q746669" start="20203" end="20212" title="2007 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997617" start="20296" end="20324" title="2007 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="thrilling five-set encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072426" start="20389" end="20393" title="1980 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="20425" end="20435" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q326233" start="20504" end="20518" title="2007 Rogers Masters – Singles" label="Canada Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="20549" end="20563" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650814" start="20618" end="20628" title="2007 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters – Singles" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q756439" start="20689" end="20696" title="2007 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299174" start="20979" end="20984" title="Swiss Indoors" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="20993" end="21015" title="ATP World Tour Finals" label="year-end championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q207367" start="21542" end="21555" title="mononucleosis" label="mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q577107" start="21617" end="21632" title="2008 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q277655" start="21968" end="21979" title="2008 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q388312" start="21984" end="21993" title="2008 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="22108" end="22118" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q194246" start="22242" end="22255" title="Tennis at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="22269" end="22282" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156604" start="22328" end="22342" title="Bryan brothers" label="Bryan brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q315986" start="22398" end="22411" title="Simon Aspelin" label="Simon Aspelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q277802" start="22416" end="22432" title="Thomas Johansson" label="Thomas Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q53333" start="22545" end="22556" title="James Blake (tennis)" label="James Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q388303" start="22708" end="22715" title="2008 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608112" start="22848" end="22861" title="2008 BNP Paribas Masters – Singles" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263336" start="22900" end="22921" title="2008 Tennis Masters Cup – Singles" label="year-end championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q570502" start="23223" end="23238" title="2009 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870329" start="23260" end="23274" title="2009 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="five-set match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161519" start="23526" end="23540" title="Madrid Open (tennis)" label="Madrid Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q192801" start="23582" end="23597" title="Robin Söderling" label="Robin Söderling"/>
<link wikidata="Q741573" start="23659" end="23670" title="2009 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="23761" end="23771" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180535" start="23853" end="23874" title="Juan Martín del Potro" label="Juan Martín del Potro"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639557" start="23918" end="23927" title="2009 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000361" start="23991" end="24014" title="Coupe des Mousquetaires" label="Coupe des Mousquetaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q751798" start="24133" end="24142" title="2009 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="24174" end="24186" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q751798" start="24264" end="24269" title="2009 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149640" start="24559" end="24577" title="2009 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters – Singles" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q838477" start="24701" end="24708" title="2009 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q8964916" start="24803" end="24810" title="Tweener (tennis)" label="tweener"/>
<link wikidata="Q476646" start="25135" end="25150" title="2010 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="25267" end="25279" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="25465" end="25473" title="History of tennis" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q248438" start="25556" end="25567" title="2010 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q843749" start="25712" end="25728" title="2004 French Open" label="2004 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="25853" end="25865" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q753589" start="25928" end="25937" title="2010 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193665" start="25982" end="25995" title="Tomáš Berdych" label="Tomáš Berdych"/>
<link wikidata="Q926656" start="26154" end="26167" title="Paul Annacone" label="Paul Annacone"/>
<link wikidata="Q837819" start="26242" end="26249" title="2010 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53422" start="26419" end="26429" title="Mardy Fish" label="Mardy Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297012" start="26433" end="26443" title="2010 Western &amp;amp; Southern Financial Group Masters – Singles" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085070" start="26517" end="26531" title="2010 If Stockholm Open – Singles" label="Stockholm Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978828" start="26533" end="26546" title="2010 Swiss Indoors – Singles" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q300022" start="26555" end="26565" title="2010 ATP World Tour Finals" label="ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747134" start="26734" end="26742" title="Big Four (tennis)" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q381132" start="27010" end="27025" title="2011 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="27047" end="27061" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q244427" start="27070" end="27081" title="2011 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q751102" start="27240" end="27249" title="2011 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192661" start="27288" end="27306" title="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga" label="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q325307" start="27425" end="27432" title="2011 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q658550" start="27917" end="27930" title="2011 Swiss Indoors Basel" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478340" start="27932" end="27945" title="2011 BNP Paribas Masters – Singles" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478962" start="27950" end="27960" title="2011 ATP World Tour Finals – Singles" label="ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q782695" start="28169" end="28184" title="2012 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q287481" start="28226" end="28240" title="2012 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q390157" start="28313" end="28332" title="2012 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q796849" start="28388" end="28408" title="2012 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q53566" start="28454" end="28464" title="John Isner" label="John Isner"/>
<link wikidata="Q594674" start="28514" end="28528" title="2012 Mutua Madrid Open" label="Madrid Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q754491" start="28660" end="28671" title="2012 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q289587" start="28804" end="28813" title="2012 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313402" start="28874" end="28890" title="Julien Benneteau" label="Julien Benneteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q30822" start="29236" end="29256" title="Tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068579" start="29556" end="29574" title="2012 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q430195" start="29614" end="29621" title="2012 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q155703" start="29690" end="29706" title="2012 Shanghai Rolex Masters – Singles" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q44474" start="29906" end="29916" title="2012 ATP World Tour Finals – Singles" label="ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q299454" start="30150" end="30166" title="Gerry Weber Open" label="Gerry Weber Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q219970" start="30178" end="30193" title="Mikhail Youzhny" label="Mikhail Youzhny"/>
<link wikidata="Q211636" start="30478" end="30495" title="Sergiy Stakhovsky" label="Sergiy Stakhovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q13602869" start="30763" end="30770" title="2013 International German Open" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14097040" start="30775" end="30781" title="2013 Crédit Agricole Suisse Open Gstaad" label="Gstaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180535" start="30978" end="30999" title="Juan Martín del Potro" label="Juan Martín del Potro"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="31162" end="31175" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649219" start="31214" end="31227" title="Severin Lüthi" label="Severin Lüthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630192" start="31268" end="31283" title="2014 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q15723395" start="31429" end="31448" title="2014 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678461" start="31569" end="31581" title="2014 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="31665" end="31683" title="Stanislas Wawrinka" label="Stanislas Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q14916861" start="31829" end="31838" title="2014 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415056" start="31879" end="31885" title="Serbia Davis Cup team" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734780" start="31887" end="31897" title="Kazakhstan Davis Cup team" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025581" start="31976" end="31981" title="Italy Davis Cup team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998621" start="32119" end="32138" title="2014 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters" label="Monte-Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943573" start="32218" end="32228" title="2014 Gerry Weber Open" label="Halle Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q357215" start="32295" end="32310" title="Alejandro Falla" label="Alejandro Falla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893134" start="32336" end="32345" title="2014 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507139" start="32423" end="32442" title="2014 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="epic five-set match"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435005" start="32478" end="32491" title="2014 Rogers Cup" label="Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q191476" start="32561" end="32573" title="David Ferrer" label="David Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486256" start="32609" end="32619" title="2014 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q15851911" start="32665" end="32672" title="2014 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q245241" start="32720" end="32731" title="Marin Čilić" label="Marin Čilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127934" start="32737" end="32753" title="2014 Shanghai Rolex Masters" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q212833" start="32937" end="32949" title="Gilles Simon" label="Gilles Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17592675" start="33092" end="33105" title="2014 Swiss Indoors" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19406" start="33142" end="33154" title="David Goffin" label="David Goffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438236" start="33208" end="33223" title="2014 ATP World Tour Finals – Singles" label="2014 ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q209436" start="33380" end="33395" title="Richard Gasquet" label="Richard Gasquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14916861" start="33410" end="33419" title="2014 Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410402" start="33497" end="33516" title="Stade Pierre-Mauroy" label="Stade Pierre-Mauroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985318" start="33797" end="33819" title="2015 Brisbane International" label="Brisbane International"/>
<link wikidata="Q312343" start="33831" end="33843" title="Milos Raonic" label="Milos Raonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="33946" end="33959" title="Jimmy Connors" label="Jimmy Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059455" start="34083" end="34102" title="2015 Dubai Tennis Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Dubai Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q19505534" start="34220" end="34232" title="2015 BNP Paribas Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817651" start="34321" end="34334" title="Istanbul Open" label="Istanbul Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q381118" start="34403" end="34419" title="2009 French Open" label="2009 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19897417" start="34441" end="34453" title="2015 Italian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868596" start="34546" end="34557" title="2015 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q20021740" start="34698" end="34714" title="2015 Gerry Weber Open" label="Gerry Weber Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18410121" start="34792" end="34801" title="2015 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20821487" start="35056" end="35074" title="2015 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18413459" start="35205" end="35212" title="2015 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q21236654" start="35435" end="35448" title="2015 Swiss Indoors – Singles" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q261095" start="35587" end="35600" title="Ivan Ljubičić" label="Ivan Ljubičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q21924013" start="35890" end="35912" title="2016 Brisbane International – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Brisbane International"/>
<link wikidata="Q21715456" start="36059" end="36074" title="2016 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q708232" start="36256" end="36276" title="arthroscopic surgery" label="arthroscopic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134609" start="36289" end="36302" title="torn meniscus" label="torn meniscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22319897" start="36345" end="36354" title="2016 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691105" start="36356" end="36361" title="2016 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078192" start="36367" end="36379" title="2016 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019041" start="36455" end="36465" title="2016 Miami Open (tennis)" label="Miami Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766780" start="36544" end="36563" title="2016 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters – Singles" label="Monte-Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925101" start="36646" end="36658" title="2016 Italian Open (tennis)" label="Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q88762" start="36695" end="36708" title="Dominic Thiem" label="Dominic Thiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690923" start="36734" end="36745" title="2016 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q782192" start="36865" end="36885" title="2000 Australian Open" label="2000 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q24291376" start="36983" end="36992" title="2016 MercedesCup – Singles" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q24569374" start="36997" end="37002" title="2016 Gerry Weber Open – Singles" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24487405" start="37007" end="37016" title="2016 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23747965" start="37375" end="37390" title="Tennis at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22077628" start="38323" end="38338" title="2017 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q311222" start="38390" end="38403" title="Kei Nishikori" label="Kei Nishikori"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="38640" end="38652" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869949" start="39036" end="39048" title="2017 BNP Paribas Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q28962805" start="39086" end="39091" title="2017 Miami Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169191" start="39382" end="39391" title="2017 Porsche Tennis Grand Prix" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q299454" start="39653" end="39669" title="Halle Open" label="Gerry Weber Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344123" start="39733" end="39742" title="2017 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="40059" end="40069" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q902293" start="40073" end="40077" title="1976 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q33749110" start="40157" end="40171" title="2017 Rogers Cup" label="Canada Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="40175" end="40191" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q34973277" start="40283" end="40301" title="2017 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836052" start="40320" end="40327" title="2017 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q26696478" start="40467" end="40486" title="2017 Laver Cup" label="inaugural Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q54538" start="40567" end="40578" title="Sam Querrey" label="Sam Querrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720084" start="40583" end="40595" title="Nick Kyrgios" label="Nick Kyrgios"/>
<link wikidata="Q54663" start="40859" end="40868" title="Jack Sock" label="Jack Sock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41646989" start="40972" end="40988" title="2017 Shanghai Rolex Masters – Singles" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="41224" end="41234" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308390" start="41300" end="41313" title="2017 Swiss Indoors – Singles" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151344" start="41390" end="41405" title="2017 ATP Finals" label="2017 ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19406" start="41425" end="41437" title="David Goffin" label="David Goffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36698296" start="41569" end="41579" title="2018 Hopman Cup" label="Hopman Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q509903" start="41613" end="41627" title="Belinda Bencic" label="Belinda Bencic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134720" start="41670" end="41684" title="Martina Hingis" label="Martina Hingis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025960" start="41771" end="41777" title="Germany at the Hopman Cup" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="41784" end="41800" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q77178" start="41805" end="41821" title="Angelique Kerber" label="Angelique Kerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993124" start="41848" end="41863" title="2018 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="42033" end="42048" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q312545" start="42083" end="42094" title="Roy Emerson" label="Roy Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426439" start="42199" end="42209" title="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q337681" start="42353" end="42368" title="Grigor Dimitrov" label="Grigor Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q299701" start="42386" end="42400" title="Rotterdam Open" label="Rotterdam Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q28913519" start="42755" end="42775" title="2018 BNP Paribas Open" label="Indian Wells Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13616024" start="42795" end="42806" title="Chung Hyeon" label="Chung Hyeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784554" start="43065" end="43083" title="Thanasi Kokkinakis" label="Thanasi Kokkinakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48864976" start="43087" end="43092" title="2018 Miami Open" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q54864380" start="43317" end="43331" title="2018 MercedesCup – Singles" label="Stuttgart Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299454" start="43493" end="43503" title="Halle Open" label="Halle Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q54961494" start="43564" end="43573" title="2018 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q741560" start="43645" end="43657" title="2012 US Open (tennis)" label="2012 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299956" start="43695" end="43709" title="Kevin Anderson (tennis)" label="Kevin Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064808" start="43813" end="43823" title="2018 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q50391517" start="44028" end="44035" title="2018 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152388" start="44058" end="44070" title="John Millman" label="John Millman"/>
<link wikidata="Q53389236" start="44193" end="44202" title="2018 Laver Cup" label="Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q57536122" start="44490" end="44503" title="2018 Swiss Indoors – Singles" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q523725" start="44573" end="44585" title="Marius Copil" label="Marius Copil"/>
<link wikidata="Q57624381" start="44677" end="44690" title="2018 Rolex Paris Masters" label="Paris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q47091511" start="44743" end="44753" title="2018 ATP Finals" label="ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388745" start="44964" end="44974" title="2019 Hopman Cup" label="Hopman Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q48213295" start="45202" end="45217" title="2019 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q24450982" start="45240" end="45258" title="Stefanos Tsitsipas" label="Stefanos Tsitsipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772338" start="45388" end="45407" title="2019 Dubai Tennis Championships" label="Dubai Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="45545" end="45558" title="Jimmy Connors" label="Jimmy Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q61948275" start="45647" end="45659" title="2019 BNP Paribas Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q88762" start="45678" end="45691" title="Dominic Thiem" label="Dominic Thiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q62083876" start="45697" end="45702" title="2019 Miami Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q53566" start="45722" end="45732" title="John Isner" label="John Isner"/>
<link wikidata="Q63434799" start="45804" end="45815" title="2019 Mutua Madrid Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Madrid Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q186429" start="45887" end="45899" title="Gaël Monfils" label="Gaël Monfils"/>
<link wikidata="Q63367920" start="46021" end="46032" title="2019 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q64666029" start="46285" end="46295" title="2019 Halle Open – Singles" label="Halle Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19406" start="46349" end="46361" title="David Goffin" label="David Goffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64785012" start="46479" end="46488" title="2019 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202961" start="46522" end="46557" title="Federer–Nadal rivalry" label="40th and final professional meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612261" start="46681" end="46701" title="2008 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="2008 Wimbledon final"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="46771" end="46783" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q507643" start="46791" end="46803" title="1974 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1974 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q74109398" start="46840" end="46845" title="2019 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q66363084" start="47152" end="47170" title="2019 Western &amp;amp; Southern Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17373391" start="47233" end="47246" title="Andrey Rublev" label="Andrey Rublev"/>
<link wikidata="Q66321968" start="47321" end="47328" title="2019 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q337681" start="47374" end="47389" title="Grigor Dimitrov" label="Grigor Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q56344807" start="47411" end="47420" title="2019 Laver Cup" label="Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q69744060" start="47558" end="47574" title="2019 Rolex Shanghai Masters – Singles" label="Shanghai Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="47613" end="47629" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q71760073" start="47638" end="47651" title="2019 Swiss Indoors – Singles" label="Swiss Indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q91615" start="47727" end="47742" title="Peter Gojowczyk" label="Peter Gojowczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22958938" start="47791" end="47805" title="Alex de Minaur" label="Alex de Minaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q73397057" start="47880" end="47890" title="2019 ATP Finals – Singles" label="ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918446" start="47964" end="47981" title="Matteo Berrettini" label="Matteo Berrettini"/>
<link wikidata="Q61062112" start="48233" end="48248" title="2020 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700510" start="48352" end="48367" title="Tennys Sandgren" label="Tennys Sandgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q85982068" start="48607" end="48626" title="2020 Dubai Tennis Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Dubai Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q974505" start="48628" end="48640" title="Indian Wells Masters" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="48642" end="48652" title="Miami Open (tennis)" label="Miami Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q63367899" start="48661" end="48672" title="2020 French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q83629829" start="49097" end="49112" title="2021 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="49166" end="49174" title="Coronavirus disease 2019" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="49221" end="49235" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49289" end="49315" title="Open Era tennis records – men&amp;#x27;s singles#ATP rankings achievements" label="ATP number 1 ranked player"/>
<link wikidata="Q105825417" start="49372" end="49382" title="2021 Qatar ExxonMobil Open – Singles" label="Qatar Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847264" start="49438" end="49447" title="Dan Evans (tennis)" label="Dan Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297666" start="49465" end="49485" title="Nikoloz Basilashvili" label="Nikoloz Basilashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q99526058" start="49515" end="49526" title="2021 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469424" start="49626" end="49634" title="walkover" label="walkover"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918446" start="49638" end="49655" title="Matteo Berrettini" label="Matteo Berrettini"/>
<link wikidata="Q102124791" start="49660" end="49665" title="2021 Halle Open" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20752045" start="49698" end="49719" title="Félix Auger-Aliassime" label="Félix Auger-Aliassime"/>
<link wikidata="Q92032464" start="49817" end="49826" title="2021 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="49948" end="49960" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927958" start="49997" end="50011" title="Hubert Hurkacz" label="Hubert Hurkacz"/>
<link wikidata="Q278531" start="50224" end="50240" title="2008 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2008 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q98833450" start="50395" end="50402" title="2021 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q110388660" start="50727" end="50741" title="2022 Laver Cup" label="2022 Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202961" start="51103" end="51118" title="Federer–Nadal rivalry" label="long-time rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="51130" end="51142" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54663" start="51151" end="51160" title="Jack Sock" label="Jack Sock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305299" start="51165" end="51179" title="Frances Tiafoe" label="Frances Tiafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="51270" end="51282" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273600" start="51766" end="51780" title="Djokovic–Nadal rivalry" label="Djokovic–Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q64785012" start="51944" end="51972" title="2019 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2019 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q330022" start="52725" end="52745" title="2009 Australian Open" label="2009 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q244427" start="52757" end="52773" title="2011 French Open" label="2011 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q22077628" start="52788" end="52808" title="2017 Australian Open" label="2017 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="53165" end="53179" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273600" start="53528" end="53546" title="Djokovic–Nadal rivalry" label="Djokovic and Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q836815" start="53681" end="53693" title="2007 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2007 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18194803" start="53814" end="53832" title="2014 Shanghai Rolex Masters – Singles" label="2014 Shanghai Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q18413459" start="54423" end="54435" title="2015 US Open (tennis)" label="2015 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q10125" start="54635" end="54646" title="Andy Murray" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155022" start="55297" end="55325" title="2012 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles final" label="2012 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q30822" start="55442" end="55462" title="Tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="55533" end="55551" title="career Golden Slam" label="career Golden Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="55652" end="55662" title="ATP World Tour Finals" label="ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="55798" end="55810" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="56273" end="56287" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q181501" start="56415" end="56431" title="David Nalbandian" label="David Nalbandian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="56492" end="56503" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="56558" end="56570" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="56631" end="56644" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q180535" start="56704" end="56725" title="Juan Martín del Potro" label="Juan Martín del Potro"/>
<link wikidata="Q193665" start="56786" end="56799" title="Tomáš Berdych" label="Tomáš Berdych"/>
<link wikidata="Q192661" start="56860" end="56878" title="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga" label="Jo-Wilfried Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q21862656" start="57764" end="57791" title="2016 Roger Federer tennis season" label="injuries forced him to skip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57838" end="57860" title="ATP Awards#Player &amp;amp; Team of the Year" label="ATP Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q693708" start="57912" end="57930" title="ITF World Champion" label="ITF World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58010" end="58029" title="ATP World Tour Awards#Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award" label="Sportsmanship Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58107" end="58130" title="ATP World Tour Awards#ATPTour.com Fans&amp;#x27; Favourite" label="ATP Fans&amp;#x27; Favorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="58234" end="58276" title="ATP Arthur Ashe Humanitarian award" label="Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808301" start="58301" end="58336" title="Laureus World Sports Award for Sportsman of the Year" label="Laureus World Sportsman of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494048" start="58375" end="58418" title="BBC Sports Personality World Sport Star of the Year" label="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q918534" start="58448" end="58482" title="Laureus World Sports Award for Comeback of the Year" label="Laureus World Comeback of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="58969" end="58978" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="59207" end="59217" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="59222" end="59234" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q962049" start="59579" end="59592" title="Frank Sedgman" label="Frank Sedgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="59627" end="59638" title="Jack Kramer" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q720452" start="59758" end="59768" title="Tennis.com" label="Tennis.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747964" start="59842" end="59856" title="Tennis Channel" label="Tennis Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11459" start="59933" end="59948" title="Serena Williams" label="Serena Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q552359" start="60035" end="60044" title="BBC Sport" label="BBC Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q815748" start="60145" end="60158" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipe" label="L&amp;#x27;Équipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q209436" start="60179" end="60194" title="Richard Gasquet" label="Richard Gasquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747134" start="60523" end="60533" title="Big Four (tennis)" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="60891" end="60904" title="Jimmy Connors" label="Jimmy Connors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61118" end="61146" title="Tennis strategy#All-court player" label="all-court, all-around player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371988" start="61368" end="61373" title="smash (tennis)" label="smash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371988" start="61471" end="61478" title="skyhook (tennis)" label="skyhook"/>
<link wikidata="Q313246" start="61670" end="61690" title="David Foster Wallace" label="David Foster Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="61803" end="61815" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q490309" start="61992" end="61997" title="Backspin" label="slice"/>
<link wikidata="Q936809" start="62105" end="62112" title="topspin" label="topspin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911683" start="62429" end="62434" title="serve (tennis)" label="serve"/>
<link wikidata="Q915012" start="62778" end="62794" title="serve and volley" label="serve and volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8964916" start="63070" end="63077" title="Tweener (tennis)" label="tweener"/>
<link wikidata="Q380557" start="63172" end="63184" title="2009 US Open (tennis)" label="2009 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="63193" end="63207" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="63337" end="63350" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="65287" end="65296" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968483" start="65976" end="65988" title="Peter Carter (tennis)" label="Peter Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356290" start="66469" end="66483" title="Peter Lundgren" label="Peter Lundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="66648" end="66660" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649219" start="67406" end="67419" title="Severin Lüthi" label="Severin Lüthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q710119" start="67505" end="67515" title="Tony Roche" label="Tony Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348847" start="67556" end="67569" title="José Higueras" label="José Higueras"/>
<link wikidata="Q926656" start="67578" end="67591" title="Paul Annacone" label="Paul Annacone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="67605" end="67618" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q261095" start="67636" end="67649" title="Ivan Ljubičić" label="Ivan Ljubičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329777" start="68102" end="68108" title="Wilson Sporting Goods" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246411" start="68299" end="68306" title="strings (tennis)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68333" end="68344" title="Strings (tennis)#Natural Gut" label="Natural Gut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68413" end="68422" title="Strings (tennis)#Polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="69065" end="69069" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="69609" end="69613" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q26070" start="69669" end="69675" title="Uniqlo" label="Uniqlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26070" start="69698" end="69704" title="Uniqlo" label="Uniqlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43452713" start="69942" end="69944" title="On (company)" label="On"/>
<link wikidata="Q836815" start="70544" end="70556" title="2007 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2007 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061833" start="70701" end="70719" title="The Imperial March" label="The Imperial March"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="70737" end="70746" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="70883" end="70909" title="Time magazine" label="&amp;#x27;Time&amp;#x27; magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="70935" end="70963" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="71058" end="71070" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q381118" start="71144" end="71160" title="2009 French Open" label="2009 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71180" end="71197" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Career Grand Slam" label="career Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="71271" end="71289" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="71302" end="71314" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="71411" end="71424" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344123" start="71522" end="71541" title="2017 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="8th Wimbledon title"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="71834" end="71848" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="71980" end="71995" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q30908" start="72000" end="72012" title="William Tell" label="William Tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="72580" end="72592" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="72594" end="72606" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q337681" start="72977" end="72992" title="Grigor Dimitrov" label="Grigor Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="72998" end="73008" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340095" start="73066" end="73092" title="Hard to Say I&amp;#x27;m Sorry" label="Hard to Say I&amp;#x27;m Sorry"/>
<link wikidata="Q371938" start="73121" end="73128" title="Chicago (band)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="73279" end="73293" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q77112" start="73366" end="73378" title="David Foster" label="David Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="73425" end="73430" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609235" start="73501" end="73511" title="Money Mark" label="Money Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329777" start="73516" end="73529" title="Wilson Sporting Goods" label="Wilson Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="73538" end="73543" title="Vinyl record" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="73740" end="73753" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="73886" end="73888" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="74030" end="74036" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313203" start="74043" end="74085" title="Forbes&amp;#x27; list of world&amp;#x27;s highest-paid athletes" label="list of highest-paid athletes in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="74710" end="74716" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220" start="74736" end="74746" title="Swiss Alps" label="Swiss Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="74775" end="74792" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839350" start="75010" end="75021" title="Trevor Noah" label="Trevor Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="75210" end="75228" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q110388660" start="75327" end="75341" title="2022 Laver Cup" label="2022 Laver Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q299454" start="75602" end="75618" title="Gerry Weber Open" label="Gerry Weber Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q372608" start="76108" end="76127" title="University of Basel" label="University of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q672792" start="76446" end="76455" title="Swissmint" label="Swissmint"/>
<link wikidata="Q614803" start="76649" end="76659" title="Swiss Post" label="Swiss Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763505" start="76794" end="76823" title="Austria&amp;#x27;s Postal Service" label="Austria&amp;#x27;s Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q691896" start="76867" end="76888" title="Swiss National Museum" label="Swiss National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="76984" end="76993" title="Doctorate" label="Doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="77024" end="77033" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583669" start="77680" end="77699" title="Goodwill Ambassador" label="Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="77703" end="77709" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100113" start="77810" end="77832" title="2005 Pacific Life Open" label="2005 Pacific Life Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q490714" start="77836" end="77848" title="Indian Wells, California" label="Indian Wells"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77939" end="77955" title="2011 Australian Open#Rally for Relief" label="Rally for Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="77999" end="78006" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="78021" end="78049" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="78080" end="78090" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q731509" start="78196" end="78216" title="2005 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="78235" end="78252" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="78274" end="78295" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q476646" start="78400" end="78420" title="2010 Australian Open" label="2010 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822539" start="78434" end="78447" title="Hit for Haiti" label="Hit for Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782959" start="78565" end="78590" title="2010 Indian Wells Masters" label="2010 Indian Wells Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786224" start="78645" end="78661" title="Match for Africa" label="Match for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="78679" end="78685" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="78690" end="78696" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="78761" end="78781" title="Fundación Rafa Nadal" label="Fundación Rafa Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78821" end="78837" title="2011 Australian Open#Rally for Relief" label="Rally for Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q837833" start="78891" end="78908" title="2010–11 Queensland floods" label="Queensland floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="78974" end="78987" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786224" start="79084" end="79100" title="Match for Africa" label="Match for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="79155" end="79164" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="79177" end="79187" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q54663" start="79215" end="79224" title="Jack Sock" label="Jack Sock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="79229" end="79232" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="79233" end="79238" title="Today (American TV program)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227969" start="79249" end="79265" title="Savannah Guthrie" label="Savannah Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q26070" start="79466" end="79472" title="Uniqlo" label="Uniqlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q372657" start="79495" end="79508" title="Credit Suisse" label="Credit Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43452713" start="79510" end="79512" title="On (company)" label="On"/>
<link wikidata="Q62288" start="79514" end="79519" title="Rolex" label="Rolex"/>
<link wikidata="Q152822" start="79521" end="79526" title="Lindt" label="Lindt"/>
<link wikidata="Q112573820" start="79528" end="79535" title="Sunrise Communications AG" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q165690" start="79541" end="79561" title="Jura Elektroapparate" label="Jura Elektroapparate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="79612" end="79625" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q503592" start="80136" end="80144" title="Gillette (brand)" label="Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329777" start="80146" end="80152" title="Wilson Sporting Goods" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q762787" start="80154" end="80161" title="Barilla Group" label="Barilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q699529" start="80167" end="80185" title="Moët &amp;amp; Chandon" label="Moët &amp;amp; Chandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="80224" end="80228" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504132" start="80230" end="80237" title="NetJets" label="NetJets"/>
<link wikidata="Q632030" start="80239" end="80246" title="Emmi AG" label="Emmi AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q177591" start="80252" end="80267" title="Maurice Lacroix" label="Maurice Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189671" start="80322" end="80330" title="FC Basel" label="FC Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="80339" end="80358" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Swiss national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q483868" start="80472" end="80486" title="Czech Republic national football team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113245" start="80573" end="80584" title="Murat Yakin" label="Murat Yakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q157064" start="80613" end="80617" title="Puma (brand)" label="Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q284163" start="80657" end="80676" title="2022 FIFA World Cup" label="2022 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q948442" start="80752" end="80783" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Tennis Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q233306" start="80791" end="80823" title="Mirka Federer" label="Miroslava Federer (née Vavrinec)"/>
<link wikidata="Q661494" start="80891" end="80911" title="Tennis at the 2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Sydney Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262" start="81035" end="81041" title="Riehen" label="Riehen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="81284" end="81292" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427409" start="81342" end="81355" title="Urban Federer" label="Urban Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="81368" end="81373" title="Abbot" label="Abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q125072234" start="81377" end="81393" title="Einsiedeln Abbey" label="Einsiedeln Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162767" start="82459" end="82486" title="conscription in Switzerland" label="compulsory military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="83020" end="83037" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635153" start="83056" end="83073" title="2006 Italian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2006 Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="83088" end="83092" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q64665" start="83182" end="83192" title="Birsfelden" label="Birsfelden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262" start="83194" end="83200" title="Riehen" label="Riehen"/>
<link wikidata="Q69030" start="83211" end="83223" title="Münchenstein" label="Münchenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q387066" start="83265" end="83277" title="Swiss German" label="Swiss German"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="83326" end="83341" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q207367" start="83814" end="83827" title="EBV infectious mononucleosis" label="mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85160" end="85206" title="List of career achievements by Roger Federer#Guinness World Records" label="30, which include 18 performance based records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232431" start="85269" end="85277" title="Tennis Records Open Era (Singles Men)" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q83529" start="85358" end="85389" title="Roger Federer career statistics" label="Roger Federer career statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006209" start="85392" end="85436" title="List of career achievements by Roger Federer" label="List of career achievements by Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426439" start="85439" end="85486" title="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions" label="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q30754353" start="85489" end="85533" title="Tennis Masters Series records and statistics" label="Tennis Masters Series records and statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="85536" end="85586" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players" label="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players"/>
<link wikidata="Q686735" start="85602" end="85643" title="World number 1 ranked male tennis players" label="World number 1 ranked male tennis players"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016846" start="85697" end="85741" title="All-time tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="All-time tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232431" start="85744" end="85788" title="Open Era tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Open Era tennis records – Men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206583" start="85804" end="85820" title="ATP Tour records" label="ATP Tour records"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="85836" end="85846" title="ATP Awards" label="ATP Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603328" start="85849" end="85891" title="2004 Summer Olympics national flag bearers" label="2004 Summer Olympics national flag bearers"/>
<link wikidata="Q434783" start="85894" end="85936" title="2008 Summer Olympics national flag bearers" label="2008 Summer Olympics national flag bearers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262377" wikidata="Q3753012" url="?curid=262377" title="French 75 (cocktail)">
<text>French 75 is a cocktail made from gin, champagne, lemon juice, and sugar. It is also called a 75 cocktail, or in French simply a (&#x27;seventy five&#x27;).

The drink dates to World War I, when in 1915 an early form was created at the New York Bar in Paris — later Harry&#x27;s New York Bar — by barman Harry MacElhone. The combination was said to have such a kick that it felt like being shelled with the powerful French 75mm field gun.

==History==
The drink with its current name and recipe developed over the 1920s, though similar drinks date to the 19th century. In the 19th century, the &quot;champagne cup&quot; was a popular cocktail, consisting of champagne, lemon juice, sugar, and ice. Gin was sometimes added, yielding a drink much like the French 75.

The drink was first recorded as the &quot;75&quot; in &quot;Harry&#x27;s ABC of Mixing Cocktails&quot;, 1922 edition, by Harry MacElhone, and in the same year in Robert Vermeire&#x27;s &quot;Cocktails: How to Mix Them&quot;, which credits the drink to MacElhone. However, the recipes differed from the current form – MacElhone&#x27;s version consisted of Calvados, gin, grenadine, and absinthe, while Vermeire added lemon juice.

The recipe took its now-classic form and &quot;French 75&quot; name in &quot;Here’s How&quot;, by Judge Jr. (1927), consisting of gin, sugar, lemon juice, and champagne. This recipe was republished with the name &quot;French 75&quot; in &quot;The Savoy Cocktail Book&quot; (1930), which helped popularize the drink. Some later cocktail books use cognac instead of gin, such as &quot;The Fine Art of Mixing Drinks&quot; by David A. Embury.

The French 75 was popularized in America at the Stork Club in New York. It appears in the movie &quot;Casablanca&quot; (1942) and is referenced twice in the John Wayne films &quot;A Man Betrayed&quot; (1941) and &quot;Jet Pilot&quot; (1957). In 2016, it appears in the ITV series &quot;Mr. Selfridge&quot;, which is set in London in the 1910s and 1920s.

A fanciful alternative story of the invention of the French 75 was related by humorist Jean Shepherd on November 17, 1969, wherein he credits Gervais Raoul Lufbery as the inventor. The mixture, as related by Shepherd, is champagne and cognac on ice with perhaps a twist of lemon. This version is not credible, given the documented earlier version.

==Similar drinks==
The recipe of the French 75 is very similar to one of the most popular cocktails, the Tom Collins, with champagne replacing carbonated water. According to the recipe in Harry MacElhone&#x27;s book &quot;Harry&#x27;s ABC of Mixing Cocktails&quot;, a French 75 is supposed to be served in a highball glass. The highball glass, which the Tom Collins cocktail is also served in, supports the theory of the French 75 being a variation of the Tom Collins.

== References ==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3753012" start="0" end="9" title="French 75 (cocktail)" label="French 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q134768" start="15" end="23" title="cocktail" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q959362" start="34" end="37" title="gin" label="gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753012" start="94" end="105" title="French 75 (cocktail)" label="75 cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="177" end="188" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334247" start="266" end="291" title="Harry&amp;#x27;s New York Bar" label="Harry&amp;#x27;s New York Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715709" start="304" end="319" title="Harry MacElhone" label="Harry MacElhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q958738" start="416" end="437" title="Canon de 75 modèle 1897" label="French 75mm field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715709" start="887" end="902" title="Harry MacElhone" label="Harry MacElhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268" start="1121" end="1129" title="Calvados" label="Calvados"/>
<link wikidata="Q746639" start="1439" end="1462" title="The Savoy Cocktail Book" label="The Savoy Cocktail Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q284" start="1542" end="1548" title="cognac" label="cognac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733971" start="1579" end="1608" title="The Fine Art of Mixing Drinks" label="The Fine Art of Mixing Drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230458" start="1618" end="1633" title="David A. Embury" label="David A. Embury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620064" start="1684" end="1694" title="Stork Club" label="Stork Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="1738" end="1748" title="Casablanca (movie)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="1793" end="1803" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808686" start="1816" end="1830" title="A Man Betrayed (1941 film)" label="A Man Betrayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q862956" start="1854" end="1863" title="Jet Pilot (film)" label="Jet Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127467" start="1922" end="1935" title="Mr. Selfridge" label="Mr. Selfridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355015" start="2078" end="2091" title="Jean Shepherd" label="Jean Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088654" start="2133" end="2154" title="Gervais Raoul Lufbery" label="Gervais Raoul Lufbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q703541" start="2445" end="2456" title="Tom Collins" label="Tom Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="2483" end="2499" title="carbonated water" label="carbonated water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131010" start="2648" end="2662" title="highball glass" label="highball glass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262380" wikidata="Q7430495" url="?curid=262380" title="Scarp">
<text>Scarp may refer to:

==Landforms and geology==
* Cliff, a significant vertical, or near vertical, rock exposure
* Escarpment, a steep slope or long cliff that occurs from erosion or faulting and separates two relatively level areas of differing elevations
* Fault scarp, the topographic expression of faulting attributed to the displacement of the land surface by movement along faults

==Other==
* Scarp, Scotland, an island in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland
* Scarp Forest, a location in South Africa
* Scarp and counterscarp, the inner and outer sides of a ditch or moat used in fortifications
* SS-9 Scarp, the NATO reporting name for the R-36 ICBM
* &quot;Scarp&quot;, a 2013 book by the British writer Nick Papadimitriou

==See also==
* Scarpe (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7430495" start="0" end="5" title="Scarp" label="Scarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="49" end="54" title="Cliff" label="Cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="114" end="124" title="Escarpment" label="Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q475080" start="258" end="269" title="Fault scarp" label="Fault scarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107652" start="399" end="414" title="Scarp, Scotland" label="Scarp, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="462" end="474" title="Scarp Forest" label="Scarp Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="490" end="502" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q545975" start="515" end="527" title="counterscarp" label="counterscarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451506" start="599" end="609" title="SS-9 Scarp" label="SS-9 Scarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q50439547" start="708" end="726" title="Nick Papadimitriou" label="Nick Papadimitriou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430498" start="743" end="766" title="Scarpe (disambiguation)" label="Scarpe (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262383" wikidata="Q365626" url="?curid=262383" title="Ben Hogan">
<text>William Ben Hogan (August 13, 1912 – July 25, 1997) was an American professional golfer who is generally considered to be one of the greatest players in the history of the game. He is notable for his profound influence on golf swing theory, his assiduous practice,
 and his ball-striking skill.

Hogan&#x27;s nine career professional major championships tie him with Gary Player for fourth all-time, trailing only Jack Nicklaus (18), Tiger Woods (15) and Walter Hagen (11). He is one of only five players to have won all four majors: the Masters Tournament, The Open Championship (despite only playing once), the U.S. Open, and the PGA Championship. The other four are Nicklaus, Woods, Player, and Gene Sarazen. Hogan&#x27;s first major win came at age 34.

Golf.com proclaimed, &quot;Ben is more respected for the quality of his shots than any golfer ever in history and that includes Woods or Nicklaus—-nobody has been copied more than Ben Hogan and his book has been copied more than any book ever.&quot;

==Early life and character==
Hogan was born in Stephenville, Texas, the third and youngest child of Chester and Clara (Williams) Hogan. His father was a blacksmith and the family lived southwest in Dublin until 1921, when they moved northeast to Fort Worth. When Hogan was nine years old in 1922, Chester committed suicide by gunshot at the family home. By some accounts, Chester committed suicide in front of him, which some (including Hogan biographer James Dodson) have cited as the cause of his introverted personality in later years.

The family incurred financial difficulties after his father&#x27;s suicide, and the children took jobs to help their seamstress mother make ends meet. Older brother Royal quit school at age 14 to deliver office supplies by bicycle, and nine-year-old Ben sold newspapers after school at the nearby train station. A tip from a friend led him to caddying at age eleven at Glen Garden Country Club, a nine-hole course located three miles out of town. One of his fellow caddies at Glen Garden was Byron Nelson, later a tour rival. The two would tie for the lead at the annual Christmas caddie tournament in December 1927, when both were fifteen. Nelson sank a putt to tie on the ninth and final hole. Instead of sudden death, they played another nine holes; Nelson sank another substantial putt on the final green to win by a stroke.

The following spring, Nelson was granted the only junior membership offered by the members of Glen Garden. Club rules did not allow caddies age 16 and older, so after August 1928, Hogan took his game to three scrubby daily-fee courses: Katy Lake, Worth Hills, and Z-Boaz.

==Turns professional==
Hogan dropped out of Central High School during the final semester of his senior year. He turned pro six months shy of his 18th birthday at the Texas Open in San Antonio, in late January 1930. Hogan met Valerie Fox in Sunday school in Fort Worth in the mid-1920s, and they reacquainted in 1932 when he landed a low-paying club-pro job in Cleburne, where her family had moved. They married in April 1935 at her parents&#x27; home.

Hogan&#x27;s early years as a pro were very difficult; he went broke more than once. He did not win his first tournament (as an individual) until March 1940, when he won three consecutive events in North Carolina at age 27. Although it took a decade for Hogan to secure his first victory, his wife Valerie believed in him, and this helped see him through the tough years when he battled a hook that he later cured.

Despite finishing 13th on the money list in 1938, Hogan took an assistant pro job at Century Country Club in Purchase, New York. He worked at Century as an assistant and then as the head pro until 1941, when he took the head pro job at Hershey Country Club in Hershey, Pennsylvania.

==Career-threatening accident==
During Hogan&#x27;s prime years of 1938 through 1959, he won 63 professional golf tournaments despite the interruption of his career by World War II and a near-fatal car accident. Hogan served in the U.S. Army Air Forces from March 1943 to June 1945; he was stationed locally at Fort Worth and became a utility pilot with the rank of lieutenant.

Driving home to Fort Worth after a Monday playoff loss at the 1949 Phoenix Open, Hogan and his wife Valerie survived a head-on collision with a Greyhound bus east of Van Horn, Texas. On the morning of Wednesday, February 2, Hogan had reduced his speed in the limited visibility ground fog; the bus was attempting to pass another vehicle on a narrow bridge, which left no place to avoid the crash. Hogan threw himself across Valerie to protect her. He would have been killed had he not done so, because the steering column punctured the driver&#x27;s seat of their new Cadillac sedan.

This accident left Hogan, age 36, with a double-fracture of the pelvis, a fractured collar bone, a left ankle fracture, a chipped rib, and near-fatal blood clots: he would suffer lifelong circulation problems and other physical limitations. His doctors said he might never walk again, let alone play golf competitively. While Hogan was in the hospital in El Paso, his life was endangered by a blood clot problem that led doctors to tie off the vena cava. He left the hospital on the first of April, 59 days after the accident, and returned to Fort Worth by train.

Hogan regained his strength by extensive walking and resumed his golf activities in November 1949. He returned to the PGA Tour to start the 1950 season at the Los Angeles Open, where he tied with Sam Snead over 72 holes, but lost the 18-hole playoff, held over a week later (due to course conditions).

==The &quot;Triple Crown&quot; season==
The win at Carnoustie was only a part of Hogan&#x27;s watershed 1953 season, a year in which he won five of the six tournaments he entered, including three major championships (a feat known as the Triple Crown of Golf).

It still stands among the greatest single seasons in the history of professional golf. Hogan, 40, was unable to enter—and possibly win—the 1953 PGA Championship (to complete the Grand Slam) because its play (July 1–7) overlapped the play of The Open at Carnoustie (July 6–10), which he won. It was the only time that a golfer had won three major professional championships in a year until Tiger Woods won the final three majors in 2000 (and the first in 2001).

Hogan often declined to play in the PGA Championship; he skipped it more and more often as his career wore on. There were two reasons for this. First, the PGA Championship was, until 1958, a match play event, and Hogan&#x27;s particular skill was &quot;shooting a number&quot;—meticulously planning and executing a strategy to achieve a score for a round on a particular course (even to the point of leaving out the 7-iron in the U.S. Open at Merion, saying &quot;there are no 7-iron shots at Merion&quot;). Second, the PGA required several days of 36 holes per day competition, and after his 1949 auto accident, Hogan struggled to manage more than 18 holes a day.

After the win at Carnoustie, Hogan and his wife Valerie were passengers on the westbound to New York City, where he received a ticker tape parade down Broadway on July 21.

==Hogan&#x27;s golf swing==
Hogan was known to practice more than any of his contemporary golfers and is said to have &quot;invented practice&quot;. On this matter, Hogan himself said, &quot;You hear stories about me beating my brains out practicing, but... I was enjoying myself. I couldn&#x27;t wait to get up in the morning, so I could hit balls. When I&#x27;m hitting the ball where I want, hard and crisply, it&#x27;s a joy that very few people experience.&quot; He was also one of the first players to match particular clubs to yardages, or reference points around the course such as bunkers or trees, to improve his distance control.

Hogan thought that an individual&#x27;s golf swing was &quot;in the dirt&quot; and that mastering it required plenty of practice and repetition. He is also known to have spent years contemplating the golf swing, trying a range of theories and methods before arriving at the finished method which brought him his greatest period of success.

The young Hogan was badly afflicted by hooking the golf ball. Although slight of build at 5&#x27;8½&quot; and 145 pounds – attributes that earned him the nickname &quot;Bantam&quot;, which he thoroughly disliked – he was long off the tee early in his career. Like many professional golfers of his day, he competed in long-drive contests as well as matchplay and strokeplay events.

It has been alleged that Hogan used a &quot;strong&quot; grip, with hands more the right of the club grip in tournament play before his accident in 1949, despite often practicing with a &quot;weak&quot; grip, with the back of the left wrist facing the target, and that this limited his success, or, at least, his reliability, up to that date. Jacobs alleges that Byron Nelson told him this information, and furthermore that Hogan developed and used the &quot;strong&quot; grip as a boy to be able to hit the ball as far as bigger, stronger contemporaries. This strong grip is what resulted in Hogan hitting the odd disastrous snap hook.

Hogan&#x27;s late swing produced the famed &quot;Hogan Fade&quot; ball flight, lower than usual for a great player and from left to right. This ball flight was the result of his using a &quot;draw&quot; type swing in conjunction with a &quot;weak&quot; grip, a combination that all but negated the chance of hitting a hook.

Hogan played and practiced golf with only bare hands, i.e., without gloves. Moe Norman did the same, playing and practicing without gloves. The two were arguably the greatest ball strikers golf has ever known; even Tiger Woods quoted them as the only players ever to have &quot;owned their swings&quot;, in that they had total control of it and, as a result, the ball&#x27;s flight.

In May 1967, the editor of Cary Middlecoff&#x27;s 1974 book &quot;The Golf Swing&quot; watched every shot that 54-year-old Hogan hit in the Colonial National Invitational in Fort Worth, Texas. &quot;Hogan shot 281 for a third-place tie with George Archer. Of the 281 shots, 141 were taken in reaching the greens. Of the 141, 139 were rated from well-executed to superbly executed. The remaining two were a drive that missed the fairway by some 5 yards and a 5-iron to a par-3 hole that missed the green by about the same distance. It was difficult, if not impossible to conceive of anybody hitting the ball better over a four-day span.&quot;

===Hogan&#x27;s secret===
In the spring of 1953, Hogan announced he had discovered a &quot;secret&quot; that made his swing nearly automatic. There are many theories as to its exact nature. The earliest theory is that the &quot;secret&quot; was a special wrist movement known as &quot;cupping under&quot;. This information was revealed in a 1955 &quot;Life&quot; magazine article. However, many believed Hogan did not reveal all that he knew at the time. It has since been alleged in &quot;Golf Digest&quot; magazine, and by Jody Vasquez in his book &quot;Afternoons With Mr Hogan&quot;, that the second element of Hogan&#x27;s &quot;secret&quot; was how he used his right knee to initiate the swing and that this right knee movement was critical to the correct operation of the wrist.

Hogan revealed later in life that the &quot;secret&quot; involved cupping the left wrist at the top of the backswing and using a weaker left-hand grip (thumb more on top of the grip as opposed to on the right side).

Hogan did this to prevent himself from ever hooking the ball off the tee. By positioning his hands in this manner, he ensured that the club face would be slightly open upon impact, creating a fade (left to right ball flight) as opposed to a draw or hook (right to left ball flight).

===Hand dominance===
Many believe that although he played right-handed as an adult, Hogan was actually left-handed. In his book &quot;Five Lessons&quot;, in the chapter entitled &quot;The Grip&quot;, Hogan said &quot;I was born left-handed -- that was the normal way for me to do things. I was switched over to doing things right-handed when I was a boy but I started golf as a left-hander because the first club I ever came into possession of, an old five-iron, was a left-handed stick.&quot; This belief also seemed to be corroborated by Hogan himself in his earlier book &quot;Power Golf&quot;. However, some mystery still remains about this since Hogan in subsequent interviews said that the belief of his being left-handed was actually a myth (noted in what was probably his last video interview and in his 1987 &quot;Golf Magazine&quot; interview).

In these interviews, Hogan said that he was indeed a right-handed player who early on practiced/played with a left-hand club that had been given to him because it was all that he had and that it was this issue that brought about the myth that he was left-handed. This may be the reason that his early play with right-handed equipment found him using a cross-handed grip (right hand at the end of the club, left hand below it). In &quot;The Search for the Perfect Golf Swing&quot;, researchers Cochran and Stobbs held the opinion that a left-handed person playing right-handed would be prone to hook the ball.

===Famous 1-iron shot===
Hy Peskin, a staff photographer for &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;, took a famous photo of Ben Hogan playing a 1-iron shot to the green at the 72nd hole of the 1950 U.S. Open. It was ranked by &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; as one of the greatest sports photographs of the 20th century.

==&quot;Five Lessons&quot; and golf instruction==
Hogan believed that a solid, repeatable golf swing involved only a few essential elements, which, when performed correctly and in sequence, were the essence of the swing. His book &quot;Five Lessons: The Modern Fundamentals of Golf&quot; (written with Herbert Warren Wind) is perhaps the most widely read golf tutorial ever written, although Harvey Penick&#x27;s &quot;Little Red Book&quot; would also have a claim to that title, and the principles therein are often parroted by modern &quot;swing gurus&quot;. In the &quot;Five Lessons&quot;, Hogan breaks down the swing into four parts: The Fundamentals, The Grip, Stance and Posture, and The Swing.

===&quot;The Fundamentals&quot;===
Hogan explains that the average golfer underestimates himself. He believes that beginners place too much emphasis on the long game. If you have a correct, powerful and repeating swing, then you can shoot in the 70s. &quot;The average golfer is entirely capable of building a repeating swing and breaking 80.&quot; Through years of trial and error, Ben has developed techniques that have proved themselves under various types of pressure.

===&quot;The Grip&quot;===
Hogan says, &quot;Good golf begins with a good grip.&quot; Without a good grip, one cannot play to his or her potential. The grip is important because it is the only direct physical contact you have with the ball via your golf club. A bad grip can cause dipping of the hands at the top of the swing and a decrease in club head speed. This can cause a loss of power and accuracy. The following describes the perfect golf grip in the eyes of Mr. Hogan:

&quot;With the back of your left hand facing the target, place the club in the left hand so that, 1) The shaft is pressed up under the muscular pad at the inside heel of the palm, and 2) The shaft also lies directly across the top joint of the forefinger&quot;.

&quot;Crook the forefinger around the shaft and you will discover that you can lift the club and maintain a fairly firm grip on it by supporting it just with the muscles of that finger and the muscles of the pad of the palm.&quot;

&quot;Now just close the left hand-close the fingers before you close the thumb-and the club will be just where it should be.&quot;

&quot;To gain a real acquaintance with this preparatory guide to correct gripping, I would suggest practicing it five or 10 minutes a day for a week until it begins to become second nature.&quot;

&quot;To obtain the proper grip with the right hand, hold it somewhat extended, with the palm facing your target. Now-your left hand is already correctly affixed-place the club in your right hand so that the shaft lies across the top joint of the four fingers and definitely below the palm.&quot;

&quot;The right hand is a finger grip. The two fingers which should apply most of the pressure are the two middle fingers.&quot;

&quot;Now with the club held firmly on the fingers of your right hand, simply fold your right hand over your left thumb.&quot;

===&quot;Stance and Posture&quot;===
The right stance not only allows for proper alignment, but also a balanced swing, prepared usage of the proper muscles, and the maximum strength and control over your swing. We align our body to the target only after we have aligned the club head to the target. 
A proper stance starts with your feet being aligned at the target, followed by your knees, hips and shoulders. Your feet should be shoulder-width apart, your front foot should be slightly opened towards the target and your back foot should be perpendicular to the target. As you increase in club, your stance should widen for further stability. Your shoulders will be naturally open to the target line because your arms are not at equal length while holding the club. Make sure to close your shoulders slightly to stay aligned with the target line. The proper stance affects how controlled the backswing is, governs the amount of hip turn in the backswing, and allows for the hips to clear through the downswing. Your front arm should be extended at all times to allow the club to travel in its maximum arc.

&quot;The elbows should be tucked in, not stuck out from the body. At address, the left elbow should point directly at the left hipbone and the right elbow should point directly at the right hipbone. Furthermore, there should be a sense of fixed jointness between the two forearms and the wrists, and it should be maintained throughout the swing.&quot;

&quot;You should bend your knees from the thighs down. As your knees bend, the upper part of the trunk remains normally erect, just as it does when you sit down in a chair. In golf, the sit-down motion is more like lowering yourself onto a spectator-sports-stick. Think of the seat of the stick as being about two inches or so below your buttocks.&quot;

===&quot;The Swing&quot;===

====&quot;The Backswing&quot;====
Hogan advocates the use of a waggle not only because it helps you loosen your muscles, but also because it allows for your hands and arms to remember where to go for the first part of your backswing. The angle of the swing should feel like you are swinging under a slanting plane of glass. The &quot;glass&quot; has a hole for your head while it rests on your shoulders and touches the ground on top of your ball. Also, the backswing should be slightly steeper than the downswing. At the top of your backswing, your back should be facing the target.
&quot;On the backswing, the order of movement goes like this: hands, arms, shoulders, hips.&quot;

&quot;Actually, the hands start the club head back a split second before the arms start back. And the arms begin their movement a split second before the shoulders begin to turn.&quot;

&quot;Just before your hands reach the hip level, the shoulders, as they turn, automatically start pulling the hips around. As the hips begin to turn, they pull the left leg in to the right.&quot;

&quot;When you have turned your shoulders all the way, your back should face squarely toward your target.&quot;

&quot;When you finish your backswing, your chin should be hitting against the top of your left shoulder.&quot;

&quot;As you begin the backswing, you must restrain your hips from moving until the turning of the shoulders starts to pull the hips around…It is this increased tension that unwinds the upper part of the body. It unwinds the shoulder, the arms and the hands in that order, the correct order. It helps the swing so much it makes it almost automatic.&quot;

&quot;If he executes his backswing properly, as his arms are approaching hip level, they should be parallel with the plane and they should remain parallel with the plane, just beneath the glass, till they reach the top of the backswing. At the top of his backswing, his left arm should be extended at the exact same angle (to the ball) as the glass.&quot;

====&quot;The Downswing&quot;====
Hogan believes the second part of the swing, the downswing, is initiated by the hips starting to turn. A baseball player throws a ball by transferring his weight and rotates his hips. Then his shoulders and arm follow after. Hogan thinks that the downswing is very similar to this action. The downswing is at a slightly shallower angle and therefore the arms and hands should come from the inside out on the downswing. The club head reaches its maximum speed, not at impact, but right after, when both arms are fully extended.

&quot;At impact the back of the left hand faces toward your target. The wrist bone is definitely raised. It points to the target and, at the moment the ball is contacted, it is out in front, nearer to the target than any part of the hand.&quot;

&quot;At impact the right arm is still bent slightly.&quot;

&quot;At that point just beyond impact where both arms are straight and extended the club head reaches its maximum speed.&quot;

&quot;The hips lead the shoulders all the way on the downswing.&quot;

&quot;The Five Lessons&quot; was initially released as a five-part series in &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; magazine, beginning with the issue of March 11, 1957. It was compiled and printed in book form later that year and is currently in its 64th printing. Even today it continues to maintain a place at or near the top of the Amazon.com golf book sales rankings. The book was co-authored by Herbert Warren Wind, and illustrated by artist Anthony Ravielli.

==Playing style==
Hogan is widely acknowledged to have been one of the finest ball strikers that ever played the game.

Hogan&#x27;s ball striking has also been described as being of near miraculous caliber by other very knowledgeable observers such as Jack Nicklaus, who only saw him play some years after his prime. Nicklaus once responded to the question, &quot;Is Tiger Woods the best ball striker you have ever seen?&quot; with, &quot;No, no - Ben Hogan, easily&quot;.

Further testimony to Hogan&#x27;s (and Moe Norman&#x27;s) status among top golfers is provided by Tiger Woods, who said that he wished to &quot;own his (golf) swing&quot; in the same way as Moe Norman and Hogan had. Woods claimed that this pair were the only players ever to have &quot;owned their swings&quot;, in that they had total control of it and, as a result, of the ball&#x27;s flight.

By most accounts, Ben Hogan was the best golfer of his era and still stands as one of the greatest of all time. &quot;The Hawk&quot; possessed fierce determination and an iron will, which combined with his unquestionable golf skills, formed an aura that could intimidate opponents into competitive submission. In Scotland, Hogan was known as &quot;The Wee Ice Man&quot;, or, in some versions, &quot;Wee Ice Mon,&quot; a moniker earned during his famous British Open victory at Carnoustie in 1953. It is a reference to his steely and seemingly nerveless demeanor, itself a product of a golf swing he had built that was designed to perform better the more pressure he put it under. Hogan rarely spoke during competition, and mostly kept to himself. Hogan was also highly respected by fellow competitors for his superb course management skills. During his peak years, he rarely if ever attempted a shot in competition which he had not thoroughly honed in practice.

Although his ball striking was perhaps the greatest ever, Hogan&#x27;s putting skills are thought to have been below average, though he was capable of putting very well. Solid and sometimes spectacular in his early and peak years, Hogan by his later years deteriorated to the point of being an often poor putter by professional standards, particularly on slow greens. The majority of his putting problems developed after his 1949 car accident, which nearly blinded his left eye and impaired his depth perception. Toward the end of his career, he often stood over the ball inordinately long before drawing his putter back.

While he suffered from the &quot;yips&quot; in his later years, Hogan was known as an effective putter from mid to short range on quick, U.S. Open style surfaces at times during his career.

==Career and records==

Ben Hogan won ten tournaments in 1948 alone, including the U.S. Open at Riviera Country Club, a course known as &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; because of his success there. His 8-under par score in 1948 set a U.S. Open record that was matched only by Jack Nicklaus in 1980, Hale Irwin in 1990, and Lee Janzen in 1993. It was not broken until Tiger Woods shot par in 2000 (Jim Furyk also shot par in the 2003, Rory McIlroy set the current record with 16-under par in 2011, which was matched by Brooks Koepka in 2017).

Hogan remains the only player to win at least 10 PGA tour events in a year twice (13 in 1946 and 10 in 1948). Hogan owns the longest streaks of consecutive major attempts finishing in both the top 5 with 12 (1940–1947) and the top 10 with 18 (1948–1956). He is the only player to win as many as 8 majors in as few as 11 attempts (1948–1953). Hogan owns the longest streak of consecutive U.S. Open attempts finishing in the top 10 with 16 (1940–1960). The next longest streak is 7. Hogan is one of only two players to win 3 consecutive U.S. Opens in 3 attempts (the other is Willie Anderson). Hogan finished in the top 10 and scored under 290 in 12 consecutive U. S. Open attempts (1941–1956) which is still the longest such streak in Open history. He achieved this on 12 different courses and won 5 times.

Colonial Country Club in Fort Worth, a modern PGA Tour tournament venue, is also known as &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; and may have the better claim to the nickname as he won its tour event five times. It was his home course after his retirement, and he was an active member of Colonial as well for many years. The sixth hole at Carnoustie, a par five on which Hogan took a famously difficult line off the tee during each of his rounds in the 1953 Open Championship, was renamed Hogan&#x27;s Alley in 2003 during a ceremony celebrating the 50th anniversary of Hogan&#x27;s Open victory at Carnoustie.

Before the 1949 accident, Hogan never truly captured the hearts of his galleries, despite being one of the best golfers of his time. Perhaps this was due to his perceived cold and aloof on-course persona. But when Hogan shocked and amazed the golf world by returning to tournament golf only eleven months after his accident, and took second place in the 1950 Los Angeles Open after a playoff loss to Sam Snead, he was cheered on by ecstatic fans. &quot;His legs simply were not strong enough to carry his heart any longer,&quot; famed sportswriter Grantland Rice said of Hogan&#x27;s near-miss. However, he proved to his critics (and to himself, especially) that he could still win by completing his famous comeback five months later, defeating Lloyd Mangrum and George Fazio in an 18-hole playoff at Merion near Philadelphia to win his second U.S. Open title.

Hogan went on to achieve what is perhaps the greatest sporting accomplishment in history, limping to twelve more PGA Tour wins (including six majors) before retiring. In 1951, Hogan entered just five events, but won three of them – the Masters, U.S. Open, and World Championship of Golf, and finished second and fourth in his other two starts. He finished fourth on that season&#x27;s money list, barely $6,000 behind the season&#x27;s official money list leader Lloyd Mangrum, who played over twenty events. That year also saw the release of a biopic starring Glenn Ford as Hogan, called &quot;Follow the Sun: The Ben Hogan Story&quot;. He even received a ticker-tape parade in New York City in 1953, upon his return from winning the British Open, the only time he played the event. With that victory, Hogan became just the second player, after Gene Sarazen, to win all four of the modern major championships—the Masters, U.S. Open, British Open, and PGA Championship.

Hogan remains the only player to win the Masters, U.S. Open, and British Open in the same calendar year (1953). His 14-under par at the 1953 Masters set a record that stood for a dozen years; as of 2018, he remains one of just twelve (Jack Nicklaus, Raymond Floyd, Ben Crenshaw, Tiger Woods, David Duval, Phil Mickelson, Charl Schwartzel, Jordan Spieth, Justin Rose, Rickie Fowler, and Patrick Reed) to have recorded such a low score in the tournament. In 1967, at age 54, Hogan shot a record 30 on the back nine at the Masters; the record stood until 1992.

In 1945, Hogan set a PGA Tour record for a 72-hole event at the Portland Open Invitational by shooting 27-under-par. The record stood until 1998, when it was broken by John Huston (it has since been surpassed by nine others, including most recently Phil Mickelson&#x27;s 28-under in the 2013 Waste Management Phoenix Open).

Hogan never competed on the Senior PGA Tour, as that circuit did not exist until he was in his late sixties.

According to his PGA Tour profile, Hogan earned just $332,516 in official PGA events, however, a 2021 study concluded that Hogan&#x27;s tournament performances could have earned him $91.8M if he had played in the modern era.

==Hale America Open – a tenth major title for Hogan?==
Many supporters of Hogan and some golf historians feel that his victory at the Hale America Open in 1942 should be counted as his fifth U.S. Open and 10th major championship, since the tournament was to be a substitute for the Open after its cancellation by the USGA. The Hale America National Open was held in the same time slot and was run like the U.S. Open with more than 1,500 entries, local qualifying at 69 sites and sectional qualifying at most major cities. The top players, who were not away fighting in World War II, participated and the largest purse of the year was awarded. Included in the field were the very top players of the day including Byron Nelson, Gene Sarazen, Jimmy Demaret, Lloyd Mangrum, and defending Open champion Craig Wood. The only player of that level who did not play was Sam Snead, but the field did also include Bobby Jones who had competed in his own Masters event in April of that year. The championship winner&#x27;s badge was donated to the event by the USGA, and was the badge that they had intended to award for the then-canceled US Open.

==Distinctions and honors==
*A special room is dedicated to Hogan&#x27;s career, comeback, and accomplishments at the United States Golf Association Museum and Arnold Palmer Center for Golf History in Far Hills, New Jersey.
*The Hogan Bridge at Augusta National is one of the most photographed sights during The Masters as it is the footbridge that takes golfers to the green on the famous 12th hole.
*He was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 1974. In 1976, Ben Hogan was voted the Bob Jones Award, the highest honor given by the United States Golf Association in recognition of distinguished sportsmanship in golf.
*Hogan helped to design the original plans for the Trophy Club Country Club golf course in Trophy Club and 18 of the course&#x27;s 36 holes are designated as the &quot;Hogan&quot; Course.
*Hogan played on two U.S. Ryder Cup teams, 1947 and 1951, and captained the team three times, 1947, 1949, and 1967, famously claiming on the last occasion to have brought the &quot;twelve best golfers in the world&quot; to play in the competition. (This line was used by subsequent Ryder Cup captain Raymond Floyd in 1989. In 1989, playing at The Belfry, the two sides halved at 14 points each and Team Europe retained the cup.)
*Hogan ranked 38th in &quot;ESPN&#x27;s SportsCentury 50 Greatest Athletes of the 20th Century&quot; in 1999.
*Hogan won the Vardon Trophy for lowest scoring average three times: 1940, 1941, and 1948. In 1953, Hogan won the Hickok Belt as the top professional athlete of the year in the United States.
*In 2000, Hogan was ranked as the second greatest player of all time by &quot;Golf Digest&quot; magazine. Jack Nicklaus was first, and Sam Snead was third.
*In 2009, Hogan was ranked as the fourth greatest player of all time by &quot;Golf Magazine&quot;. Jack Nicklaus was first, Tiger Woods was second, and Bobby Jones was third.
*The Ben Hogan Award is given annually by the Golf Writers Association of America to a golfer who has stayed active in golf despite a physical handicap or serious illness. The first winner was Babe Zaharias.
*The Ben Hogan Award is given by Friends of Golf and the Golf Coaches Association of America to the best college golf player since 1990.
*At the 2024 Masters during the press conference for the honorary starters Jack Nicklaus, Tom Watson, and Gary Player, Mr. Player proclaimed: “I never saw a man hit a ball like Ben Hogan. He was the only man I ever met in my life that knew the swing from A to Z … He knew more about the golf swing than anybody.” 
*The Ben Hogan Museum, located in Hogan&#x27;s childhood hometown of Dublin, Texas, pays homage to the legendary golfer—the boy, the businessman, the golfer. It highlights his early experiences and their resulting impact on his private and professional life. As the son of the local blacksmith, Hogan learned from an early age the way metal could be forged to best accomplish specific tasks. He is thought to have used that knowledge to his advantage, later in life, as he went on to design and manufacture optimum golf equipment.

==The Ben Hogan Golf Equipment Company==

Following his most successful season, Hogan started his golf club company in the fall of 1953 in Fort Worth. Production began in the summer of 1954, with clubs targeted toward &quot;the better player.&quot; Always a perfectionist, Hogan is said to have ordered the entire first production run of clubs destroyed because they did not meet his exacting standards.

In 1960, he sold the company to American Machine and Foundry (AMF), but stayed on as chairman of the board for several more years. AMF &quot;Ben Hogan&quot; golf clubs were sold continuously from 1960 to 1985 when AMF was bought by Minstar who sold The Ben Hogan company in 1988 to Cosmo World, who owned the club manufacturer until 1992, when it was sold to another independent investor, Bill Goodwin.

Goodwin moved the company out of Fort Worth, and a union shop, to Virginia so it would be close to his home of operations for other AMF brands and, incidentally, a non-union shop to return the company to profitability. Goodwin sold to Spalding in 1997, closing the sale in January 1998. Spalding returned manufacturing to Hogan&#x27;s Fort Worth before eventually including the company&#x27;s assets in a bankruptcy sale of Spalding&#x27;s Top-Flite division to Callaway in 2004. After over a half-century and numerous ownership changes, the Ben Hogan line was discontinued by Callaway in 2008. The brand name was sold to Perry Ellis International in 2012. In May 2014, Eidolon Brands approached Perry Ellis International and got the rights to use Ben Hogan&#x27;s name for a line of golf clubs. The company ceased trading in 2022.

===Ownership timeline===
* 1953 – company founded
* 1960 – sold to AMF, Hogan retained as president
* 1984 – sold to Irwin Jacobs for $15 million
* 1988 – sold to Cosmo World of Japan for $55 million, initial sponsor of the Ben Hogan Tour from 1990 to 1992
* 1992 – sold to Bill Goodwin of Richmond, Virginia
* 1997 – sold to Spalding Top-Flite
* 2003 – sold to Callaway Golf, Hogan line discontinued in 2008
* 2012 – brand name sold to Perry Ellis International
* 2014 – brand name licensed by Eldolon Brands, led by CEO Terry Koehler. Company failed late 2016
* 2017 – Ben Hogan Golf Equipment Company re-emerged, funded by ExWorks Capital
* 2022 – Filed for its third and final bankruptcy and ceased trading

==Death==
Hogan died at age 84 in Fort Worth on July 25, 1997. His wife Valerie died two years later; they are interred at Greenwood Memorial Park in Fort Worth.

==Professional wins (71)==
===PGA Tour wins (64)===
*1938 (1) Hershey Four-Ball (with Vic Ghezzi)
*1940 (4) North and South Open, Greater Greensboro Open, Asheville Land of the Sky Open, Goodall Palm Beach Round Robin
*1941 (5) Asheville Open, Chicago Open, Hershey Open, Miami Biltmore International Four-Ball (with Gene Sarazen), Inverness Invitational Four-Ball (with Jimmy Demaret)
*1942 (6) Los Angeles Open, San Francisco Open, North and South Open, Asheville Land of the Sky Open, Hale America Open, Rochester Times-Union Open
*1945 (5) Nashville Invitational, Portland Open Invitational, Richmond Invitational, Montgomery Invitational, Orlando Open
*1946 (13) Phoenix Open, San Antonio Texas Open, St. Petersburg Open, Miami International Four-Ball (with Jimmy Demaret), Colonial National Invitation, Western Open, Goodall Round Robin, Inverness Invitational Four-Ball (with Jimmy Demaret), Winnipeg Open, PGA Championship, Golden State Open, Dallas Invitational, North and South Open
*1947 (7) Los Angeles Open, Phoenix Open, Colonial National Invitation, Chicago Victory National Open, World Championship of Golf, Miami International Four-Ball (with Jimmy Demaret), Inverness Invitational Four-Ball (with Jimmy Demaret)
*1948 (10) Los Angeles Open, PGA Championship, U.S. Open, Inverness Invitational Four-Ball (with Jimmy Demaret), Motor City Open, Reading Open, Western Open, Denver Open, Reno Open, Glendale Open
*1949 (2) Bing Crosby Pro-Am, Long Beach Open
*1950 (1) U.S. Open
*1951 (3) Masters Tournament, U.S. Open, World Championship of Golf
*1952 (1) Colonial National Invitation
*1953 (5) Masters Tournament, Pan American Open, Colonial National Invitation, U.S. Open, The Open Championship
*1959 (1) Colonial National Invitation

Major championships are shown in bold.

Source: 

===Other wins (7)===
&quot;this list is probably incomplete&quot;
*1936 Land of the Sky Open
*1937 Land of the Sky Open
*1940 Westchester Open, Westchester PGA Championship
*1950 Greenbrier Pro-Am
*1956 World Cup of Golf individual; World Cup of Golf team

==Major championships==
===Wins (9)===

&quot;Note: The PGA Championship was match play until 1958&quot; 
1Defeated Mangrum and Fazio in 18-hole playoff; Hogan 69 (−1), Mangrum 73 (+3), Fazio 75 (+5).

===Results timeline===




NT = no tournament
WD = Withdrew
CUT = missed the half-way cut (3rd round cut in 1960 PGA Championship)
R64, R32, R16, QF, SF = Round in which player lost in PGA Championship match play
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place

===Summary===

*Longest streak of top-10s – 18 (1948 Masters – 1956 U.S. Open)
*Most consecutive cuts made – 35 (1939 Masters – 1956 U.S. Open)

==U.S. national team appearances==
Professional
*Ryder Cup: 1947 (winners, playing captain), 1949 (winners, non-playing captain), 1951 (winners), 1967 (winners, non-playing captain)
*Canada Cup: 1956 (winners, individual winner), 1958

==See also==

*Career Grand Slam Champions
*List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins
*List of golfers with most wins in one PGA Tour event
*List of men&#x27;s major championships winning golfers
*Longest PGA Tour win streaks
*Most PGA Tour wins in a year

==References==
==Further reading==
*&quot;Ben Hogan: &quot;Players Were Afraid&quot;&quot; (1999). In &quot;ESPN SportsCentury&quot;. Michael MacCambridge, Editor. New York: Hyperion ESPN Books. pp. 142–3.
*
*

==External links==
*
*Ben Hogan - Photos by A Ravielli Taken For &quot;The Five Lessons of Golf&quot;
*Ben Hogan - &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; obituary
*Ben Hogan&#x27;s official site
*Official Ben Hogan Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q365626" start="0" end="17" title="Ben Hogan" label="William Ben Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q490253" start="68" end="87" title="professional golfer" label="professional golfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="334" end="353" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q469721" start="367" end="378" title="Gary Player" label="Gary Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="414" end="427" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="434" end="445" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q949410" start="455" end="467" title="Walter Hagen" label="Walter Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q280275" start="538" end="556" title="Masters Tournament" label="Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="558" end="579" title="The Open Championship" label="The Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="613" end="622" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="632" end="648" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q723707" start="698" end="710" title="Gene Sarazen" label="Gene Sarazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565783" start="725" end="740" title="1946 PGA Championship" label="first major win"/>
<link wikidata="Q981525" start="1056" end="1075" title="Stephenville, Texas" label="Stephenville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="1162" end="1172" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q981816" start="1207" end="1213" title="Dublin, Texas" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="1255" end="1265" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034021" start="1666" end="1676" title="seamstress" label="seamstress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064569" start="1892" end="1900" title="caddying" label="caddying"/>
<link wikidata="Q725776" start="2041" end="2053" title="Byron Nelson" label="Byron Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505148" start="2256" end="2268" title="sudden death (sport)" label="sudden death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273801" start="2696" end="2715" title="R. L. Paschal High School" label="Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="2833" end="2844" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q534957" start="3013" end="3021" title="Cleburne, Texas" label="Cleburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="3304" end="3318" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q642275" start="3631" end="3649" title="Purchase, New York" label="Purchase, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744507" start="3758" end="3778" title="Hershey Country Club" label="Hershey Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q868666" start="3782" end="3803" title="Hershey, Pennsylvania" label="Hershey, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3974" end="3986" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="4038" end="4058" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4172" end="4182" title="First lieutenant#U.S. Army, U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Air Force" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q654565" start="4252" end="4264" title="Phoenix Open" label="Phoenix Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="4329" end="4338" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q976246" start="4351" end="4366" title="Van Horn, Texas" label="Van Horn, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="4470" end="4473" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q27436" start="4753" end="4761" title="Cadillac" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q813680" start="4818" end="4840" title="fracture of the pelvis" label="fracture of the pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="4854" end="4865" title="collar bone" label="collar bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q196672" start="4900" end="4903" title="rib" label="rib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="4920" end="4930" title="blood clot" label="blood clot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="5125" end="5132" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q372409" start="5214" end="5223" title="vena cava" label="vena cava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602686" start="5494" end="5510" title="Los Angeles Open" label="Los Angeles Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q945056" start="5531" end="5540" title="Sam Snead" label="Sam Snead"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="5834" end="5853" title="men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843365" start="5875" end="5895" title="Triple Crown (golf)" label="Triple Crown of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="6043" end="6059" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079367" start="6077" end="6087" title="Grand Slam (golf)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="6288" end="6299" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187356" start="6552" end="6562" title="match play" label="match play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962734" start="6804" end="6810" title="Merion Golf Club" label="Merion"/>
<link wikidata="Q925593" start="7154" end="7172" title="List of ticker-tape parades in New York City" label="ticker tape parade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7178" end="7186" title="Broadway (Manhattan)#Nicknamed sections" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8352" end="8358" title=":wikt:bantam" label="Bantam"/>
<link wikidata="Q725776" start="8928" end="8940" title="Byron Nelson" label="Byron Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071767" start="9604" end="9614" title="Moe Norman" label="Moe Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="9743" end="9754" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171235" start="9939" end="9954" title="Cary Middlecoff" label="Cary Middlecoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q708186" start="10153" end="10166" title="George Archer" label="George Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="10907" end="10911" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110173" start="11045" end="11056" title="Golf Digest" label="Golf Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="11901" end="11913" title="handedness" label="right-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952229" start="13334" end="13343" title="Hy Peskin" label="Hy Peskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="13376" end="13394" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566931" start="13494" end="13508" title="1950 U.S. Open (golf)" label="1950 U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735845" start="13924" end="13943" title="Herbert Warren Wind" label="Herbert Warren Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587921" start="14014" end="14027" title="Harvey Penick" label="Harvey Penick"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="21663" end="21681" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735845" start="21973" end="21992" title="Herbert Warren Wind" label="Herbert Warren Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="22292" end="22305" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="22407" end="22418" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="22612" end="22623" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071767" start="22704" end="22714" title="Moe Norman" label="Moe Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="23222" end="23230" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="23362" end="23374" title="The Open Championship" label="British Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044131" start="23386" end="23396" title="Carnoustie Golf Links" label="Carnoustie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24232" end="24238" title="Golf course#Putting green" label="greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q476373" start="24528" end="24532" title="yips" label="yips"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566354" start="24769" end="24778" title="1948 U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338863" start="24782" end="24802" title="Riviera Country Club" label="Riviera Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705422" start="24978" end="24982" title="1980 U.S. Open (golf)" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586344" start="24998" end="25002" title="1990 U.S. Open (golf)" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588839" start="25022" end="25026" title="1993 U.S. Open (golf)" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597922" start="25076" end="25080" title="2000 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601923" start="25113" end="25117" title="2003 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738440" start="25176" end="25180" title="2011 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q25223555" start="25220" end="25224" title="2017 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148308" start="26035" end="26056" title="Colonial Country Club (Fort Worth)" label="Colonial Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="26060" end="26070" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="26081" end="26089" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778804" start="26216" end="26226" title="Fort Worth Invitational" label="tour event"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26227" end="26237" title="Fort Worth Invitational#Multiple winners" label="five times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044131" start="26366" end="26376" title="Carnoustie Golf Links" label="Carnoustie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567804" start="26480" end="26502" title="1953 Open Championship" label="1953 Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602686" start="26998" end="27014" title="Los Angeles Open" label="Los Angeles Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q945056" start="27039" end="27048" title="Sam Snead" label="Sam Snead"/>
<link wikidata="Q650483" start="27174" end="27186" title="sportswriter" label="sportswriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q458458" start="27187" end="27201" title="Grantland Rice" label="Grantland Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356039" start="27384" end="27397" title="Lloyd Mangrum" label="Lloyd Mangrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539220" start="27402" end="27414" title="George Fazio" label="George Fazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962734" start="27440" end="27446" title="Merion Golf Club" label="Merion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="27452" end="27464" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566931" start="27483" end="27492" title="1950 U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="27643" end="27649" title="men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="majors"/>
<link wikidata="Q369127" start="27737" end="27744" title="1951 Masters Tournament" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716058" start="27746" end="27755" title="1951 U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035490" start="27761" end="27787" title="World Championship of Golf" label="World Championship of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356039" start="27964" end="27977" title="Lloyd Mangrum" label="Lloyd Mangrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q212048" start="28062" end="28072" title="Glenn Ford" label="Glenn Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464769" start="28096" end="28131" title="Follow the Sun (film)" label="Follow the Sun: The Ben Hogan Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q378575" start="28158" end="28176" title="ticker-tape parade" label="ticker-tape parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567804" start="28236" end="28248" title="1953 Open Championship" label="British Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q723707" start="28347" end="28359" title="Gene Sarazen" label="Gene Sarazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388888" start="28722" end="28735" title="Raymond Floyd" label="Raymond Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q816472" start="28737" end="28749" title="Ben Crenshaw" label="Ben Crenshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q972981" start="28764" end="28775" title="David Duval" label="David Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q325374" start="28777" end="28791" title="Phil Mickelson" label="Phil Mickelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q531474" start="28793" end="28809" title="Charl Schwartzel" label="Charl Schwartzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287947" start="28811" end="28824" title="Jordan Spieth" label="Jordan Spieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q722750" start="28826" end="28837" title="Justin Rose" label="Justin Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364348" start="28839" end="28852" title="Rickie Fowler" label="Rickie Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15905139" start="28858" end="28870" title="Patrick Reed" label="Patrick Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231988" start="29095" end="29121" title="Portland Open Invitational" label="Portland Open Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700539" start="29199" end="29210" title="John Huston (golfer)" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q325374" start="29280" end="29294" title="Phil Mickelson" label="Phil Mickelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q654565" start="29323" end="29352" title="Waste Management Phoenix Open" label="Waste Management Phoenix Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="29384" end="29399" title="Senior PGA Tour" label="Senior PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641365" start="29826" end="29843" title="Hale America Open" label="Hale America Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="29883" end="29892" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="29902" end="29920" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187243" start="30009" end="30013" title="USGA" label="USGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="30261" end="30273" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866415" start="30947" end="31026" title="United States Golf Association Museum and Arnold Palmer Center for Golf History" label="United States Golf Association Museum and Arnold Palmer Center for Golf History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084288" start="31030" end="31051" title="Far Hills, New Jersey" label="Far Hills, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q258851" start="31256" end="31279" title="World Golf Hall of Fame" label="World Golf Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q888019" start="31322" end="31337" title="Bob Jones Award" label="Bob Jones Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187243" start="31370" end="31400" title="United States Golf Association" label="United States Golf Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q980506" start="31547" end="31558" title="Trophy Club, Texas" label="Trophy Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="31670" end="31679" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388888" start="31944" end="31957" title="Raymond Floyd" label="Raymond Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="32101" end="32105" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973671" start="32198" end="32211" title="Vardon Trophy" label="Vardon Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135207" start="32297" end="32308" title="Hickok Belt" label="Hickok Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110173" start="32453" end="32464" title="Golf Digest" label="Golf Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="32481" end="32494" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q945056" start="32510" end="32519" title="Sam Snead" label="Sam Snead"/>
<link wikidata="Q975634" start="32609" end="32622" title="Golf Magazine" label="Golf Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="32630" end="32643" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="32655" end="32666" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q437526" start="32683" end="32694" title="Bobby Jones (golfer)" label="Bobby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q231983" start="32899" end="32912" title="Babe Zaharias" label="Babe Zaharias"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713077" start="32919" end="32934" title="Ben Hogan Award (FOG)" label="Ben Hogan Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q124518350" start="33059" end="33071" title="2024 Masters" label="2024 Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="33126" end="33139" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q532111" start="33141" end="33151" title="Tom Watson (golfer)" label="Tom Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q469721" start="33157" end="33168" title="Gary Player" label="Gary Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q981816" start="33434" end="33447" title="Dublin, Texas" label="Dublin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="33648" end="33658" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744378" start="34334" end="34362" title="American Machine and Foundry" label="American Machine and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555271" start="34941" end="34949" title="Spalding (company)" label="Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q132146562" start="35146" end="35155" title="Top-Flite" label="Top-Flite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027181" start="35283" end="35291" title="Callaway Golf Company" label="Callaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744378" start="35606" end="35609" title="American Machine and Foundry" label="AMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777663" start="35763" end="35777" title="Ben Hogan Tour" label="Ben Hogan Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="35829" end="35837" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555271" start="35865" end="35873" title="Spalding (sports equipment)" label="Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027181" start="35901" end="35914" title="Callaway Golf Company" label="Callaway Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605041" start="36374" end="36397" title="Greenwood Memorial Park (Fort Worth)" label="Greenwood Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744540" start="36476" end="36493" title="Hershey Four-Ball" label="Hershey Four-Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757798" start="36500" end="36510" title="Vic Ghezzi" label="Vic Ghezzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955848" start="36522" end="36542" title="North and South Open" label="North and South Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772957" start="36544" end="36567" title="Greater Greensboro Open" label="Greater Greensboro Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="36569" end="36578" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484238" start="36579" end="36594" title="Land of the Sky" label="Land of the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583177" start="36601" end="36631" title="Goodall Palm Beach Round Robin" label="Goodall Palm Beach Round Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568453" start="36658" end="36670" title="Chicago Open" label="Chicago Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744540" start="36672" end="36684" title="Hershey Open" label="Hershey Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982678" start="36686" end="36724" title="Miami Biltmore International Four-Ball" label="Miami Biltmore International Four-Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q723707" start="36731" end="36743" title="Gene Sarazen" label="Gene Sarazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060250" start="36746" end="36778" title="Inverness Invitational Four-Ball" label="Inverness Invitational Four-Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q946456" start="36785" end="36798" title="Jimmy Demaret" label="Jimmy Demaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602686" start="36810" end="36826" title="Los Angeles Open" label="Los Angeles Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q14306656" start="36828" end="36846" title="San Francisco Open" label="San Francisco Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955848" start="36848" end="36868" title="North and South Open" label="North and South Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641365" start="36902" end="36919" title="Hale America Open" label="Hale America Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q96402311" start="36921" end="36947" title="Rochester Times-Union Open" label="Rochester Times-Union Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712888" start="36958" end="36980" title="Nashville Invitational" label="Nashville Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231988" start="36982" end="37008" title="Portland Open Invitational" label="Portland Open Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q654565" start="37082" end="37094" title="Phoenix Open" label="Phoenix Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q680171" start="37096" end="37118" title="San Antonio Texas Open" label="San Antonio Texas Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036751" start="37120" end="37139" title="St. Petersburg Open Invitational" label="St. Petersburg Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982678" start="37141" end="37170" title="Miami International Four-Ball" label="Miami International Four-Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q946456" start="37177" end="37190" title="Jimmy Demaret" label="Jimmy Demaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778804" start="37193" end="37221" title="Colonial National Invitation" label="Colonial National Invitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690974" start="37223" end="37235" title="Western Open" label="Western Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583177" start="37237" end="37256" title="Goodall Round Robin" label="Goodall Round Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060250" start="37258" end="37290" title="Inverness Invitational Four-Ball" label="Inverness Invitational Four-Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q946456" start="37297" end="37310" title="Jimmy Demaret" label="Jimmy Demaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565783" start="37328" end="37344" title="1946 PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771731" start="37365" end="37384" title="Dallas Invitational" label="Dallas Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955848" start="37386" end="37406" title="North and South Open" label="North and South Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602686" start="37417" end="37433" title="Los Angeles Open" label="Los Angeles Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q654565" start="37435" end="37447" title="Phoenix Open" label="Phoenix Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778804" start="37449" end="37477" title="Colonial National Invitation" label="Colonial National Invitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568453" start="37479" end="37508" title="Chicago Victory National Open" label="Chicago Victory National Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035490" start="37510" end="37536" title="World Championship of Golf" label="World Championship of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982678" start="37538" end="37567" title="Miami International Four-Ball" label="Miami International Four-Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q946456" start="37574" end="37587" title="Jimmy Demaret" label="Jimmy Demaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060250" start="37590" end="37622" title="Inverness Invitational Four-Ball" label="Inverness Invitational Four-Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q946456" start="37629" end="37642" title="Jimmy Demaret" label="Jimmy Demaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602686" start="37655" end="37671" title="Los Angeles Open" label="Los Angeles Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566307" start="37673" end="37689" title="1948 PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566354" start="37691" end="37700" title="1948 U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060250" start="37702" end="37734" title="Inverness Invitational Four-Ball" label="Inverness Invitational Four-Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q946456" start="37741" end="37754" title="Jimmy Demaret" label="Jimmy Demaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q15974367" start="37757" end="37772" title="Motor City Open" label="Motor City Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300536" start="37774" end="37786" title="Reading Open" label="Reading Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690974" start="37788" end="37800" title="Western Open" label="Western Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259758" start="37802" end="37813" title="Denver Open" label="Denver Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q298589" start="37850" end="37868" title="Bing Crosby Pro-Am" label="Bing Crosby Pro-Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672320" start="37870" end="37885" title="Long Beach Open" label="Long Beach Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566931" start="37896" end="37905" title="1950 U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q369127" start="37916" end="37934" title="1951 Masters Tournament" label="Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716058" start="37936" end="37945" title="1951 U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035490" start="37947" end="37973" title="World Championship of Golf" label="World Championship of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778804" start="37984" end="38012" title="Colonial National Invitation" label="Colonial National Invitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567770" start="38023" end="38041" title="1953 Masters Tournament" label="Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778804" start="38062" end="38090" title="Colonial National Invitation" label="Colonial National Invitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567862" start="38092" end="38101" title="1953 U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567804" start="38103" end="38124" title="1953 Open Championship" label="The Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q110903967" start="38126" end="38130" title="1959 PGA Tour" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778804" start="38135" end="38163" title="Colonial National Invitation" label="Colonial National Invitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="38165" end="38184" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="Major championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987261" start="38341" end="38357" title="Westchester Open" label="Westchester Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408181" start="38394" end="38411" title="Greenbrier Pro-Am" label="Greenbrier Pro-Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="38418" end="38435" title="World Cup of Golf" label="World Cup of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="38448" end="38465" title="World Cup of Golf" label="World Cup of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="39124" end="39133" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943125" start="39135" end="39139" title="1947 Ryder Cup" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943126" start="39168" end="39172" title="1949 Ryder Cup" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943127" start="39205" end="39209" title="1951 Ryder Cup" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710308" start="39221" end="39225" title="1967 Ryder Cup" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="39258" end="39268" title="World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="Canada Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407126" start="39270" end="39274" title="1956 Canada Cup" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407299" start="39305" end="39309" title="1958 Canada Cup" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39326" end="39353" title="Grand Slam (golf)#Career Grand Slam" label="Career Grand Slam Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621761" start="39355" end="39394" title="List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins" label="List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016069" start="39396" end="39448" title="List of golfers with most wins in one PGA Tour event" label="List of golfers with most wins in one PGA Tour event"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353769" start="39450" end="39504" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s major championships winning golfers" label="List of men&amp;#x27;s major championships winning golfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626707" start="39506" end="39534" title="Longest PGA Tour win streaks" label="Longest PGA Tour win streaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916772" start="39536" end="39564" title="Most PGA Tour wins in a year" label="Most PGA Tour wins in a year"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262390" wikidata="Q2295983" url="?curid=262390" title="Snoqualmie River">
<text>The Snoqualmie River is a long river in King County and Snohomish County in the U.S. state of Washington. The river&#x27;s three main tributaries are the North, Middle, and South Forks, which drain the west side of the Cascade Mountains near the town of North Bend and join near the town of Snoqualmie just above the Snoqualmie Falls. After the falls the river flows north through rich farmland and the towns of Fall City, Carnation, and Duvall before meeting the Skykomish River to form the Snohomish River near Monroe. The Snohomish River empties into Puget Sound at Everett. Other tributaries of the Snoqualmie River include the Taylor River and the Pratt River, both of which enter the Middle Fork, the Tolt River, which joins at Carnation, and the Raging River at Fall City.

Many of the Snoqualmie River&#x27;s headwaters originate as snowmelt within the Alpine Lakes Wilderness. On August 8, 2007, U.S. Representative Dave Reichert (WA-08), King County Executive Ron Sims, and others announced a proposal to expand the Alpine Lakes Wilderness to include the valley of the Pratt River, a tributary of the Middle Fork, near the town of North Bend. The proposal would also give the Pratt River National Wild and Scenic River status.

== South Fork ==

The South Fork, approximately long, begins at the outlet of tiny Source Lake, , and flows southeast before soon turning southwest and continuing to flow in that direction until after Denny Creek joins. It then flows west for a bit before turning northwest and continuing in that general direction until it merges with the Snoqualmie River Proper just above Snoqualmie Falls. It drops over a total of 6 waterfalls (many would argue 8 because many people divide the final one into three portions).

== Middle Fork ==

The Middle Fork, approximately long, originates from Chain Lakes, , and flows south to Williams Lake, then in a westerly direction until it meets with the North Fork near North Bend. It receives the waters of the Taylor River and the Pratt River in short order about halfway between its source and its mouth. It has one major waterfall along its course. The upper reaches of the Middle Fork, Taylor, and Pratt river valleys are within the boundaries of the Alpine Lakes Wilderness area.

The Middle Fork Valley is a popular recreational area since it is accessible during the winter due to its low altitude and close proximity to Seattle. For many years the Middle Fork Road extended to Hardscrabble Creek, but was gated at Dingford Creek in June 2007, in. The gate at Dingford Creek was a controversial part of the Access and Travel Management plan adopted by the US Forest Service in 2005. Much of the road&#x27;s route is on the 1920s and 1930s era railroad grade of the North Bend Timber Company. The paved portion of the Middle Fork road was extended by during a 3-year construction project from 2014 to 2016, extending pavement to just before the Taylor River bridge. The Middle Fork Valley was heavily logged starting in 1923 and continued up through the 1970s. The obvious railroad grades, pilings, and related debris are from the North Bend Timber Company&#x27;s activity from 1923 to 1941.

== North Fork ==
The North Fork, approximately long, originates at the outlet of small, rarely visited Lake Kanim, . Almost directly after exiting the lake it drops over Kanim Falls. The river then flows east before making a wide turn north. Just before its confluence with the Middle Fork the river flows through a canyon near Ernie&#x27;s Grove. There are several waterfalls within this canyon including Fantastic Falls.

== Waterfalls ==

The Snoqualmie River has quite a few major waterfalls. By far the most famous waterfall in Washington, receiving over 1 million visitors every year, is the high Snoqualmie Falls. However, the three forks of the upper Snoqualmie River also have notable waterfalls. The north fork has Fantastic Falls (35 ft) and Kanim Falls (200 ft). The middle fork has Nellie Falls (150 ft). And, the south fork has Twin Falls (135 ft), Middle Twin Falls, Upper Twin Falls, Weeks Falls, Upper Weeks Falls, Denny Camp Falls, Franklin Falls (135 ft), and Fall-into-the-Wall Falls (22 ft).

Snoqualmie Falls was featured on the television series &quot;Twin Peaks&quot;. Shots of upriver Snoqualmie also feature in some of the show&#x27;s title sequences.

== Whitewater kayaking, canoeing and rafting ==
The Snoqualmie River has quite a few sections suitable for whitewater kayaking and rafting. It features run rate Class II to Class V+. The nearby Raging River also features a kayaking run.

== Flooding ==

The Snoqualmie River is prone to flooding and typically sees multiple flood events annually that inundate local farmland and close low-lying roads. During record level floods, all road access to the towns of Carnation and Duvall becomes closed off. The last four times this happened were during the floods of 2020, 2009, 2006, and 1990.

The river level of the Snoqualmie River is monitored by six USGS streamgages, one on each fork, one just above the falls, one below Carnation, and one near Duvall. Data from the streamgages are used by the National Weather Service for flood forecasting and warning. The Tolt River and the Raging River are also monitored by USGS streamgages.

The Snoqualmie Flood Reduction Project was a controversial Army Corps of Engineers project completed in 2005 to reduce the effect of floods in the town of Snoqualmie by widening the river just above the falls.

== See also ==
* List of Washington rivers

===Cities on the river===
* North Bend, Washington
* Snoqualmie, Washington
* Fall City, Washington
* Carnation, Washington
* Duvall, Washington

== References ==
== External links ==

* Snoqualmie River Status from Floodzilla
* NOAA - Snoqualmie Stations
* King County/USGS - Snoqualmie River Flooding Information
* Snoqualmie Flood Reduction Project (a.k.a. Snoqualmie 205 Project)
* Historical information on the Middle Fork Valley</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2295983" start="4" end="20" title="Snoqualmie River" label="Snoqualmie River"/>
<link wikidata="Q108861" start="40" end="51" title="King County, Washington" label="King County"/>
<link wikidata="Q110403" start="56" end="72" title="Snohomish County, Washington" label="Snohomish County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="80" end="90" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="94" end="104" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="219" end="236" title="Cascade Mountains" label="Cascade Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q301889" start="254" end="264" title="North Bend, Washington" label="North Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000951" start="291" end="301" title="Snoqualmie, Washington" label="Snoqualmie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548048" start="317" end="333" title="Snoqualmie Falls" label="Snoqualmie Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514432" start="412" end="421" title="Fall City, Washington" label="Fall City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191413" start="423" end="432" title="Carnation, Washington" label="Carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362720" start="438" end="444" title="Duvall, Washington" label="Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486452" start="464" end="479" title="Skykomish River" label="Skykomish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619028" start="492" end="507" title="Snohomish River" label="Snohomish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055861" start="513" end="519" title="Monroe, Washington" label="Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="554" end="565" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q392599" start="569" end="576" title="Everett, Washington" label="Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690117" start="632" end="644" title="Taylor River (Washington)" label="Taylor River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238772" start="653" end="664" title="Pratt River" label="Pratt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814635" start="707" end="717" title="Tolt River" label="Tolt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283086" start="753" end="765" title="Raging River" label="Raging River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="817" end="827" title="headwaters" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754697" start="841" end="849" title="snowmelt" label="snowmelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840094" start="861" end="884" title="Alpine Lakes Wilderness" label="Alpine Lakes Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="905" end="924" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q456464" start="925" end="938" title="Dave Reichert" label="Dave Reichert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971569" start="940" end="945" title="Washington&amp;#x27;s 8th congressional district" label="WA-08"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364392" start="970" end="978" title="Ron Sims" label="Ron Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q846385" start="1198" end="1228" title="National Wild and Scenic River" label="National Wild and Scenic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49303735" start="3276" end="3286" title="Lake Kanim" label="Lake Kanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q37975" start="3343" end="3354" title="Kanim Falls" label="Kanim Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474777" start="3501" end="3519" title="Ernie&amp;#x27;s Grove" label="Ernie&amp;#x27;s Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q38083" start="3579" end="3594" title="Fantastic Falls" label="Fantastic Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548048" start="3776" end="3792" title="Snoqualmie Falls" label="Snoqualmie Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q38083" start="3898" end="3913" title="Fantastic Falls" label="Fantastic Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q37975" start="3926" end="3937" title="Kanim Falls" label="Kanim Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295983" start="3968" end="3980" title="Nellie Falls" label="Nellie Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083061" start="4015" end="4025" title="Twin Falls (Washington)" label="Twin Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083061" start="4036" end="4053" title="Middle Twin Falls" label="Middle Twin Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083061" start="4055" end="4071" title="Upper Twin Falls" label="Upper Twin Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q37952" start="4073" end="4084" title="Weeks Falls" label="Weeks Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083061" start="4086" end="4103" title="Upper Weeks Falls" label="Upper Weeks Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295983" start="4105" end="4121" title="Denny Camp Falls" label="Denny Camp Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q37421" start="4123" end="4137" title="Franklin Falls" label="Franklin Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085" start="4248" end="4258" title="Twin Peaks" label="Twin Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q337210" start="4459" end="4478" title="whitewater kayaking" label="whitewater kayaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283086" start="4546" end="4558" title="Raging River" label="Raging River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="5346" end="5369" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q767780" start="5515" end="5540" title="List of Washington rivers" label="List of Washington rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q301889" start="5570" end="5592" title="North Bend, Washington" label="North Bend, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000951" start="5595" end="5617" title="Snoqualmie, Washington" label="Snoqualmie, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514432" start="5620" end="5641" title="Fall City, Washington" label="Fall City, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191413" start="5644" end="5665" title="Carnation, Washington" label="Carnation, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362720" start="5668" end="5686" title="Duvall, Washington" label="Duvall, Washington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262391" wikidata="Q1507096" url="?curid=262391" title="Moscow mule">
<text>A Moscow mule is a cocktail made with vodka, ginger beer and lime juice, garnished with a slice or wedge of lime, and a sprig of mint. The drink, being a type of buck, is sometimes called vodka buck. It is popularly served in a copper mug, which takes on the cold temperature of the liquid.

Some public health advisories recommend copper mugs with a protective coating (such as stainless steel) on the inside and the lip, to reduce the risk of copper toxicity.

==Variations==
Due to the popularity of the Moscow mule, other buck cocktails with different liquors or other ingredients have been labeled with the &quot;mule&quot; name in recent years. Variations with the name changed accordingly:

* Aussie mule: Pear vodka, lime juice, pineapple juice. 
* Aussie mule: Bundaberg Rum.
* Berner mule: Ingwerer.
* Bohemian mule: Absinthe.
* Budapest mule: Unicum.
*Canary mule: Honey rum
*Congo mule: Tonic water
* Dead man&#x27;s mule: Absinthe and cinnamon schnapps.
* French mule: Cognac and angostura bitters.
* Gin-gin mule, London mule, Munich mule, Foghorn: Gin.
* Glasgow mule: Blended Scotch whisky and St-Germain liqueur.
* Irish mule: Irish whiskey.
* Jallu-muuli: Jaloviina.
* Jamaican mule: Spiced rum.
* Kentucky mule, Horsefeather: Bourbon.
* Manila mule: Lambanog and calamansi instead of lime.
* Merican Mule: Canned Moscow Mule brand.
* Mexican mule: Tequila.
* Mezcal mule: Mezcal.
* Mistletoe mule: Garnished with rosemary and cranberries.
* Mumbai mule: Moscow mule, coriander, cumin. 
* New Orleans mule: Bourbon and coffee liqueur.
* Oslo mule: Akvavit.
* Prickly pear mule: Pear liqueur and Poire Williams.
* Southern mule: Southern Comfort liqueur.
* Tennessee mule: Tennessee whiskey.
* Tuscan mule: Tuaca liqueur.
*Berlin mule: Jägermeister 
*Mississippi mule: Cathead Honeysuckle vodka.
*Westphalian mule: Korn, Apple juice instead of lime and cucumber 

Another variation uses ginger syrup instead of ginger beer.

Other ingredients, such as carrot juice and angostura bitters, can also be added.

A variant which uses Mountain Dew soda in place of the ginger beer is known as a Moscow Mole.

==History==
George Sinclair&#x27;s 2007 article on the origin of the drink quotes the &quot;New York Herald Tribune&quot; from 1948: The mule was born in Manhattan but &quot;stalled&quot; on the West Coast for the duration. The birthplace of &quot;Little Moscow&quot; was in New York&#x27;s Chatham Hotel. That was back in 1941 when the first carload of Jack Morgan&#x27;s Cock &#x27;n&#x27; Bull ginger beer was railing over the plains to give New Yorkers a happy surprise…The Violette Family helped. Three friends were in the Chatham bar, one John A. Morgan, known as Jack, president of Cock &#x27;n&#x27; Bull Products and owner of the Hollywood Cock &#x27;n&#x27; Bull Restaurant; one was John G. Martin, president of G.F. Heublein Brothers Inc. of Hartford, Conn., and the third was Rudolph Kunett, president of the Pierre Smirnoff, Heublein&#x27;s vodka division. As Jack Morgan tells it, &quot;We three were quaffing a slug, nibbling an hors d&#x27;oeuvre and shoving toward inventive genius&quot;. Martin and Kunett had their minds on their vodka and wondered what would happen if a two-ounce shot joined with Morgan&#x27;s ginger beer and the squeeze of a lemon. Ice was ordered, lemons procured, mugs ushered in and the concoction put together. Cups were raised, the men counted five and down went the first taste. It was good. It lifted the spirit to adventure. Four or five days later the mixture was christened the Moscow mule...

Mayo Methot&#x27;s husband, Percy T. Morgan, an oil tycoon, was a co-owner of the Cock n&#x27; Bull restaurant.

This story was well known for years, however in 2007, a new version of the invention of the Moscow mule cocktail was published. In this story the cocktail&#x27;s inventor was Wes Price, getting the idea from Hudes Potache, Morgan&#x27;s head bartender and the drink was born out of a need to clear the bar&#x27;s cellar, packed with unsold inventory, including vodka and ginger beer.

Eric Felten quotes Wes Price in an article that was published in 2007 in &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; &quot;I just wanted to clean out the basement,&quot; Price would say of creating the Moscow mule. &quot;I was trying to get rid of a lot of dead stock.&quot; The first one he mixed he served to the actor Broderick Crawford. &quot;It caught on like wildfire,&quot; Price bragged.&quot;

The Moscow mule is often served in a copper mug. The popularity of this drinking vessel is attributable to Martin, who went around the United States to sell Smirnoff vodka and popularize the Moscow mule. Martin asked bartenders to pose with a specialty copper mug and a bottle of Smirnoff vodka, and took Polaroid photographs of them. He took two photos, leaving one with the bartender for display. The other photo was put into a collection and used as proof to the next bar Martin visited of the popularity of the Moscow mule. The copper mug remains, to this day, a popular serving vessel for the Moscow mule.

According to a 1942 &quot;Insider Hollywood&quot; article, the Moscow mule was most popular in Los Angeles, where it originated. &quot;The Nevada State Journal&quot; (October 12, 1943) reinforced the mule&#x27;s popularity in reporting: &quot;Already the mule is climbing up into the exclusive handful of most-popular mixed drinks&quot;. It became known as a favorite drink of Reno casino owner William F. Harrah. In his book &quot;Beat the Dealer&quot; (1964), Edward O. Thorp did not name the Tahoe casino where he thought he had been poorly treated as a card counter. Instead, he wrote, &quot;Immediately I had a Moscow mule&quot;, subtly hinting that the location was Harrah&#x27;s Lake Tahoe, due to Harrah&#x27;s then well-known proclivity for the drink.

Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, some American and Canadian bars began to refer to the drink as a &quot;Kyiv mule&quot; – referring to the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv – in protest of the invasion. 

==Health concerns==
There are some health concerns related to the tradition of serving a Moscow Mule in a copper vessel. The ingredients in a Moscow mule cocktail are acidic, and the resulting beverage has a pH well below 6.0. This creates a problem when using traditional copper mugs without coating, as copper can start dissolving into acidic solutions. Copper in solution is considered toxic at concentrations above 1 mg/L. On July 28, 2017, the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division issued a statement that pure copper vessels should not be used to serve acidic drinks, but that &quot;copper mugs lined on the interior with another metal, such as nickel or stainless steel, are allowed to be used and are widely available&quot;. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 2013 Food Code states that copper and copper alloys such as brass &quot;may not be used in contact with a food that has a pH below 6 such as vinegar, fruit juice, or wine or for a fitting or tubing installed between a backflow prevention device and a carbonator.&quot;

The FDA&#x27;s Model Food Code specifically prohibits copper from &quot;coming into direct contact with foods that have a pH below 6.0&quot;. The advisory relates only to solid copper mugs. Copper mugs that are lined with stainless steel or other food-safe materials are exempt from the advisory.

The risk of copper poisoning has however been questioned by Trisha Andrew, who teaches chemistry at University of Massachusetts Amherst, saying that the cold temperature and the short duration of a usual serving would not cause the copper levels to rise high enough to pose a risk.

==See also==
* Highball

==References==
==External links==

* |https://kyiv-mule.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1507096" start="2" end="13" title="Moscow mule" label="Moscow mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q134768" start="19" end="27" title="cocktail" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q374" start="38" end="43" title="vodka" label="vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448819" start="45" end="56" title="ginger beer" label="ginger beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="61" end="71" title="lime juice" label="lime juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982800" start="162" end="166" title="Buck (cocktail)" label="buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507096" start="188" end="198" title="Moscow mule" label="vodka buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168803" start="445" end="460" title="copper toxicity" label="copper toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190226" start="737" end="752" title="pineapple juice" label="pineapple juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646942" start="770" end="783" title="Bundaberg Rum" label="Bundaberg Rum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="800" end="808" title="Ingwerer" label="Ingwerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170210" start="827" end="835" title="Absinthe" label="Absinthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q765604" start="854" end="860" title="Unicum" label="Unicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214938" start="876" end="885" title="Ron miel" label="Honey rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q237315" start="899" end="910" title="Tonic water" label="Tonic water"/>
<link wikidata="Q170210" start="935" end="943" title="Absinthe" label="Absinthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815494" start="957" end="965" title="schnapps" label="schnapps"/>
<link wikidata="Q284" start="982" end="988" title="Cognac" label="Cognac"/>
<link wikidata="Q542594" start="993" end="1010" title="angostura bitters" label="angostura bitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q959362" start="1063" end="1066" title="Gin" label="Gin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1084" end="1105" title="Scotch_whisky#Blended" label="Blended Scotch whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588247" start="1110" end="1120" title="St-Germain (liqueur)" label="St-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q909747" start="1144" end="1157" title="Irish whiskey" label="Irish whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q116059542" start="1174" end="1183" title="Jaloviina" label="Jaloviina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83376" start="1202" end="1212" title="Spiced rum" label="Spiced rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q543127" start="1245" end="1252" title="bourbon whiskey" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481071" start="1269" end="1277" title="Lambanog" label="Lambanog"/>
<link wikidata="Q849387" start="1282" end="1291" title="calamansi" label="calamansi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122195" start="1367" end="1374" title="Tequila" label="Tequila"/>
<link wikidata="Q726413" start="1391" end="1397" title="Mezcal" label="Mezcal"/>
<link wikidata="Q543127" start="1525" end="1532" title="bourbon whiskey" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625475" start="1537" end="1551" title="coffee liqueur" label="coffee liqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q178899" start="1566" end="1573" title="Akvavit" label="Akvavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047155" start="1613" end="1627" title="Poire Williams" label="Poire Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q585992" start="1646" end="1662" title="Southern Comfort" label="Southern Comfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088701" start="1690" end="1707" title="Tennessee whiskey" label="Tennessee whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850578" start="1724" end="1729" title="Tuaca" label="Tuaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q661871" start="1753" end="1765" title="Jägermeister" label="Jägermeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q582877" start="1832" end="1836" title="Korn (liquor)" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190074" start="1969" end="1981" title="carrot juice" label="carrot juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q542594" start="1986" end="2003" title="angostura bitters" label="angostura bitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q896" start="2046" end="2058" title="Mountain Dew" label="Mountain Dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="2212" end="2235" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="New York Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="2274" end="2283" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="2315" end="2325" title="United States West Coast" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q529654" start="3564" end="3575" title="Mayo Methot" label="Mayo Methot"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="4141" end="4164" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182349" start="4375" end="4393" title="Broderick Crawford" label="Broderick Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q777721" start="4614" end="4628" title="Smirnoff vodka" label="Smirnoff vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313391" start="5204" end="5228" title="Reno Gazette-Journal" label="The Nevada State Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="5446" end="5450" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008389" start="5464" end="5481" title="William F. Harrah" label="William F. Harrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q930755" start="5531" end="5546" title="Edward O. Thorp" label="Edward O. Thorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="5564" end="5569" title="Lake Tahoe" label="Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915272" start="5626" end="5638" title="Card counting" label="card counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663809" start="5741" end="5765" title="Harrah&amp;#x27;s Lake Tahoe" label="Harrah&amp;#x27;s Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="5845" end="5872" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="6018" end="6022" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="6263" end="6265" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064240" start="6504" end="6537" title="Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division" label="Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="6793" end="6821" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="7496" end="7531" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617899" start="7694" end="7702" title="Highball" label="Highball"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262392" wikidata="Q7532173" url="?curid=262392" title="Situationist Times">
<text>The Situationist Times ran to six issues edited and published by Jacqueline de Jong between May 1962 and December 1967 in Hengelo (Netherlands), Copenhagen and Paris, in editions of between 1,000 and 2,000.

Contributors include: Theo Wolvecamp, de Jong, Armando, Vanderkamm, Gruppe SPUR, de Boer, Edle Hansen, Singer, Gordon Fazarkely, Max Bucaille, G. Hay, Asger Jorn, P. Schat, Noël Arnaud, Pierre Alechinsky, Boris Vian, and many others.

==No. 3==
This issue is the &quot;International British Edition&quot;, dedicated to &quot;The Typology of Knots&quot;.

==No. 4==
This issue deals with labyrinths;

==No. 5==
This issues deals with the Ring, the interlaced ring and consequently the Chain.
:a letter from Luc d&#x27;Heusch,
:&quot;Mind and Sense&quot; by Asger Jorn
:&quot;Der Kleine Bootsmann&quot; (17th century Danish poem)
:&quot;Art and Orders&quot; by Asger Jorn
:&quot;Regular forms of closed non-orientabe surfaces&quot; by Lech Tomaszewski
:Extract from &quot;Het Verleden van Oost-Europa&quot; by Dr. Z. R. Diettrich
:Extract from &quot;Topology&quot; by Patterson
:&quot;Cosmogonie annulaires&quot;, &quot;Port d&#x27;Anneau&quot; and &quot;Structure d&#x27;Anneau&quot; by Max Bucaille
:&quot;Von den Polyeder zu den gekrümmten Flächen&quot; by Professor W. Lietzmann
:&quot;Origin et géénéologie d&#x27;Anneau&quot; by Max Bucaille
:&quot;Forgotten knowledge of the universe in the children&#x27;s hopscotch&quot; by Virtus Schade
:&quot;L&#x27;infini du doigt&quot; by Max Bucaille
:&quot;L&#x27;anneau retrouvé&quot; - folk tale from Kashmir
:&quot;Cercles mysterieux&quot; by Max Bucaille
:&quot;Ringsleken en Ringrijden&quot; - Children&#x27;s game
:&quot;Noeds et dénouments&quot; by D. G. Emmerich
:&quot;Die Legende des Heiligen Oswald&quot;
:&quot;Cinétisations&quot; by Pol Bury
:&quot;What goes up still goes down&quot; by Dr Narlikar and Professor Fred Hoyle
:&quot;Kreisen, Kreissegementen und Wellenlinien usw. by F. van der Waals
:&quot;Die Parabel des 3 Ringe (Nathan der Weise)&quot; Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
:&quot;Some mathematical aspects&quot; by H. C. Doets
:&quot;Tournures&quot; by D. G. Emmerich
:&quot;Venus de l&#x27;île&quot; by Mérimée
:Extract from the Opera &quot;The Labyrinth&quot; by Peter Schat
:Drawings b Karl Pelgram
:Poems and drawings by Jim Ryan
:&quot;No happy returns for me&quot; by E. Mazman

==No. 6==
(International Parisian Edition) contains 33 lithographs (Alechinsky, Peter Klasen, Jorn, Wifredo Lam, Roberto Matta, Roland Topor, Antonio Saura.)

==References==
==Further reading==
Situationist Times. https://monoskop.org/Situationist_Times</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q543582" start="65" end="83" title="Jacqueline de Jong" label="Jacqueline de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10006" start="122" end="129" title="Hengelo" label="Hengelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="131" end="142" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="145" end="155" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="160" end="165" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="230" end="244" title="Theo Wolvecamp" label="Theo Wolvecamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q678099" start="255" end="262" title="Armando (artist)" label="Armando"/>
<link wikidata="Q895999" start="276" end="287" title="Gruppe SPUR" label="Gruppe SPUR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="298" end="309" title="Edle Hansen" label="Edle Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="319" end="335" title="Gordon Fazarkely" label="Gordon Fazarkely"/>
<link wikidata="Q83578" start="359" end="369" title="Asger Jorn" label="Asger Jorn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="381" end="392" title="Noël Arnaud" label="Noël Arnaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q328248" start="394" end="411" title="Pierre Alechinsky" label="Pierre Alechinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833" start="413" end="423" title="Boris Vian" label="Boris Vian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397485" start="692" end="697" title="Chain" label="Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83578" start="764" end="774" title="Asger Jorn" label="Asger Jorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="823" end="829" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="941" end="957" title="Lech Tomaszewski" label="Lech Tomaszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="1056" end="1064" title="Topology" label="Topology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1194" end="1206" title="Max Bucaille" label="Max Bucaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="1558" end="1565" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="1881" end="1891" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q286611" start="1998" end="2014" title="Nathan der Weise" label="Nathan der Weise"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="2022" end="2046" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034318" start="2239" end="2250" title="Peter Schat" label="Peter Schat"/>
<link wikidata="Q465342" start="2459" end="2470" title="Wifredo Lam" label="Wifredo Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q450236" start="2472" end="2485" title="Roberto Matta" label="Roberto Matta"/>
<link wikidata="Q550806" start="2487" end="2499" title="Roland Topor" label="Roland Topor"/>
<link wikidata="Q528511" start="2501" end="2514" title="Antonio Saura" label="Antonio Saura"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262393" wikidata="Q405525" url="?curid=262393" title="Garbo">
<text>Garbo may refer to:
==People==
*Greta Garbo (1905–1990), Swedish actress
*Gunnar Garbo (1924–2016), Norwegian journalist and politician
*Ingvald Garbo (1891–1941), member of the Norwegian Resistance in WWII 
*Norman Garbo (1919–2017), American author, lecturer and painter
*Raffaellino del Garbo (1466), Florentine painter
*Juan Pujol García (1912–1988), codename &quot;Garbo&quot;, Spanish double agent for the British
*Garbo (singer) (Renato Abate, born 1958), Italian singer
*Greg Garbowsky (born 1986), known as Garbo, American musician

==Places==
*Għarb, Gozo, Malta
*Garbo, Tibet

==Arts and entertainment==
*&quot;Garbo&quot; (film), a 1992 Australian comedy 
*&quot;Garbo&quot; (2005 film), a documentary about Greta Garbo by Kevin Brownlow
*Garbo, a fictional character in American TV drama &quot;Dirt&quot;

==Other uses==
*&quot;Garbo&quot;, Australian slang for a waste collector
*Garbo (Darawiish), a Darawiish administrative division
*Garbo (Puerto Vallarta), a bar in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q405525" start="0" end="5" title="Garbo" label="Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443" start="32" end="43" title="Greta Garbo" label="Greta Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619002" start="74" end="86" title="Gunnar Garbo" label="Gunnar Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033473" start="137" end="150" title="Ingvald Garbo" label="Ingvald Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052255" start="209" end="221" title="Norman Garbo" label="Norman Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q954072" start="274" end="295" title="Raffaellino del Garbo" label="Raffaellino del Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q403394" start="324" end="341" title="Juan Pujol García" label="Juan Pujol García"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758184" start="421" end="435" title="Garbo (singer)" label="Garbo (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605597" start="479" end="493" title="Greg Garbowsky" label="Greg Garbowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026487" start="554" end="559" title="Għarb" label="Għarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634439" start="574" end="586" title="Garbo, Tibet" label="Garbo, Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522034" start="616" end="640" title="Garbo (film)" label="&amp;quot;Garbo&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="669" end="698" title="Garbo (2005 film)" label="&amp;quot;Garbo&amp;quot; (2005 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724729" start="735" end="749" title="Kevin Brownlow" label="Kevin Brownlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q906077" start="807" end="811" title="Dirt (TV series)" label="Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391360" start="877" end="892" title="waste collector" label="waste collector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="894" end="911" title="Garbo (Darawiish)" label="Garbo (Darawiish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109372428" start="950" end="973" title="Garbo (Puerto Vallarta)" label="Garbo (Puerto Vallarta)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262396" wikidata="Q5077006" url="?curid=262396" title="Charles Duncombe (Upper Canada Rebellion)">
<text>Charles Duncombe (28 July 1792 – 1 October 1867) was a leader in the Upper Canada Rebellion in 1837 and subsequent Patriot War. He was an active Reform politician in the 1830s, and produced several important legislative reports on banking, lunatic asylums, and education.

== Early life ==
He was the eldest son of Thomas and Rhoda Tyrill Duncombe, born July 28, 1792, in Stratford, Connecticut. He studied medicine at the college of the One Hundred and One Members of the Medical Society of the City of New York, graduating in 1819. He then settled in Delaware, Upper Canada, and in 1824 he established the first medical school in Upper Canada with Dr John Rolph, in St. Thomas, under the patronage of Colonel Thomas Talbot.

== Freemasonry ==
Debates within Upper Canada on the nature of the relationship of the provincial Grand Lodge and the English Grand Lodge paralleled political discussions on the colony&#x27;s constitution. Those Freemasons who immigrated from the United States favoured an independent Provincial Grand Lodge. Duncombe was a Freemason, serving as first master of the Mount Moriah lodge at Westminster. In 1836, in a move that presaged the Rebellion, he set up a Grand Lodge independent from the British lodges and became its first Grand Master.

Duncombe&#x27;s Grand Lodge was short-lived, but he soon helped found another during the Patriot War that followed the Rebellion: the Hunters&#x27; Lodge. The Hunters&#x27; Lodge was patterned on Freemasonry.

His last known Masonic activity was to establish a Masonic lodge in Sacramento in 1852.

== Reform politics ==

=== Upper Canada Legislature ===

Duncombe was elected in 1830 to the Legislative Assembly as a representative for Oxford County. He was originally a Reformer in the same vein as Robert Baldwin, but was attracted by William Lyon Mackenzie&#x27;s more radical reform movement.

In 1836, Duncombe made extensive reports to a parliamentary committee of reformers on prisons, asylums and education based on an extensive tour of American facilities. In his report on prisons, Duncombe argued crime was the result of social injustice, and not just the product of individual error. He argued that government had the responsibility to not merely punish the offender, but to rectify the social conditions that produced the offender. This, he argued, was particularly true for juvenile offenders. He viewed penitentiaries as &quot;schools for criminals&quot; and sought their eradication.

&quot;Doctor Charles Duncombe&#x27;s Report upon the Subject of Education, made to the Parliament of Upper Canada, 25th February, 1836.&quot; called for a radical expansion of common school education in the province. He rejected the grammar school model pursued by the Family Compact and argued for practical education; the classics were of limited use in the real world for which education should prepare students. A bill based on Duncombe&#x27;s report passed the assembly on 4 April 1836, only to be rejected by the Family Compact-dominated legislative council. Many of its provisions, however, would be introduced under after the Rebellion including elective school boards, female education, creation of normal schools, prescribed textbooks, and non-sectarian religious instruction.

The 1836 provincial elections were marked by widespread violence by the Orange Order, and claims of voter fraud. The Lt. Governor, Sir Francis Bond Head was in charge of the elections but intervened directly in favour of the Tories in the campaign. The Reformers complained that he issued illegal land patents to new immigrants to entice them to vote for Tory candidates. When the new Tory dominated Assembly refused to hear their petition, Duncombe was charged with presenting it to the British government. He travelled to London, England in the summer of 1836 but was refused an audience by the Colonial Office. Duncombe was all the more disillusioned when his 14-year-old son was killed before his return in November. Like Samuel Lount, his fellow reform assemblyman and rebellion organizer, he virtually withdrew from public life in 1837.

=== Rebellion &amp; Hunters&#x27; Lodges ===
In December 1837, Duncombe heard reports of Mackenzie&#x27;s rebellion in Toronto. Duncombe, with Robert Alway, Finlay Malcolm, Eliakim Malcolm, Enoch Moore and Joshua Doan, gathered about 200 men on 8 December and marched towards Toronto; this is sometimes known as the Western Rising. A few hundred more rebels joined them on their march, but they dispersed near Hamilton on December 13 when they learned of Mackenzie&#x27;s defeat, and that a militia under Colonel Allan MacNab was on their way to stop them. Duncombe and Eliakim Malcolm fled to the United States. Duncombe was a central organizer of the Hunters&#x27; Lodge, a secret Masonic-like military organization with its Grand Lodge in Cleveland. This organization inducted more than 40,000 men into lodges spread across the Great Lakes and St Lawrence region. They launched the Patriot War in 1838–39, almost bringing the United States and the United Kingdom to war. The organization also declared a provisional Republic of Canada at a convention in Cleveland in September 1838, at which Duncombe established a Republican Bank of Canada to finance the war.
Duncombe remained there for the rest of his life, despite being pardoned in 1843. Joshua Doan was executed in 1839.

=== The Story of His Escape ===
 Main Article: The History of the County Brant, 1883, p. 395
Local History of Burford Township Ontario speaks of Dr. Charles Duncombe and his escape from Canada. A writer was able to give it from the statement of the gentleman who, by his intrepidity and knowledge of the Western part of the Ontario frontier, aided an escape and which recalls those of some of Scott&#x27;s Jacobite heroes a century before. Charles Tilden, Uncle of Dr. Hagel of Toronto, Ontario, was, with several of the Hagel family among the Scotland insurgents. Living near Amherstberg, he happened to be specially well acquainted with the entire western frontier, and noticed that although Sir Francis Head&#x27;s agents had placed guards all along the line to prevent the escape of &quot;rebels&quot;, now that a month had passed from the first excitement, the vigilance was much relaxed. Tilden went to see Duncombe, who, in the depth of winter (January, 1838, was a specially cold season), was kept hid in a hay-loft, and supplied with food by stealth by those who left the house as if to feed the cattle. Tilden urged him to attempt escape disguised as a woman, which Duncombe&#x27;s smooth round face rendered it possible enough. The attempt was dangerous; a reward had been offered for his head, and all over the country the noble savages of the Grand River reserve were on the lookout for his scalp and the blood-money it would bring. They left the house next day in an old-fashioned farmers box sleigh. Tilden drove, Mrs. Shennick and Duncombe sat side by side, the latter disguised as an elderly farmer&#x27;s wife. Mrs. Shennick&#x27;s little girl, a child of nine years, was taught to address him as &quot;Auntie&quot;. All day they drove along without molestation; at night they stopped at a country hotel, where there not being sufficient accommodation, Charles Tilden had to sleep in another a room for the hotel staff, while the three women had a room to themselves. Unable to sleep from the excitement of his position, Dr. Duncombe sat up all night. At early dawn they drove away breakfastless, and arrived after several hours&#x27; drive at the crossing place, which was at a village opposite what is now Marine City, Michigan. They drove into the yard of the tavern where were the soldiers of a party in command of a sergeant, posted there to watch the crossing place, and if possible arrest the &quot;rebel Chief&quot;. Very calmly Tilden watered his horses, and then addressing the sergeant in command as &quot;Captain&quot;, asked if the ice was safe. The sergeant asked whence he came. Tilden replied, truly enough, that he came from London, and he was going with his Aunt and Mother to visit some friends, whose names he mentioned, on the opposite coast of Michigan. The sergeant ordered one of his men to accompany them across the ice. Then they get half way for the rest of the river, the young soldier said that they could easily find their way for the rest of the track, and was about to leave them. Dr. Duncombe handed Charles Tilden fifty cents for the soldier, and while the latter was thanking them, felt very much inclined to send Dr. Duncombe&#x27;s compliments to the sergeant who had furnished them with a guide, but refrained lest he should spoil the chance of some other unfortunate who might try the same stratagem for evading the blood-hounds of the Family Compact Government. In a few minutes he stood &quot;a free man&quot; on a free soil.&quot; They entered a store to buy some food, and Duncombe careless about preserving his disguise soon attracted attention. It became known that the Canadian Republican, Dr. Duncombe, a crowd gathered. He escaped capture, which in those days would have been certain death. He had a long and prosperous career in the U.S. lay before him. He was included in the general amnesty, and his Buford property was restored to him. Charles Tilden&#x27;s son lived in possession of a farm of two hundred acres which Dr. Duncombe deeded to him as an acknowledgment of his father&#x27;s generous friendship. Dr. Duncombe was the first known physician in Sacramento, California practicing medicine in 1851. He would later be elected to State Legislature in 1858, but was denied a seat for not being a citizen. He was elected the following year but was denied a seat. It was in 1862 he became a citizen, he took his place in the State Assembly.
=== Free Banking ===
Until 1835, all banks in Upper Canada required a legislative charter; this left them subject to political corruption and manipulation, as was the case with the largest of them, the Bank of Upper Canada. The Bank of Upper Canada was controlled by the Family Compact and used by them to control the province&#x27;s money supply and trade. Reformers tried several legislative strategies, including attempts to incorporate credit unions such as the Farmers&#x27; Storehouse company. This came to an end in 1835 when Charles Duncombe produced a &quot;Report on Currency&quot; for the Legislative Assembly which demonstrated the legality of the Scottish joint-stock bank system in Upper Canada.

The difference between the English chartered banks and the Scottish joint stock banks is that the Scottish banks were considered partnerships and hence didn&#x27;t need a legislated Act in order to operate. The joint stock banks thus lacked limited liability, and every partner in the bank was responsible for the bank&#x27;s debts to the full extent of their personal property. The chartered banks, in contrast, protected their shareholders with limited liability and hence from major loss; they thus encouraged speculation. The Scottish joint-stock banks followed a &quot;hard money policy.&quot; They avoided speculative risk because if they failed, their shareholders were responsible for the full loss. Since the banks did not require a legislated charter, many more banks could be founded, and they were more competitive and freer from political influence and corruption. Following Duncombe&#x27;s report, the Farmers&#x27; Bank and the Bank of the People were founded on a joint stock basis, until the Family Compact conspired to make them illegal in 1838. The Bank of the People funded William Lyon Mackenzie newspaper, &quot;The Constitution&quot; in 1836.

Similar issues existed in the United States, where the chartered banks were accused of creating a &quot;monied aristocracy&quot; responsible for the financial panic of 1837–1838. The Equal Rights Party (the Locofocos) called for the introduction of the Scottish system, called by them &quot;Free Banking&quot;. The Patriot War has been described as &quot;Locofocoism with a Gun.&quot;

When the Hunters&#x27; Lodges held their convention in Cleveland in September 1838, Duncombe presented &quot;An address to the Different Lodges on the Subject of a Joint-Stock Company Bank&quot; in which he proposed financing the Patriot War with a republican bank. The bank was established for a short period.

Duncombe continued to pursue the idea of joint stock banking after the end of the Patriot War, publishing a lengthy book on the subject: &quot;Duncombe’s Free Banking: An essay on Banking, Currency, Finance, Exchanges and Political Economy&quot; (Cleveland: Sanford &amp; Co., 1841). In it, he argued that a democratic state depended upon Free Banking.

=== California State Assembly ===

After his activity in the Patriot War, Duncombe moved from Cleveland to Rochester, in 1841. He practised medicine there until he moved to Sacramento County, California in 1849 at the beginning of the California Gold Rush. Although one of the first doctors to arrive in Sacramento, he did not qualify to practise in the state until 1851. He married Lucy Millard of California in 1857. He was elected to the Sacramento city council.

In 1859, he was elected to the California State Assembly as one of four members from Sacramento County, but was disqualified because it was argued that he gave up his American citizenship when he allowed himself to be elected to a foreign (Canadian) legislature. He became an American citizen and was elected again in 1863 as one of the county&#x27;s five representatives. He died in Hicksville, California, in 1867 after a severe case of sunstroke and buried in the Masonic Section of the Sacramento Historic City Cemetery in Sacramento, California.

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5077006" start="0" end="16" title="Charles Duncombe (Upper Canada Rebellion)" label="Charles Duncombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q389091" start="69" end="91" title="Upper Canada Rebellion" label="Upper Canada Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148030" start="115" end="126" title="Patriot War" label="Patriot War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760029" start="145" end="162" title="The Reform Movement (Upper Canada)" label="Reform politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q755140" start="372" end="394" title="Stratford, Connecticut" label="Stratford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253209" start="553" end="575" title="Delaware, Ontario" label="Delaware, Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255519" start="653" end="663" title="John Rolph (politician)" label="John Rolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078072" start="668" end="678" title="St. Thomas, Ontario" label="St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794340" start="711" end="724" title="Thomas Talbot (Upper Canada)" label="Thomas Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="1051" end="1060" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148030" start="1361" end="1372" title="Patriot War" label="Patriot War"/>
<link wikidata="Q389091" start="1391" end="1400" title="Upper Canada Rebellion" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845705" start="1406" end="1425" title="Hunters&amp;#x27; Lodges" label="Hunters&amp;#x27; Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="1550" end="1560" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518216" start="1664" end="1684" title="Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093662" start="1773" end="1787" title="Robert Baldwin" label="Robert Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182454" start="1810" end="1832" title="William Lyon Mackenzie" label="William Lyon Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760029" start="1845" end="1868" title="The Reform Movement (Upper Canada)" label="radical reform movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="2707" end="2721" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066234" start="2743" end="2757" title="Family Compact" label="Family Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441408" start="3397" end="3414" title="Francis Bond Head" label="Francis Bond Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412045" start="3988" end="4000" title="Samuel Lount" label="Samuel Lount"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="4225" end="4232" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341483" start="4249" end="4261" title="Robert Alway" label="Robert Alway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379315" start="4296" end="4307" title="Enoch Moore (loyalist turned rebel)" label="Enoch Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200012" start="4312" end="4323" title="Joshua Gwillen Doan" label="Joshua Doan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="4516" end="4524" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837746" start="4619" end="4631" title="Allan MacNab" label="Allan MacNab"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845705" start="4759" end="4778" title="Hunters&amp;#x27; Lodges" label="Hunters&amp;#x27; Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148030" start="4991" end="5002" title="Patriot War" label="Patriot War"/>
<link wikidata="Q474971" start="10003" end="10023" title="Bank of Upper Canada" label="Bank of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066234" start="10072" end="10086" title="Family Compact" label="Family Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435764" start="10267" end="10299" title="Farmers&amp;#x27; Storehouse Company" label="Farmers&amp;#x27; Storehouse company"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="10470" end="10493" title="Joint-stock company" label="joint-stock bank system"/>
<link wikidata="Q162157" start="10547" end="10562" title="Chartered company" label="chartered banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q568338" start="10753" end="10770" title="limited liability" label="limited liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q568338" start="10959" end="10976" title="limited liability" label="limited liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655578" start="11086" end="11103" title="hard money policy" label="hard money policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856208" start="11455" end="11473" title="Bank of the People" label="Bank of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q182454" start="11606" end="11628" title="William Lyon Mackenzie" label="William Lyon Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665952" start="11886" end="11895" title="Locofocos" label="Locofocos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453396" start="11970" end="11982" title="Free Banking" label="Free Banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q108131" start="12904" end="12933" title="Sacramento County, California" label="Sacramento County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="12966" end="12986" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="13229" end="13254" title="California State Assembly" label="California State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q337554" start="13637" end="13646" title="sunstroke" label="sunstroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396984" start="13688" end="13721" title="Sacramento Historic City Cemetery" label="Sacramento Historic City Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="13725" end="13747" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262400" wikidata="Q678099" url="?curid=262400" title="Armando (artist)">
<text>: &quot;For the online writer/blogger, see Daily Kos.&quot;

Armando (18 September 1929 – 1 July 2018), born Herman Dirk van Dodeweerd, was a Dutch painter, sculptor and writer.

==Biography==
Armando was born in Amsterdam, and as child moved to Amersfoort. There he saw, during the German occupation of the Netherlands, how the Nazis set up a &quot;transition camp&quot; for prisoners who were to be sent to concentration camps. The suffering of the victims and the cruelty of the Nazi camp guards, so near his home, influenced him for the rest of his life. After the liberation (1945), he studied art history at the University of Amsterdam.

His first solo exhibition was at the Galerie Le Canard, Amsterdam, in 1954. At this time he also started to write poetry. He was influenced by the CoBrA art group, and made abstract drawings—with his left hand, in the dark. He was also influenced by Jean Dubuffet and Jean Fautrier, producing thickly impastoed paintings.

In 1958 he was one of the founding members of the Nederlandse Informele Groep (Informelen), with the painters , , Henk Peeters, and others.

By 1959 he had joined the Situationist International (SI) and attended their Third conference, held in Munich 17–20 April 1959. With Anton Alberts, Constant and Har Oudejans he wrote &quot;First proclamation of the Dutch Section of the SI&quot;. However, he was expelled from the SI in the Spring of 1960, though continuing to contribute to other Situationist publications like the &quot;Situationist Times.&quot; He also contributed to &quot;Podium&quot;, &quot;Gard Sivik&quot;, &quot;De Nieuwe Stijl&quot;, and &quot;Barbarber&quot;.

He lived partly in Amsterdam, partly in Amersfoort, and until 1989 also in Berlin.

==Fire at the Armando museum, 2007==
Amersfoort, the place of his childhood, hosted a museum devoted to his work. On 22 October 2007 a large fire struck the museum and burned thirteen Armando paintings. At the time of the fire there was also an exhibition with works of painters like Ruisdael, Dürer, Seghers and Kiefer, which were all lost, with damages estimated at about three million euros (US$4,000,000). &quot;(Source: Dutch TV News NOS, 24 October 2007)&quot; A final balance of the damage by the fire was made on Tuesday 20 November 2007. According to a Dutch newsarticle, 63 paintings were lost, 8 were recovered. 6 of the recovered paintings are badly damaged, two are lightly damaged.

==The new Armando museum: Museum Oud Amelisweerd (MOA)==
Since 2014 the Armando Collection has been housed in a new home, the Museum Oud Amelisweert near Bunnik (NLD). The MOA regularly organizes exhibitions with works by Armando, sometimes in relation with works by other artists.
Unfortunately the museum was closed in 2018, due to insufficient funding.

==Honours and awards==

===Honours===
*1990 - Knight of the Order of Oranje-Nassau
*2006 - Knight of the Order of the Netherlands Lion
*2009 - The Honorary medal for Arts and Science of the Order of the House of Orange

===Awards===

*1987 - The Gouden Ganzenveer voor his contribution to the Dutch culture and the distribution throughout Europa.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1272560" start="43" end="52" title="Daily Kos" label="Daily Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q678099" start="61" end="68" title="Armando (artist)" label="Armando"/>
<link wikidata="Q678099" start="109" end="134" title="Armando (artist)" label="Herman Dirk van Dodeweerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="213" end="222" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q992" start="246" end="256" title="Amersfoort" label="Amersfoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="283" end="300" title="Second World War" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="409" end="427" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="618" end="641" title="University of Amsterdam" label="University of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="681" end="698" title="Galerie Le Canard" label="Galerie Le Canard"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="758" end="764" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q212611" start="791" end="796" title="COBRA (avant-garde movement)" label="CoBrA"/>
<link wikidata="Q170076" start="894" end="907" title="Jean Dubuffet" label="Jean Dubuffet"/>
<link wikidata="Q537838" start="912" end="925" title="Jean Fautrier" label="Jean Fautrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545200" start="945" end="952" title="impasto" label="impasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q747954" start="1081" end="1093" title="Henk Peeters" label="Henk Peeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="1134" end="1160" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1185" end="1201" title="Third conference of the Situationist International" label="Third conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1211" end="1217" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014284" start="1241" end="1254" title="Anton Alberts (architect)" label="Anton Alberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q697681" start="1256" end="1264" title="Constant Nieuwenhuys" label="Constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1269" end="1281" title="Har Oudejans" label="Har Oudejans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532173" start="1496" end="1514" title="Situationist Times" label="Situationist Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="1665" end="1674" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q992" start="1686" end="1696" title="Amersfoort" label="Amersfoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1721" end="1727" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="1816" end="1822" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213612" start="2014" end="2022" title="Jacob Isaakszoon van Ruisdael" label="Ruisdael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580" start="2024" end="2029" title="Albrecht Dürer" label="Dürer"/>
<link wikidata="Q931846" start="2031" end="2038" title="Hercules Seghers" label="Seghers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170344" start="2043" end="2049" title="Anselm Kiefer" label="Kiefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10032" start="2581" end="2587" title="Bunnik" label="Bunnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q139425" start="2844" end="2866" title="Order of Oranje-Nassau" label="Order of Oranje-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471215" start="2889" end="2918" title="Order of the Netherlands Lion" label="Order of the Netherlands Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q286898" start="2974" end="3002" title="Order of the House of Orange" label="Order of the House of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588147" start="3030" end="3047" title="Gouden Ganzenveer" label="Gouden Ganzenveer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262401" wikidata="Q185917" url="?curid=262401" title="Translation (biology)">
<text>In biology, translation is the process in living cells in which proteins are produced using RNA molecules as templates. The generated protein is a sequence of amino acids. This sequence is determined by the sequence of nucleotides in the RNA. The nucleotides are considered three at a time. Each such triple results in the addition of one specific amino acid to the protein being generated. The matching from nucleotide triple to amino acid is called the genetic code. The translation is performed by a large complex of functional RNA and proteins called ribosomes. The entire process is called gene expression.

In translation, messenger RNA (mRNA) is decoded in a ribosome, outside the nucleus, to produce a specific amino acid chain, or polypeptide. The polypeptide later folds into an active protein and performs its functions in the cell. The polypeptide can also start folding during protein synthesis. The ribosome facilitates decoding by inducing the binding of complementary transfer RNA (tRNA) anticodon sequences to mRNA codons. The tRNAs carry specific amino acids that are chained together into a polypeptide as the mRNA passes through and is &quot;read&quot; by the ribosome.

Translation proceeds in three phases:
# Initiation: The ribosome assembles around the target mRNA. The first tRNA is attached at the start codon.
# Elongation: The last tRNA validated by the small ribosomal subunit (accommodation) transfers the amino acid. It carries to the large ribosomal subunit which binds it to one of the preceding admitted tRNA (transpeptidation). The ribosome then moves to the next mRNA codon to continue the process (translocation), creating an amino acid chain. 
# Termination: When a stop codon is reached, the ribosome releases the polypeptide. The ribosomal complex remains intact and moves on to the next mRNA to be translated.

In prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea), translation occurs in the cytosol, where the large and small subunits of the ribosome bind to the mRNA. In eukaryotes, translation occurs in the cytoplasm or across the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum through a process called co-translational translocation. In co-translational translocation, the entire ribosome–mRNA complex binds to the outer membrane of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and the new protein is synthesized and released into the ER; the newly created polypeptide can be immediately secreted or stored inside the ER for future vesicle transport and secretion outside the cell.

Many types of transcribed RNA, such as tRNA, ribosomal RNA, and small nuclear RNA, do not undergo a translation into proteins.

Several antibiotics act by inhibiting translation. These include anisomycin, cycloheximide, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, streptomycin, erythromycin, and puromycin. Prokaryotic ribosomes have a different structure from that of eukaryotic ribosomes, and thus antibiotics can specifically target bacterial infections without harming a eukaryotic host&#x27;s cells.

==Basic mechanisms==


The basic process of protein production is the addition of one amino acid at a time to the end of a protein. This operation is performed by a ribosome. A ribosome is made up of two subunits, a small subunit, and a large subunit. These subunits come together before the translation of mRNA into a protein to provide a location for translation to be carried out and a polypeptide to be produced. The choice of amino acid type to add is determined by a messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule. Each amino acid added is matched to a three-nucleotide subsequence of the mRNA. For each such triplet possible, the corresponding amino acid is accepted. The successive amino acids added to the chain are matched to successive nucleotide triplets in the mRNA. In this way, the sequence of nucleotides in the template mRNA chain determines the sequence of amino acids in the generated amino acid chain.
The addition of an amino acid occurs at the C-terminus of the peptide; thus, translation is said to be amine-to-carboxyl directed.

The mRNA carries genetic information encoded as a ribonucleotide sequence from the chromosomes to the ribosomes. The ribonucleotides are &quot;read&quot; by translational machinery in a sequence of nucleotide triplets called codons. Each of those triplets codes for a specific amino acid.

The ribosome molecules translate this code to a specific sequence of amino acids. The ribosome is a multisubunit structure containing ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and proteins. It is the &quot;factory&quot; where amino acids are assembled into proteins.

Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are small noncoding RNA chains (74–93 nucleotides) that transport amino acids to the ribosome. The repertoire of tRNA genes varies widely between species, with some bacteria having between 20 and 30 genes while complex eukaryotes could have thousands. tRNAs have a site for amino acid attachment, and a site called an anticodon. The anticodon is an RNA triplet complementary to the mRNA triplet that codes for their cargo amino acid.

Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases (enzymes) catalyze the bonding between specific tRNAs and the amino acids that their anticodon sequences call for. The product of this reaction is an aminoacyl-tRNA. The amino acid is joined by its carboxyl group to the 3&#x27; OH of the tRNA by an ester bond. When the tRNA has an amino acid linked to it, the tRNA is termed &quot;charged&quot;. In bacteria, this aminoacyl-tRNA is carried to the ribosome by EF-Tu, where mRNA codons are matched through complementary base pairing to specific tRNA anticodons. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases that mispair tRNAs with the wrong amino acids can produce mischarged aminoacyl-tRNAs, which can result in inappropriate amino acids at the respective position in the protein. This &quot;mistranslation&quot; of the genetic code naturally occurs at low levels in most organisms, but certain cellular environments cause an increase in permissive mRNA decoding, sometimes to the benefit of the cell.

The ribosome has two binding sites for tRNA. They are the aminoacyl site (abbreviated A), and the peptidyl site/ exit site (abbreviated P/E). Concerning the mRNA, the three sites are oriented 5&#x27; to 3&#x27; E-P-A, because ribosomes move toward the 3&#x27; end of mRNA. The A-site binds the incoming tRNA with the complementary codon on the mRNA. The P/E-site holds the tRNA with the growing polypeptide chain. When an aminoacyl-tRNA initially binds to its corresponding codon on the mRNA, it is in the A site. Then, a peptide bond forms between the amino acid of the tRNA in the A site and the amino acid of the charged tRNA in the P/E site. The growing polypeptide chain is transferred to the tRNA in the A site. Translocation occurs, moving the tRNA to the P/E site, now without an amino acid; the tRNA that was in the A site, now charged with the polypeptide chain, is moved to the P/E site and the uncharged tRNA leaves, and another aminoacyl-tRNA enters the A site to repeat the process.

After the new amino acid is added to the chain, and after the tRNA is released out of the ribosome and into the cytosol, the energy provided by the hydrolysis of a GTP bound to the translocase EF-G (in bacteria) and a/eEF-2 (in eukaryotes and archaea) moves the ribosome down one codon towards the 3&#x27; end. The energy required for translation of proteins is significant. For a protein containing &quot;n&quot; amino acids, the number of high-energy phosphate bonds required to translate it is 4&quot;n&quot;-1. The rate of translation varies; it is significantly higher in prokaryotic cells (up to 17–21 amino acid residues per second) than in eukaryotic cells (up to 6–9 amino acid residues per second).

===Initiation and termination of translation===
Initiation involves the small subunit of the ribosome binding to the 5&#x27; end of mRNA with the help of initiation factors (IF). In bacteria and a minority of archaea, initiation of protein synthesis involves the recognition of a purine-rich initiation sequence on the mRNA called the Shine–Dalgarno sequence. The Shine–Dalgarno sequence binds to a complementary pyrimidine-rich sequence on the 3&#x27; end of the 16S rRNA part of the 30S ribosomal subunit. The binding of these complementary sequences ensures that the 30S ribosomal subunit is bound to the mRNA and is aligned such that the initiation codon is placed in the 30S portion of the P-site. Once the mRNA and 30S subunit are properly bound, an initiation factor brings the initiator tRNA–amino acid complex, f-Met-tRNA, to the 30S P site. The initiation phase is completed once a 50S subunit joins the 30S subunit, forming an active 70S ribosome. Termination of the polypeptide occurs when the A site of the ribosome is occupied by a stop codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) on the mRNA, creating the primary structure of a protein. tRNA usually cannot recognize or bind to stop codons. Instead, the stop codon induces the binding of a release factor protein (RF1 &amp; RF2) that prompts the disassembly of the entire ribosome/mRNA complex by the hydrolysis of the polypeptide chain from the peptidyl transferase center of the ribosome. Drugs or special sequence motifs on the mRNA can change the ribosomal structure so that near-cognate tRNAs are bound to the stop codon instead of the release factors. In such cases of &#x27;translational readthrough&#x27;, translation continues until the ribosome encounters the next stop codon.

===Errors in translation===
Even though the ribosomes are usually considered accurate and processive machines, the translation process is subject to errors that can lead either to the synthesis of erroneous proteins or to the premature abandonment of translation, either because a tRNA couples to a wrong codon or because a tRNA is coupled to the wrong amino acid. The rate of error in synthesizing proteins has been estimated to be between 1 in 105 and 1 in 103 misincorporated amino acids, depending on the experimental conditions. The rate of premature translation abandonment, instead, has been estimated to be of the order of magnitude of 10−4 events per translated codon.

===Regulation===
The process of translation is highly regulated in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms. Regulation of translation can impact the global rate of protein synthesis which is closely coupled to the metabolic and proliferative state of a cell.

To study this process, scientists have used a wide variety of methods such as structural biology, analytical chemistry (mass-spectrometry based), imaging of reporter mRNA translation (in which the translation of a mRNA is linked to an output, such as luminescence or fluorescence), and next-generation sequencing based methods. Other methods such as toeprinting assay can also be used to determine to determine the location of ribosomes of a particular mRNA in vitro, and footprints of other proteins regulating translation. 

In particular, ribosome profiling, which is a powerful method, enables researchers to take a snapshot of all the proteins being translated at a given time, showing which parts of the mRNA are being translated into proteins by ribosomes at a given time. This method is useful because it looks at all the mRNAs instead of using reporters that would typically look at one specific mRNA at a time. Ribosome profiling provides valuable insights into translation dynamics, revealing the complex interplay between gene sequence, mRNA structure, and translation regulation. For example, research utilizing this method has revealed that genetic differences and their subsequent expression as mRNAs can also impact translation rate in an RNA-specific manner.

Expanding on this concept, a more recent development is single-cell ribosome profiling, a technique that allows us to study the translation process at the resolution of individual cells. This is particularly significant as cells, even those of the same type, can exhibit considerable variability in their protein synthesis. Single-cell ribosome profiling has the potential to shed light on the heterogeneous nature of cells, leading to a more nuanced understanding of how translation regulation can impact cell behavior, metabolic state, and responsiveness to various stimuli or conditions.

==Clinical significance==
Translational control is critical for the development and survival of cancer. Cancer cells must frequently regulate the translation phase of gene expression, though it is not fully understood why translation is targeted over steps like transcrion. While cancer cells often have genetically altered translation factors, it is much more common for cancer cells to modify the levels of existing translation factors. Several major oncogenic signaling pathways, including the RAS–MAPK, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, MYC, and WNT–β-catenin pathways, ultimately reprogram the genome via translation. Cancer cells also control translation to adapt to cellular stress. During stress, the cell translates mRNAs that can mitigate the stress and promote survival. An example of this is the expression of AMPK in various cancers; its activation triggers a cascade that can ultimately allow the cancer to escape apoptosis (programmed cell death) triggered by nutrition deprivation. Future cancer therapies may involve disrupting the translation machinery of the cell to counter the downstream effects of cancer.

== Mathematical modeling of translation ==


The transcription-translation process description, mentioning only the most basic &quot;elementary&quot; processes, consists of:

# production of mRNA molecules (including splicing),
# initiation of these molecules with help of initiation factors (e.g., the initiation can include the circularization step though it is not universally required),
# initiation of translation, recruiting the small ribosomal subunit,
# assembly of full ribosomes,
# elongation, (i.e. movement of ribosomes along mRNA with production of protein),
# termination of translation,
# degradation of mRNA molecules,
# degradation of proteins.

The process of amino acid building to create protein in translation is a subject of various physic models for a long time starting from the first detailed kinetic models such as or others taking into account stochastic aspects of translation and using computer simulations. Many chemical kinetics-based models of protein synthesis have been developed and analyzed in the last four decades. Beyond chemical kinetics, various modeling formalisms such as Totally Asymmetric Simple Exclusion Process, Probabilistic Boolean Networks, Petri Nets and max-plus algebra have been applied to model the detailed kinetics of protein synthesis or some of its stages. A basic model of protein synthesis that takes into account all eight &#x27;elementary&#x27; processes has been developed, following the paradigm that &quot;useful models are simple and extendable&quot;. The simplest model &quot;M0&quot; is represented by the reaction kinetic mechanism (Figure M0). It was generalised to include 40S, 60S and initiation factors (IF) binding (Figure M1&#x27;). It was extended further to include effect of microRNA on protein synthesis. Most of models in this hierarchy can be solved analytically. These solutions were used to extract &#x27;kinetic signatures&#x27; of different specific mechanisms of synthesis regulation.

==Genetic code==

It is also possible to translate either by hand (for short sequences) or by computer (after first programming one appropriately, see section below); this allows biologists and chemists to draw out the chemical structure of the encoded protein on paper.

First, convert each template DNA base to its RNA complement (note that the complement of A is now U), as shown below. Note that the template strand of the DNA is the one the RNA is polymerized against; the other DNA strand would be the same as the RNA, but with thymine instead of uracil.

 DNA -&gt; RNA
 A -&gt; U
 T -&gt; A
 C -&gt; G
 G -&gt; C
 A=T-&gt; A=U
Then split the RNA into triplets (groups of three bases). Note that there are 3 translation &quot;windows&quot;, or reading frames, depending on where you start reading the code.
Finally, use the table at Genetic code to translate the above into a structural formula as used in chemistry.

This will give the primary structure of the protein. However, proteins tend to fold, depending in part on hydrophilic and hydrophobic segments along the chain. Secondary structure can often still be guessed at, but the proper tertiary structure is often very hard to determine.

Whereas other aspects such as the 3D structure, called tertiary structure, of protein can only be predicted using sophisticated algorithms, the amino acid sequence, called primary structure, can be determined solely from the nucleic acid sequence with the aid of a translation table.

This approach may not give the correct amino acid composition of the protein, in particular if unconventional amino acids such as selenocysteine are incorporated into the protein, which is coded for by a conventional stop codon in combination with a downstream hairpin (SElenoCysteine Insertion Sequence, or SECIS).

There are many computer programs capable of translating a DNA/RNA sequence into a protein sequence. Normally this is performed using the Standard Genetic Code, however, few programs can handle all the &quot;special&quot; cases, such as the use of the alternative initiation codons which are biologically significant. For instance, the rare alternative start codon CTG codes for Methionine when used as a start codon, and for Leucine in all other positions.

Example: Condensed translation table for the Standard Genetic Code (from the NCBI Taxonomy webpage).

 AAs = FFLLSSSSYY**CC*WLLLLPPPPHHQQRRRRIIIMTTTTNNKKSSRRVVVVAAAADDEEGGGG
 Starts = ---M---------------M---------------M----------------------------
 Base1 = TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
 Base2 = TTTTCCCCAAAAGGGGTTTTCCCCAAAAGGGGTTTTCCCCAAAAGGGGTTTTCCCCAAAAGGGG
 Base3 = TCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAG

The &quot;Starts&quot; row indicate three start codons, UUG, CUG, and the very common AUG. It also indicates the first amino acid residue when interpreted as a start: in this case it is all methionine.

===Translation tables===

Even when working with ordinary eukaryotic sequences such as the Yeast genome, it is often desired to be able to use alternative translation tables—namely for translation of the mitochondrial genes. Currently the following translation tables are defined by the NCBI Taxonomy Group for the translation of the sequences in GenBank:
# The standard code
# The vertebrate mitochondrial code
# The yeast mitochondrial code
# The mold, protozoan, and coelenterate mitochondrial code and the mycoplasma/spiroplasma code
# The invertebrate mitochondrial code
# The ciliate, dasycladacean and hexamita nuclear code
# The kinetoplast code
# &lt;li value=&quot;9&quot;&gt; The echinoderm and flatworm mitochondrial code
# The euplotid nuclear code
# The bacterial, archaeal and plant plastid code
# The alternative yeast nuclear code
# The ascidian mitochondrial code
# The alternative flatworm mitochondrial code
# The &quot;Blepharisma&quot; nuclear code
# The chlorophycean mitochondrial code
# &lt;li value=&quot;21&quot;&gt; The trematode mitochondrial code
# The &quot;Scenedesmus obliquus&quot; mitochondrial code
# The &quot;Thraustochytrium&quot; mitochondrial code
# The Pterobranchia mitochondrial code
# The candidate division SR1 and gracilibacteria code
# The &quot;Pachysolen tannophilus&quot; nuclear code
# The karyorelict nuclear code
# The &quot;Condylostoma&quot; nuclear code
# The &quot;Mesodinium&quot; nuclear code
# The peritrich nuclear code
# The &quot;Blastocrithidia&quot; nuclear code
# &lt;li value=&quot;33&quot;&gt; The Cephalodiscidae mitochondrial code
== See also ==

* Cell (biology)
* Cell division
* DNA codon table
* Epigenetics
* Expanded genetic code
* Gene expression
* Gene regulation
* Gene
* Genome
* Life
* Protein methods
* Start codon
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 


== External links ==

* Virtual Cell Animation Collection: Introducing Translation
* Translate tool (from DNA or RNA sequence)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="3" end="10" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="12" end="23" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="49" end="54" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="64" end="71" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="92" end="95" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="159" end="169" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="219" end="230" title="nucleotides" label="nucleotides"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="455" end="467" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="555" end="563" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="595" end="610" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="629" end="642" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="719" end="729" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="740" end="751" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q847556" start="775" end="780" title="protein folding" label="folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q190474" start="789" end="795" title="Activation energy" label="active"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="796" end="803" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="970" end="983" title="Base pair" label="complementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="984" end="996" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="1004" end="1013" title="anticodon" label="anticodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="1032" end="1038" title="codons" label="codons"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="1231" end="1241" title="Translation (biology)" label="Initiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="1339" end="1349" title="Translation (biology)" label="Elongation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827874" start="1466" end="1489" title="Eukaryotic large ribosomal subunit (60S)" label="large ribosomal subunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="1684" end="1695" title="Translation (biology)" label="Termination"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="1855" end="1866" title="prokaryotes" label="prokaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="1998" end="2008" title="eukaryotes" label="eukaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="2036" end="2045" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q79927" start="2076" end="2097" title="endoplasmic reticulum" label="endoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q658882" start="2123" end="2153" title="Protein targeting" label="co-translational translocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79927" start="2258" end="2285" title="rough endoplasmic reticulum" label="rough endoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84230" start="2402" end="2410" title="Secretion" label="secreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q189206" start="2446" end="2453" title="Vesicle (biology and chemistry)" label="vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="2511" end="2522" title="Transcription (biology)" label="transcribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="2633" end="2643" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q378498" start="2690" end="2700" title="anisomycin" label="anisomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412895" start="2702" end="2715" title="cycloheximide" label="cycloheximide"/>
<link wikidata="Q274515" start="2717" end="2732" title="chloramphenicol" label="chloramphenicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193045" start="2734" end="2746" title="tetracycline" label="tetracycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q192717" start="2748" end="2760" title="streptomycin" label="streptomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213511" start="2762" end="2774" title="erythromycin" label="erythromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424696" start="2780" end="2789" title="puromycin" label="puromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="2930" end="2940" title="infections" label="infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="2970" end="2974" title="Host (biology)" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="3155" end="3163" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="3463" end="3476" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q310425" start="3939" end="3949" title="C-terminus" label="C-terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="4044" end="4051" title="genetic code" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="4225" end="4235" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="4304" end="4314" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="4321" end="4329" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="4451" end="4464" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="4564" end="4576" title="Transfer RNA" label="Transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="5008" end="5018" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q415968" start="5021" end="5046" title="Aminoacyl tRNA synthetase" label="Aminoacyl tRNA synthetase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="5049" end="5055" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="5110" end="5121" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q209022" start="5198" end="5212" title="aminoacyl-tRNA" label="aminoacyl-tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="5297" end="5307" title="ester bond" label="ester bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q24726678" start="5458" end="5463" title="EF-Tu" label="EF-Tu"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="5517" end="5526" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647010" start="6260" end="6266" title="A-site" label="A-site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588997" start="6337" end="6345" title="P-site" label="P/E-site"/>
<link wikidata="Q115829307" start="6889" end="6903" title="uncharged tRNA" label="uncharged tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q909555" start="7162" end="7173" title="translocase" label="translocase"/>
<link wikidata="Q24778470" start="7174" end="7178" title="EF-G" label="EF-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="7183" end="7191" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17916043" start="7197" end="7204" title="EEF2" label="a/eEF-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="7209" end="7219" title="eukaryotes" label="eukaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="7224" end="7231" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995607" start="7279" end="7290" title="3&amp;#x27; end" label="3&amp;#x27; end"/>
<link wikidata="Q424137" start="7845" end="7863" title="initiation factors" label="initiation factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q416807" start="8026" end="8049" title="Shine–Dalgarno sequence" label="Shine–Dalgarno sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q307455" start="8511" end="8516" title="N-Formylmethionine" label="f-Met"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994527" start="8928" end="8942" title="release factor" label="release factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812938" start="10717" end="10734" title="toeprinting assay" label="toeprinting assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="12332" end="12338" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="12498" end="12508" title="transcription (biology)" label="transcrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14197552" start="12733" end="12741" title="RAS/MAPK pathway" label="RAS–MAPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119288" start="12743" end="12756" title="PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway" label="PI3K/AKT/mTOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q155769" start="12767" end="12780" title="Wnt signaling pathway" label="WNT–β-catenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12357464" start="13039" end="13043" title="AMPK" label="AMPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="13145" end="13154" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q297612" start="14461" end="14504" title="Asymmetric simple exclusion process" label="Totally Asymmetric Simple Exclusion Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246856" start="14506" end="14536" title="Probabilistic logic network" label="Probabilistic Boolean Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q724168" start="14538" end="14548" title="Petri net" label="Petri Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790098" start="14553" end="14569" title="Tropical semiring" label="max-plus algebra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14799" end="14807" title="Paradigm#Scientific paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="14826" end="14832" title="Mathematical model" label="models"/>
<link wikidata="Q424137" start="15005" end="15022" title="initiation factor" label="initiation factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="15101" end="15109" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q923372" start="16071" end="16085" title="reading frames" label="reading frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205744" start="16151" end="16156" title="DNA and RNA codon tables" label="table"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="16160" end="16172" title="Genetic code" label="Genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q496353" start="16203" end="16221" title="structural formula" label="structural formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q899763" start="16264" end="16281" title="primary structure" label="primary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q847556" start="16307" end="16328" title="protein folding" label="proteins tend to fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="16351" end="16362" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="16367" end="16378" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q904984" start="16405" end="16424" title="Secondary structure" label="Secondary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q898483" start="16471" end="16489" title="tertiary structure" label="tertiary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q898483" start="16579" end="16597" title="tertiary structure" label="tertiary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q899656" start="16638" end="16662" title="Protein structure prediction" label="sophisticated algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="16789" end="16806" title="Codon Dictionary" label="translation table"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="16919" end="16929" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q408663" start="16939" end="16953" title="selenocysteine" label="selenocysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180341" start="17504" end="17514" title="Methionine" label="Methionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q483745" start="17551" end="17558" title="Leucine" label="Leucine"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="18350" end="18355" title="Yeast" label="Yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q82494" start="18546" end="18550" title="National Center for Biotechnology Information" label="NCBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q901755" start="18606" end="18613" title="GenBank" label="GenBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205744" start="18621" end="18634" title="DNA codon table" label="standard code"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395320" start="18641" end="18670" title="vertebrate mitochondrial code" label="vertebrate mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q18396034" start="18677" end="18701" title="yeast mitochondrial code" label="yeast mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325270" start="18708" end="18796" title="The mold, protozoan, and coelenterate mitochondrial code and the mycoplasma/spiroplasma code" label="mold, protozoan, and coelenterate mitochondrial code and the mycoplasma/spiroplasma code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325308" start="18803" end="18834" title="invertebrate mitochondrial code" label="invertebrate mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325352" start="18841" end="18889" title="ciliate, dasycladacean and hexamita nuclear code" label="ciliate, dasycladacean and hexamita nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325270" start="18896" end="18912" title="The mold, protozoan, and coelenterate mitochondrial code and the mycoplasma/spiroplasma code" label="kinetoplast code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325370" start="18950" end="18992" title="echinoderm and flatworm mitochondrial code" label="echinoderm and flatworm mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325376" start="18999" end="19020" title="euplotid nuclear code" label="euplotid nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325268" start="19027" end="19069" title="bacterial, archaeal and plant plastid code" label="bacterial, archaeal and plant plastid code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325378" start="19076" end="19106" title="alternative yeast nuclear code" label="alternative yeast nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883747" start="19113" end="19140" title="ascidian mitochondrial code" label="ascidian mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325432" start="19147" end="19186" title="alternative flatworm mitochondrial code" label="alternative flatworm mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350045" start="19193" end="19229" title="Blepharisma nuclear code" label="&amp;quot;Blepharisma&amp;quot; nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209085" start="19236" end="19268" title="chlorophycean mitochondrial code" label="chlorophycean mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209091" start="19307" end="19335" title="trematode mitochondrial code" label="trematode mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209092" start="19342" end="19393" title="Scenedesmus obliquus mitochondrial code" label="&amp;quot;Scenedesmus obliquus&amp;quot; mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209108" start="19400" end="19447" title="Thraustochytrium mitochondrial code" label="&amp;quot;Thraustochytrium&amp;quot; mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256697" start="19454" end="19486" title="Pterobranchia mitochondrial code" label="Pterobranchia mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325379" start="19493" end="19540" title="candidate division SR1 and gracilibacteria code" label="candidate division SR1 and gracilibacteria code"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209109" start="19547" end="19594" title="Pachysolen tannophilus nuclear code" label="&amp;quot;Pachysolen tannophilus&amp;quot; nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457263" start="19601" end="19625" title="karyorelict nuclear code" label="karyorelict nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589457" start="19632" end="19669" title="Condylostoma nuclear code" label="&amp;quot;Condylostoma&amp;quot; nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589462" start="19676" end="19711" title="Mesodinium nuclear code" label="&amp;quot;Mesodinium&amp;quot; nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589621" start="19718" end="19740" title="peritrich nuclear code" label="peritrich nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589707" start="19747" end="19787" title="Blastocrithidia nuclear code" label="&amp;quot;Blastocrithidia&amp;quot; nuclear code"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082353" start="19826" end="19860" title="Cephalodiscidae mitochondrial code" label="Cephalodiscidae mitochondrial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="19879" end="19893" title="Cell (biology)" label="Cell (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="19896" end="19909" title="Cell division" label="Cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205744" start="19912" end="19927" title="DNA codon table" label="DNA codon table"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="19930" end="19941" title="Epigenetics" label="Epigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420754" start="19944" end="19965" title="Expanded genetic code" label="Expanded genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="19968" end="19983" title="Gene expression" label="Gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q411391" start="19986" end="20001" title="Gene regulation" label="Gene regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="20004" end="20008" title="Gene" label="Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="20011" end="20017" title="Genome" label="Genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="20020" end="20024" title="Life" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915896" start="20027" end="20042" title="Protein methods" label="Protein methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854186" start="20045" end="20056" title="Start codon" label="Start codon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262402" wikidata="Q225856" url="?curid=262402" title="Translation (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Translation]], from the Latin for &quot;carry across&quot;, is the conversion of text from one language to another.

== Science ==
* Translation studies, the systematic study of the theory, description and application of translation, interpreting, and localization
* Translation (biology), part of the biological process of protein biosynthesis from messenger RNA
* Frequency translation, converting a radio signal from one frequency to another by mixing the input signal with a second signal 
** Broadcast translator, rebroadcasting a radio signal at a different frequency
* Translation (physics), movement that changes the position of an object, moving every point the same distance in the same direction, without rotation, reflection or change in size
* Translation operator, an alternative name for the displacement operator in quantum optics

* Translational research
* Translation (sociology)

== Mathematics ==
* Translation (geometry), moving points the same distance in the same direction
**Shift operator, a translation within the real line
* Translation (group theory), the operation of multiplying by a group element

== Computing ==
* Address translation
** Port address translation, allows a single public IP address to be used by many hosts on a private network
** Network address translation, transceiving network traffic through a router by re-writing the source and/or destination IP addresses 
** Virtual-to-physical address translation
* Program transformation
* The translation phase of a compiler (or, by extension, the entire process of compilation)
* Translate Toolkit, freeware localization toolkit 
* Translator (computing), multiple meanings
* Bing Translator, online machine translation service in Bing.com
* Google Translate, online machine translation service in Google
* Translate (Apple), a translation app developed by Apple for their iOS and iPadOS devices

== Literature and entertainment ==
*&quot;Translations&quot; (play), 1980 play by Brian Friel
*&quot;...In Translation&quot;, seventeenth episode of the first season of &quot;Lost&quot; 
* &quot;Translate&quot; (Sexy Sadie album), 2006 album by Sexy Sadie
* &quot;Translation&quot; (album), 2020 album by Black Eyed Peas
* &quot;Translate&quot; (Luke Abbott album), 2020 album by Luke Abbott

== Religion ==
* Translation (relic), the removal of holy objects from one locality to another 
* Translation (ecclesiastical), the transfer of a bishop from one diocese or episcopal see to another
* Translation (Mormonism), in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the change of a person from mortality to immortality without death

==See also==
* Translator (disambiguation)
* Conversion (disambiguation)
* Interpretation (disambiguation)
* Transformation (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225856" start="0" end="15" title="Translation (disambiguation)" label="[[Translation]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q501778" start="135" end="154" title="Translation studies" label="Translation studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="269" end="290" title="Translation (biology)" label="Translation (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q760140" start="368" end="389" title="Frequency translation" label="Frequency translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q357742" start="499" end="519" title="Broadcast translator" label="Broadcast translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q211459" start="578" end="599" title="Translation (physics)" label="Translation (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282616" start="809" end="830" title="displacement operator" label="displacement operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q110373712" start="852" end="874" title="Translational research" label="Translational research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834520" start="877" end="900" title="Translation (sociology)" label="Translation (sociology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211459" start="922" end="944" title="Translation (geometry)" label="Translation (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278680" start="1002" end="1016" title="Shift operator" label="Shift operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="1055" end="1081" title="Translation (group theory)" label="Translation (group theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15171" start="1150" end="1169" title="Address Resolution Protocol" label="Address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="1173" end="1197" title="Port address translation" label="Port address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="1282" end="1309" title="Network address translation" label="Network address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="1418" end="1457" title="VIPT" label="Virtual-to-physical address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248437" start="1460" end="1482" title="Program transformation" label="Program transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q368244" start="1577" end="1594" title="Translate Toolkit" label="Translate Toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462013" start="1629" end="1651" title="Translator (computing)" label="Translator (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21490961" start="1673" end="1688" title="Bing Translator" label="Bing Translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q135622" start="1739" end="1755" title="Google Translate" label="Google Translate"/>
<link wikidata="Q96678543" start="1804" end="1821" title="Translate (Apple)" label="Translate (Apple)"/>
<link wikidata="Q288092" start="1930" end="1961" title="Translations (play)" label="&amp;quot;Translations&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048632" start="1995" end="2012" title="...In Translation" label="...In Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834510" start="2083" end="2123" title="Translate (Sexy Sadie album)" label="&amp;quot;Translate&amp;quot; (Sexy Sadie album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96251220" start="2152" end="2183" title="Translation (album)" label="&amp;quot;Translation&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880175" start="2217" end="2258" title="Translate (Luke Abbott album)" label="&amp;quot;Translate&amp;quot; (Luke Abbott album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q663370" start="2304" end="2323" title="Translation (relic)" label="Translation (relic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997751" start="2385" end="2413" title="Translation (ecclesiastical)" label="Translation (ecclesiastical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014374" start="2487" end="2510" title="Translation (Mormonism)" label="Translation (Mormonism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q427653" start="2647" end="2674" title="Translator (disambiguation)" label="Translator (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q235969" start="2677" end="2704" title="Conversion (disambiguation)" label="Conversion (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q651448" start="2707" end="2738" title="Interpretation (disambiguation)" label="Interpretation (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q234757" start="2741" end="2772" title="Transformation (disambiguation)" label="Transformation (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262407" wikidata="Q503680" url="?curid=262407" title="David H. Rosenthal">
<text>David H. Rosenthal (1945–1992) was an American author, poet, editor, and translator. He wrote mostly on the history of jazz music and was also an important translator of Catalan literature. Among his translations was the first English rendering of the Catalan epic &quot;Tirant Lo Blanch&quot;, of which Cervantes said, &quot;I swear to you, my friend, it&#x27;s the best book of its kind in the world.&quot; In 1986, he translated popular Mercè Rodoreda&#x27;s novel &quot;The Time of the Doves.&quot;

==Selected books==
* &quot;Eyes on the Street&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Modern Catalan Poetry&quot; (editor, 1979)
* &quot;Loves of the Poets: Poems&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Hard Bop: Jazz and Black Music 1955–1965&quot; (1992)
* &quot;The Journey: Poems&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Four Postwar Catalan Poets&quot; (editor, 1994)

==References==
==External links==
*Catalan Biography
* David H. Rosenthal legacy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q503680" start="0" end="18" title="David H. Rosenthal" label="David H. Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="47" end="53" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="55" end="59" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="61" end="67" title="editor" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="73" end="83" title="translator" label="translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="119" end="129" title="Jazz" label="jazz music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="170" end="177" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q559667" start="265" end="293" title="Tirant lo Blanch" label="&amp;quot;Tirant Lo Blanch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="304" end="313" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q234663" start="440" end="454" title="Mercè Rodoreda" label="Mercè Rodoreda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107782" start="474" end="495" title="The Time of the Doves" label="The Time of the Doves"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262408" wikidata="Q482413" url="?curid=262408" title="An Jung-geun">
<text>An Jung-geun (; 2 September 1879 – 26 March 1910) was a Korean independence activist. He is remembered as a martyr in both South and North Korea for his 1909 assassination of the Japanese politician Itō Hirobumi, who had previously served as the first prime minister of Japan and Japanese Resident-General of Korea. An was imprisoned and later executed by Japanese authorities on 26 March 1910.

He was posthumously awarded the Order of Merit for National Foundation in 1962 by the South Korean government, the most prestigious civil decoration in the Republic of Korea, for his efforts for Korean independence.

==Biography==

===Early accounts===

An was born on 2 September 1879, in Haeju, Hwanghae Province, Joseon. He was the first son of and , of the Sunheung An clan (). Ahn is the 26th great-grandson of Ahn Hyang. His childhood name was (안응칠; 安應七; ). The name originated from seven dots on the chest and stomach, meaning that it was born in accordance with the energy of the Big Dipper. As a boy, he learned Chinese literature and Western sciences, but was more interested in martial arts and marksmanship. Kim Ku, a future leader of the Korean independence movement who had taken refuge in An Tae-hun&#x27;s house at the time, wrote that young An Jung-geun was an excellent marksman, liked to read books, and had strong charisma.
At the age of 16, An entered the Catholic Church with his father, where he received his baptismal name &quot;Thomas&quot; (), and learned French. While fleeing from the Japanese, An took refuge with a French priest of the Catholic Church in Korea named Wilhelm (Korean name, Hong Seok-gu; 홍석구; 洪錫九) who baptized him and hid him in his church for several months. The priest encouraged An to read the Bible and had a series of discussions with him. He maintained his belief in Catholicism until his death, going to the point of even asking his son to become a priest in his last letter to his wife.

At the age of 25, he started a coal business, but devoted himself to the education of Korean people after the Eulsa Treaty by establishing private schools in northwestern regions of Korea. He also participated in the National Debt Repayment Movement. In 1907 he exiled himself to Vladivostok to join in with the armed resistance against the Japanese colonial rulers, where he learned fluent Russian. He was appointed a lieutenant general of an armed Korean resistance group and led several attacks against Japanese forces before his eventual defeat.

===Assassination of Itō Hirobumi===
In October 1909, An passed the Imperial Japanese guards at the Harbin Railway Station. Itō Hirobumi had come back from negotiating with the Russian representative on the train. An shot him three times with an FN M1900 pistol on the railway platform. He also shot Kawagami Toshihiko (川上俊彦), the Japanese Consul General, Morita Jirō (森泰二郞), a Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and Tanaka Seitarō (田中淸太郞), an executive of the South Manchuria Railway, who were seriously injured. After the shooting, An yelled out for Korean independence in Russian, stating &quot;Корея! Ура!&quot; (Korea! Hurrah!), and waving the Korean flag.

Afterwards, An was arrested by Russian guards who held him for two days before turning him over to Japanese colonial authorities. When he heard the news that Itō had died, he made the sign of the cross in gratitude. An was quoted as saying, &quot;I have ventured to commit a serious crime, offering my life for my country. This is the behavior of a noble-minded patriot.&quot; Wilhelm gave last rites to An, ignoring the bishop of Korea&#x27;s order not to. An insisted that the captors call him by his baptismal name, Thomas.

In court, An claimed to be a lieutenant general of the Korean resistance army and demanded to be treated as a prisoner of war and not a suspected criminal. He insisted he did nothing wrong, reciting a list of 15 execution-worthy offenses he believed Itō had committed. An mistakenly believed Itō had ordered the assassination of Empress Myeongseong, an order which is attributed to Miura Gorō, although Miura Gorō did send a report to Itō after the execution.

===Imprisonment and death===

An&#x27;s Japanese captors showed sympathy to him. He recorded in his autobiography that the public prosecutor, Mizobuchi Takao, exclaimed &quot;From what you have told me, it is clear that you are a righteous man of East Asia. I can&#x27;t believe a sentence of death will be imposed on a righteous man. There&#x27;s nothing to worry about.&quot; He was also given New Year&#x27;s delicacies and his calligraphy was highly admired and requested, later stored in Japan. After six trials, An was sentenced to death by the Japanese colonial court in Ryojun (Port Arthur). An was angered at the sentence, though he expected this outcome. He had hoped to be viewed as a prisoner of war instead of an assassin. On the same day of sentencing at two o&#x27;clock in the afternoon, his two brothers Jeong-geun and Gong-geun met with him to deliver their mother&#x27;s message, &quot;Your death is for the sake of your country, and don&#x27;t ask for your life in a cowardly manner. Your brave death for justice is final filial regard to your mother.&quot;

Judge Hirashi, who presided over An&#x27;s trial, had promised An that a stay of execution for at least a few months would be granted, but Tokyo ordered prompt action. Before his execution, An made a final request: that the wardens help him finish his essay, &quot;On Peace in East Asia&quot;. He also received Korean white clothes from his mother to die in during his execution. An requested to be executed as a prisoner of war, by firing squad. But instead, it was ordered that he should be hanged as a common criminal. An was executed in Ryojun, on 26 March 1910. His grave in Lu Shun has not been found.

During his imprisonment, An was excommunicated by the Catholic church for Ito&#x27;s assassination, viewed negatively by the church. This excommunication was lifted posthumously in 1993.

An dictated in his will that his body be buried in Harbin Park in China and then relocated to his homeland if Korea achieved independence but his request was not honoured. According to records, he was buried near the prison; the Korean government has not received cooperation from the Japanese government regarding the location of his burial. Hyochang Park in Seoul contains a grassy mound that serves as an honorary grave for An.

==Views==
Some historians hold that Itō&#x27;s death resulted in the acceleration of the final stage of the colonization process, but the claim has been disputed by some.

=== Pan-Asianism ===
An strongly believed in the union of the three great countries in East Asia, China, Korea, and Japan in order to counter and fight off Western imperialism, namely, Western countries that controlled parts of Asia, and restore East Asian independence. He followed the progress of Japan during the Russo-Japanese War and claimed that he and his compatriots were delighted at hearing of the defeat of one of the agents of western imperialism, but were disappointed that the war ended before Russia was totally subjugated.

According to Donald Keene, author of &quot;Emperor of Japan: Meiji and His World, 1852–1912&quot;, An Jung-Geun was an admirer of Emperor Meiji of Imperial Japan. One of the 15 charges An leveled against Itō was that he had deceived the Emperor of Japan, whom An felt desired peace in East Asia and Korean independence. An requested that Meiji be informed of his reasons for his execution of Itō in the hopes that if Meiji understood his reasons, the emperor would realize how mistaken Itō&#x27;s policies were and would rejoice. An also felt sure that most Japanese felt similar hatred for Itō, an opinion he formed from talking with Japanese prisoners in Korea. During An&#x27;s prison sentence and trial, many Japanese prison guards, lawyers, and even prosecutors were inspired by him.

An felt that with the death of Itō, Japan and Korea could become friends because of the many traditions that they shared. He hoped that this friendship, along with China, would become a model for the world to follow. His thoughts on Pan-Asianism were stated in his essay, &quot;On Peace in East Asia&quot; (東洋平和論; 동양평화론) that he worked on and left unfinished before his execution. In this work, An recommends the organization of combined armed forces and the issue of joint banknotes among Korea, Japan, and China. Sasagawa Norikatsu (笹川紀勝), a Professor of Law at Meiji University, highly praises An&#x27;s idea as an equivalent of the European Union and a concept that preceded the concept of the League of Nations by 10 years.

==Legacy==

The assassination of Itō by An was praised by Koreans and many Chinese as well, who were struggling against Japanese invasion at the time. Well-known Chinese political leaders such as Yuan Shikai, Sun Yat-sen, and Liang Qichao wrote poems acclaiming An.

In the 2010 An Jung-Geun Symposium in Korea, Wada Haruki (和田春樹), an activist who once worked at Tokyo University, evaluated An by quoting Itō Yukio (伊藤之雄), a fellow history scholar in Kyoto University. In his text published in 2009, Itō Yukio claims that the reign by Itō Hirobumi resulted in strong resistance from Koreans as it was considered the first step for the annexation of Korea due to the cultural differences, and that An is not to be blamed even if he assassinated Itō without understanding Itō&#x27;s ideology (2009, Itō).

On 26 March 2010, a nationwide centenary tribute to An was held in South Korea, including a ceremony led by the Prime Minister Chung Un-Chan and tribute concerts.

=== Ancestry ===
An&#x27;s family produced many other Korean independence activists. An&#x27;s cousin &quot;An Myeong-Geun&quot; () attempted to assassinate Terauchi Masatake, the first Japanese Governor-General of Korea () who executed the Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty in 1910. He failed, however, and was imprisoned for 15 years; he died in 1926. An&#x27;s brothers An Jeong-Geun () and An Gong-Geun (), as well as An&#x27;s cousin An Gyeong-Geun () and nephew An Woo-Saeng (), joined the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea in Shanghai, China, which was led by Kim Ku, and fought against Japan. An Chun-Saeng (), another nephew of An&#x27;s, joined the National Revolutionary Army of China, participated in battles against Japanese forces at Shanghai, and joined the Korean Liberation Army in 1940. Later, he became a lieutenant general of the Republic of Korea Army and a member of the National Assembly of South Korea.

Meanwhile, An Jung-Geun&#x27;s youngest son, became a prominent businessman and Chinilpa during the Japanese occupation of Korea. He died in 1952 from tuberculosis, with his children immigrating to the United States of America after the war.
* Grandfather
** An In-su ()
* Father
** An Tae-hun ()
* Mother 
** Jo Maria (趙瑪利亞, 조마리아) of the Baecheon Jo clan (; 6 May 1862 – 25 July 1927)
* Sister
** Younger sister: An Seong-nyeo (; 1881–1954)
* Brother
** Younger brother: An Jeong-geun (; 17 January 1887 – 17 March 1949)
*** Sister-in-law: Yi Jeong-seo ()
**** Nephew: An Won-saeng ()
**** Niece: An Mi-saeng ()
**** Nephew: An Jin-saeng (; 28 January 1916 – 24 December 1988)
***** Niece-in-law: Park Tae-jeong ()
****** Grandniece: An Gi-su ()
****** Grandniece: An Gi-ryeo ()
** Younger brother: An Gong-geun (; 11 July 1889 – 30 May 1939)
*** Nephew: An Woo-saeng (; 1907–1997)
*** Nephew: An Nak-saeng (; 22 June 1913 – 1950)
*** Niece: Lady An
**** Nephew-in-law: Han Ji-seong ()
*** Niece: Lady An
* Wife
** Kim Ah-ryeo ()
* Children
** Son: An Mun-saeng ()
** Daughter: An Hyeon-saeng (; 1902–1959) 
*** Son-in-law: Hwang Il-cheong ()
**** Granddaughter: Hwang Eun-ju ()
**** Granddaughter: Hwang Eun-sil ()
** Son: An Jun-saeng (; 1907 – November 1951) 
*** Daughter-in-law: Jeong Ok-nyeo (; 1905–?)
**** Grandson: An Ung-ho ()
**** Granddaughter: An Yeon-ho (; 1938 – 6 February 2011)
**** Granddaughter: An Seon-ho (; ? – 2003)
* Cousins
** An Myeong-geun (안명근,安明根; 1879–1927)
** An Hong-geun ()
** An Bong-geun ()
* Grandnephew: An Chun-saeng (; 12 August 1912 – 26 January 2011)

=== Calligraphic works ===

An is highly renowned for calligraphy works. While he was in prison, many prison guards such as Chiba Toshichi (千葉十七) who respected him, made requests to An for calligraphy works.
He left many calligraphy works which were written in the jail of Lushun although he hadn&#x27;t studied calligraphy formally. He would leave on his calligraphy works a signature of &quot;大韓國人&quot; (Great Korean) and a handprint of his left hand, which was missing the last joint of the ring finger, which he had cut off with his comrades in 1909 as a pledge to kill Itō. Some of the works were designated as Treasure No. 569 of the Republic of Korea in 1972. One of his famous works is &quot;一日不讀書口中生荊棘&quot; (일일부독서 구중생형극; Unless one reads every day, thorns grow in the mouth), a quote from the &quot;Analects&quot; of Confucius.

===Memorial Halls===

Memorial halls for An were erected in Seoul in 1970 by the South Korean government and in Harbin by the Chinese government in 2006. South Korean President Park Geun-Hye raised the idea of erecting a monument for An while meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping during a visit to China in June 2013. Thus another memorial hall honoring An Jung-Geun was opened on Sunday, 19 January 2014 in Harbin. The hall, a 200-square meter room, features photos and memorabilia. Annual activities in memorial of An are held in Lüshun, where he was imprisoned and executed.

According to local sources in China dated on 22 March 2017, the An Jung-geun Memorial Hall located at Harbin Railway Station was recently relocated to a Korean art museum in Harbin City amid China&#x27;s retaliation over South Korea&#x27;s deployment of the U.S. THAAD antimissile system. The Memorial Hall has since been reopened in the Harbin Railway Station after renovation work.

== Controversies ==
Historically, the Japanese government has generally deemed An Jung-geun as a terrorist and criminal, while South Korea has upheld An as a national hero. In January 2014, Yoshihide Suga, then a Japanese government spokesperson and former Japanese Prime Minister, described the Harbin memorial hall honoring An in China as &quot;not conducive to building peace and stability&quot; between East Asian countries. China, on the other hand has declared that An was a &quot;famous anti-Japanese high-minded person&quot; while South Korea&#x27;s foreign ministry stated An was a &quot;highly respected figure.&quot;

In February 2017, South Korean police were criticized for using a picture of An in posters put up in the city of Incheon. The poster warned of terrorism, and many South Korean citizens online criticized the police, asking &quot;if it was meant to imply if An was a terrorist&quot;. A police officer in the &quot;Korea Times&quot; apologized and clarified that there was no intention to associate An with terrorism, and all posters were taken down.

==In popular culture==
In 1959, South Korean film &quot;King Gojong and martyr An Jung-Geun&quot; was the first movie about An Jung-geun, and is a dramatized story about the event. The 1979 North Korean film &quot;An Jung Gun Shoots Itō Hirobumi&quot; is another dramatized story of the event.
The 2004 South Korean film &quot;Thomas An Jung-geun&quot; () is another dramatized story of the event. Released on September 10, 2004, it is directed by Seo Se-won. An Jung-Geun is played by actor Yu Oh-seong and Itō Hirobumi is played by Yoon Joo-sang.

A Chinese-South Korean co-production, &quot;The Age of Heroes&quot;, is being planned as a Korean drama for 2019. &quot;The Age of Heroes&quot; is planned to be 24 episodes long and entirely pre-produced with a budget of 30 billion won. Filming will begin by the end of 2018 with locations in South Korea, China, and North Korea.

A fictionalized explanation of the events is presented in an episode of the fifteenth season of &quot;Murdoch Mysteries&quot;, a Canadian murder mystery show. In the episode, entitled &quot;Patriot Games&quot;, a dead body in a Toronto cellar leads to an explanation of An Jung-geun&#x27;s assassination plot wherein rogue Russian agents play a part, requiring swift action to prevent the outbreak of a potential world war.

&quot;Hero&quot;, a 2022 South Korean musical drama film dramatized story about the event, directed by Yoon Je-kyoon.

&quot;Harbin&quot;, a 2024 film directed by Woo Min-ho, stars Hyun Bin as An.

==See also==

* Lee Bong-chang
* Yun Bong-gil

==References==
* Chung, K. (1910/2004). 대한계년사 9 [History of Korean Empire Vol. 9]. Seoul, South Korea: Somyung. 
* Itō, Y. (2009). 伊藤博文 近代日本を創った男 [Itō Hirobumi – A man who modernized Japan]. Tokyo, Japan: Kodansha. .
* Jansen, M. B. (1961). Sakamoto Ryoma and the Meiji Restoration. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
* Kang, J. (2007). 한국근대사산책 5 [Modern history of Korea Vol. 5]. Seoul, South Korea: Inmulgwa Sasang. 
* Kim, G. (1928/1997). 백범일지 [Baekbeomilji]. Seoul, Korea: Hakminsa. 
* Nam, K. (1999). 종횡무진 동양사 [History of Eastern Asia] Seoul, South Korea: Greenbee. 
* Ravina, M. (2004). The last samurai: The life and battles of Saigo Takamori. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &amp; Sons. 

==Notes==
==External links==
* An Jung Geun Memorial Hall
* 
* Scholarly introduction to An Jung-geun&#x27;s &quot;Treatise on Peace in the East&quot;
* An Jung-geun&#x27;s &quot;Treatise on Peace in the East&quot; (1910)
* &quot;Hero: the Musical&quot;, Lincoln Center, New York, 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482413" start="0" end="12" title="An Jung-geun" label="An Jung-geun"/>
<link wikidata="Q707483" start="56" end="84" title="Korean independence movement" label="Korean independence activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="108" end="114" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q174971" start="199" end="211" title="Itō Hirobumi" label="Itō Hirobumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="252" end="275" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="prime minister of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24856863" start="280" end="314" title="Japanese Resident-General of Korea" label="Japanese Resident-General of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q624185" start="428" end="466" title="Order of Merit for National Foundation" label="Order of Merit for National Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q714865" start="686" end="691" title="Haeju" label="Haeju"/>
<link wikidata="Q698214" start="693" end="710" title="Hwanghae Province" label="Hwanghae Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="712" end="718" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16182642" start="757" end="773" title="Sunheung An clan" label="Sunheung An clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q495964" start="812" end="821" title="An Hyang" label="Ahn Hyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q215737" start="1116" end="1122" title="Kim Ku" label="Kim Ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q28278" start="1147" end="1175" title="Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea" label="Korean independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1373" end="1381" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q233254" start="2048" end="2060" title="Eulsa Treaty" label="Eulsa Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q623859" start="2155" end="2187" title="National Debt Repayment Movement" label="National Debt Repayment Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="2218" end="2229" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="2357" end="2375" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2382" end="2411" title="Righteous army#During the Japanese occupation (1910–194" label="armed Korean resistance group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059254" start="2588" end="2610" title="Harbin Railway Station" label="Harbin Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q658491" start="2734" end="2742" title="FN M1900" label="FN M1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143602" start="2883" end="2908" title="Imperial Household Agency" label="Imperial Household Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q696419" start="2958" end="2981" title="South Manchuria Railway" label="South Manchuria Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="3072" end="3079" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q623692" start="3344" end="3361" title="sign of the cross" label="sign of the cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q869217" start="3550" end="3560" title="last rites" label="last rites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3743" end="3765" title="Righteous army#During the Japanese occupation (1910–1945)" label="Korean resistance army"/>
<link wikidata="Q623757" start="4000" end="4036" title="assassination of Empress Myeongseong" label="assassination of Empress Myeongseong"/>
<link wikidata="Q704307" start="4070" end="4080" title="Miura Gorō" label="Miura Gorō"/>
<link wikidata="Q701398" start="4545" end="4560" title="Japanese New Year" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="4580" end="4591" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195495" start="4674" end="4692" title="Capital punishment in Japan" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q623329" start="4735" end="4746" title="Lüshunkou" label="Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="4845" end="4860" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="4875" end="4883" title="assassination" label="assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="5367" end="5372" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123027562" start="5539" end="5559" title="White clothing in Korea" label="Korean white clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q623329" start="5769" end="5775" title="Ryojun" label="Ryojun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5957035" start="6368" end="6381" title="Hyochang Park" label="Hyochang Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="6727" end="6732" title="Qing dynasty" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="6734" end="6739" title="Joseon" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="6745" end="6750" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="6785" end="6804" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="Western imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="6945" end="6963" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="7137" end="7143" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240040" start="7182" end="7194" title="Donald Keene" label="Donald Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="7299" end="7312" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="7406" end="7422" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="7454" end="7463" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46492" start="8523" end="8539" title="Meiji University" label="Meiji University"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8595" end="8609" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="8657" end="8674" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="8885" end="8896" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="8898" end="8909" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q379836" start="8915" end="8927" title="Liang Qichao" label="Liang Qichao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842" start="9052" end="9068" title="Tokyo University" label="Tokyo University"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="9140" end="9156" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q336417" start="9620" end="9633" title="Chung Un-Chan" label="Chung Un-Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q315559" start="9814" end="9831" title="Terauchi Masatake" label="Terauchi Masatake"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="9852" end="9868" title="Governor-General" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q495558" start="9898" end="9927" title="Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty" label="Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28278" start="10149" end="10196" title="Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea" label="Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="10200" end="10208" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q215737" start="10234" end="10240" title="Kim Ku" label="Kim Ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="10326" end="10353" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q489964" start="10440" end="10462" title="Korean Liberation Army" label="Korean Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q483268" start="10517" end="10539" title="Republic of Korea Army" label="Republic of Korea Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744857" start="10675" end="10683" title="Chinilpa" label="Chinilpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="10695" end="10723" title="Japanese occupation of Korea" label="Japanese occupation of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10797" end="10821" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q24720" start="12243" end="12254" title="Korean calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q623329" start="12462" end="12468" title="Lushun" label="Lushun"/>
<link wikidata="Q276015" start="12999" end="13007" title="Analects" label="Analects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="13017" end="13026" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="13089" end="13094" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q138048" start="13206" end="13219" title="Park Geun-Hye" label="Park Geun-Hye"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="13303" end="13313" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q523156" start="13876" end="13881" title="Terminal High Altitude Area Defense" label="THAAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q122465" start="14188" end="14202" title="Yoshihide Suga" label="Yoshihide Suga"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="14294" end="14300" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q486950" start="14939" end="14950" title="The Korea Times" label="Korea Times"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15290" end="15321" title="An Jung Gun Shoots Itō Hirobumi" label="An Jung Gun Shoots Itō Hirobumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128805" start="15568" end="15579" title="Yu Oh-seong" label="Yu Oh-seong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055192" start="15610" end="15623" title="Yoon Joo-sang" label="Yoon Joo-sang"/>
<link wikidata="Q482612" start="15717" end="15729" title="Korean drama" label="Korean drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326701" start="16059" end="16076" title="Murdoch Mysteries" label="Murdoch Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="16086" end="16094" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79998805" start="16388" end="16392" title="Hero (2022 South Korean film)" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11265006" start="16485" end="16498" title="Yoon Je-kyoon" label="Yoon Je-kyoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127510067" start="16507" end="16513" title="Harbin (film)" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21710789" start="16545" end="16555" title="Woo Min-ho" label="Woo Min-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q380118" start="16563" end="16571" title="Hyun Bin" label="Hyun Bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q136386" start="16596" end="16610" title="Lee Bong-chang" label="Lee Bong-chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q491240" start="16613" end="16625" title="Yun Bong-gil" label="Yun Bong-gil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262410" wikidata="Q1176385" url="?curid=262410" title="David Rosenthal">
<text>David Rosenthal may refer to:

*David Rosenthal (musician) (born 1961), American keyboardist, music producer, and songwriter
*David H. Rosenthal (1945–1992), American author, poet, editor and translator
*David M. Rosenthal (philosopher) (fl. 1970s to present), philosopher at the City University of New York
*David M. Rosenthal (director) (born 1969), American filmmaker, writer and director
*David S. Rosenthal (fl. 1990s to present), American television producer
*David S. H. Rosenthal (born 1948), computer scientist

==See also==
*David Rosenthall, Archdeacon of Singapore 1945-1947</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1176385" start="0" end="15" title="David Rosenthal" label="David Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714150" start="32" end="58" title="David Rosenthal (musician)" label="David Rosenthal (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q503680" start="126" end="144" title="David H. Rosenthal" label="David H. Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236958" start="204" end="236" title="David M. Rosenthal (philosopher)" label="David M. Rosenthal (philosopher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018342" start="309" end="338" title="David M. Rosenthal (director)" label="David M. Rosenthal (director)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239390" start="393" end="411" title="David S. Rosenthal" label="David S. Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239368" start="466" end="487" title="David S. H. Rosenthal" label="David S. H. Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887503" start="535" end="551" title="David Rosenthall" label="David Rosenthall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262411" wikidata="Q2014284" url="?curid=262411" title="Anton Alberts (architect)">
<text>Anton (Ton) Alberts (6 July 1927 – 16 August 1999) was a Dutch architect best known for designing the ING Bank (1982) in the Bijlmer district of Amsterdam and the Gas Corporation headquarters in Groningen.

Alberts was involved with Situationist International before being expelled in 1960. He had been involved with fellow Situationists Constant and Har Oudejans in setting up a labyrinth in the Stedelijk Museum of Amsterdam, but the project fell apart amidst acrimony. Officially, he was expelled for designing churches, although Asger Jorn relates the expulsion more to the &quot;Amsterdam affair&quot;.

In 1963 he founded the firm Alberts and Van Huut with Max van Huut, guided by the principles of organic architecture. His work also has its roots in the anthroposophical architecture of Rudolf Steiner.

Alberts offered to work for free on the Peace Parks in Bosnia and Herzegovina but was only able to create sketches before he died, aged 72, in Amsterdam. Still, by Albert&#x27;s sketches the Peace Flame House, a community centre, was built in Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a gift by Peace Flame Foundation Netherlands to this former war-ravaged community.
==Notes==
== External links ==
* Official website of Alberts &amp; van Huut (portions in English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2014284" start="0" end="19" title="Anton Alberts (architect)" label="Anton (Ton) Alberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q645708" start="102" end="110" title="ING Bank" label="ING Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q128498" start="125" end="132" title="Bijlmer" label="Bijlmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="195" end="204" title="Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="233" end="259" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q697681" start="338" end="346" title="Constant Nieuwenhuys" label="Constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="351" end="363" title="Har Oudejans" label="Har Oudejans"/>
<link wikidata="Q924335" start="397" end="413" title="Stedelijk Museum" label="Stedelijk Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="417" end="426" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q83578" start="533" end="543" title="Asger Jorn" label="Asger Jorn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="663" end="675" title="Max van Huut" label="Max van Huut"/>
<link wikidata="Q36118" start="705" end="725" title="organic architecture" label="organic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184719" start="762" end="778" title="Anthroposophy" label="anthroposophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="795" end="809" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="867" end="889" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="955" end="964" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1003" end="1020" title="Peace Flame House" label="Peace Flame House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1099" end="1133" title="Peace Flame Foundation Netherlands" label="Peace Flame Foundation Netherlands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262413" wikidata="Q1441408" url="?curid=262413" title="Francis Bond Head">
<text>Sir Francis Bond Head, 1st Baronet KCH PC (7 December 1793 – 20 July 1875) was Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada during the rebellion of 1837.

== Biography ==
Head was an officer in the corps of Royal Engineers of the British Army from 1811 to 1825; as such he earned a Waterloo Medal. Afterwards, he attempted to set up a mining company in Argentina. Head rode between Buenos Aires and the Andes twice, from which he was given the nickname &quot;Galloping Head&quot;.

Head was born to parents, James Roper Mendes Head and Frances Anne Burgess. He was descended from the Spanish Jew Fernando Mendes, who accompanied as her personal physician Catherine of Braganza in 1662 when she came to England to marry Charles II. His grandfather Moses Mendes married Anna Gabriella Head and took on the Head name following the death of his wife&#x27;s father, Sir Francis Head, 4th Bt. He married Julia Valenza Somerville in 1816, and they eventually had four children.
King William IV knighted him in 1831 after he demonstrated the military usefulness of the lasso. In 1834, Head was appointed as an assistant Poor Law Commissioner in Kent. While serving in this capacity, he drew up a document called &quot;Plan of a Rural Workhouse for 500 Persons&quot;, which established separate areas for males and females but mingled sick and well, young and old, sane and insane. He argued that provisions for the poor should not be superior to those earned by the independent labourer. The rooms, for example, were to hold eight residents in a 15&#x27; x 10&#x27; space, and the diet was to be strictly for subsistence, resulting in the kind of gruel portrayed in the workhouse scenes of &quot;Oliver Twist&quot; by Charles Dickens.

Head was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada in 1835 in an attempt by the British government to appease the reformers in the colony, such as William Lyon Mackenzie, who wanted responsible government. He appointed reformer Robert Baldwin to the Executive Council, but that appointment was opposed by the more radical Mackenzie. In any case, he ignored Baldwin&#x27;s advice, and Baldwin resigned; the Legislative Assembly of the 12th Parliament of Upper Canada then refused to pass any money bills and so Head dissolved the government. In the subsequent election campaign, he appealed to the United Empire Loyalists of the colony, proclaiming that the reformers were advocating American republicanism. The Conservative party, led by the wealthy landowners known as the &quot;Family Compact&quot;, won the election to the 13th Parliament of Upper Canada.

In December 1837, Mackenzie led a brief and bungled rebellion in Toronto. Sir Francis Bond Head later boasted that despite the evidence that poured in from every district in the province, he allowed Mackenzie to prepare a revolt. He further claimed that he encouraged the outbreak by sending all the troops from the province, laying a trap for Mackenzie, despite there being no troops, and the York Militia had been preparing for an attack. Head sent the colonial militia to put down the rebellion, which they did within four days. In response to the rebellion, Britain replaced Head as Lieutenant-Governor with Sir George Arthur and then Lord Durham. Head returned to England and settled down to write books and essays.

In later life Head lived at Duppas Hall, overlooking Duppas Hill in Croydon, where he organised protests against the proposed outlawing of horse-riding in the area. He was appointed to the Privy Council in 1867.

==Legacy==
Several places in Ontario are named for Sir Francis Bond Head:
*Bond Head, an unincorporated area northwest of Toronto in the town of Bradford West Gwillimbury, Simcoe County
*Bond Head, a cape on Lake Ontario in the municipality of Clarington, Regional Municipality of Durham, to the east of Toronto, which gives its name to the adjacent settlement of Bond Head, and a local park west of the cape and east of the Port of Newcastle harbour.
*Three streets in the town of Oakville, Ontario named Francis, Bond, and Head. (Only Bond and Head remain.)
*Two streets in the city of St. Catharines, Ontario named &#x27;Bond&#x27; and &#x27;Head&#x27;. Though both streets are short, they intersect.
*The community of Frankford, on the Trent River, was named after Head after he crossed the river there while travelling.

==Works==
*&quot;Life of Bruce&quot; (London, 1830), a biography of Scottish traveler James Bruce
*Bruce, James, &quot;Travels&quot; (1830), an abridged version of the 1790 work, edited by F. Bond Head.
* Head, Francis Bond. (1826). &quot;Rough Notes Taken during some Rapid Journeys across the Pampas and among the Andes&quot;. Murray (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009; )
*&quot;Bubbles from the Brunnens of Nassau, by an Old Man&quot; (1834), travel in Germany
* Head, Francis Bond. (1846). &quot;The Emigrant&quot;. London: John Murray.
* Head, Francis B[ond]. (1852). &quot;A Fortnight in Ireland.&quot;
*&quot;The Defenceless State of Great Burray, 1869.

==References==
==External links==
*Biography at the &quot;Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online&quot;
* 
**&quot;Life of Bruce, the African Traveller&quot; (1830 edition), full text at Archive.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1441408" start="0" end="34" title="Francis Bond Head" label="Sir Francis Bond Head, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q705153" start="35" end="38" title="Royal Guelphic Order" label="KCH"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="39" end="41" title="Privy Council (United Kingdom)" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516453" start="79" end="98" title="Lieutenant-Governor" label="Lieutenant-Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="102" end="114" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q389091" start="126" end="143" title="Upper Canada Rebellion" label="rebellion of 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="198" end="213" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="221" end="233" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848033" start="273" end="287" title="Waterloo Medal" label="Waterloo Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="344" end="353" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="575" end="586" title="Spanish Jew" label="Spanish Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q176253" start="646" end="667" title="Catherine of Braganza" label="Catherine of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="710" end="720" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q18733494" start="738" end="750" title="Moses Mendes" label="Moses Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228780" start="1103" end="1122" title="Poor Law Commission" label="Poor Law Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="1128" end="1132" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1803" end="1810" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q182454" start="1870" end="1892" title="William Lyon Mackenzie" label="William Lyon Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="1905" end="1927" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093662" start="1951" end="1965" title="Robert Baldwin" label="Robert Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419828" start="1973" end="1990" title="Executive Council of Upper Canada" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518216" start="2129" end="2149" title="Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548901" start="2157" end="2188" title="12th Parliament of Upper Canada" label="12th Parliament of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829231" start="2320" end="2343" title="United Empire Loyalists" label="United Empire Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2406" end="2414" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="2434" end="2452" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Conservative party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066234" start="2503" end="2517" title="Family Compact" label="Family Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150022" start="2549" end="2580" title="13th Parliament of Upper Canada" label="13th Parliament of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2648" end="2655" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q826766" start="3195" end="3212" title="Sir George Arthur, 1st Baronet" label="Sir George Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q336437" start="3222" end="3233" title="John Lambton, 1st Earl of Durham" label="Lord Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316056" start="3358" end="3369" title="Duppas Hill" label="Duppas Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="3373" end="3380" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="3494" end="3507" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="3547" end="3554" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3607" end="3626" title="Unincorporated area#Canada" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="3640" end="3647" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492517" start="3663" end="3688" title="Bradford West Gwillimbury" label="Bradford West Gwillimbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437636" start="3690" end="3703" title="Simcoe County" label="Simcoe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q185113" start="3718" end="3722" title="Cape (geography)" label="cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="3726" end="3738" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438" start="3762" end="3772" title="Clarington" label="Clarington"/>
<link wikidata="Q381803" start="3774" end="3805" title="Regional Municipality of Durham" label="Regional Municipality of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q555690" start="3951" end="3960" title="Newcastle, Ontario" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q424984" start="4000" end="4017" title="Oakville, Ontario" label="Oakville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q126805" start="4106" end="4120" title="St. Catharines" label="St. Catharines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276918" start="4240" end="4249" title="Frankford, Ontario" label="Frankford"/>
<link wikidata="Q175816" start="4258" end="4269" title="Trent River (Ontario)" label="Trent River"/>
<link wikidata="Q348489" start="4430" end="4441" title="James Bruce" label="James Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071418" start="4463" end="4470" title="Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile" label="Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="4693" end="4719" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262416" wikidata="Q278906" url="?curid=262416" title="Balkan Bulgarian Airlines">
<text>Balkan Bulgarian Airlines () was Bulgaria&#x27;s government-owned flag carrier airline between 1947 and 2002. During the 1970s, the airline became a significant European carrier. The company encountered financial instability following the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe. Despite managing to continue operations, following the start of the 21st century and a controversial privatisation, it declared bankruptcy in 2002. Balkan was liquidated in late October 2002. Bulgaria Air was appointed Balkan&#x27;s successor in December 2002.

== History ==

=== Early years ===
Bulgaria had a short-lived airline (Bunavad) in 1927, yet the country could not afford investing in modern air transport until after World War II. In 1946, the Ministry of Transport and Communications formed an Administration of Air Communications (, ). Since Bulgaria was regarded as a combatant on the defeated Axis side, the DVS could only contract with France for the supply of several Atelier d&#x27;Avions Coulombe &quot;Toucan&quot; aircraft (French-built versions of the Junkers Ju 52). In interpretation of their delivery, Bulgarian airmen practised by flying the nation&#x27;s first long-distance flights: to Paris, transporting government officials to peace negotiations, being conducted there. These flights used German-built Ju 52 aircraft (Bulgarian service designation Сова or &quot;Sova&quot;, = Owl), delivered before the war to the На Негово Величество Въздушни войски [НВВВ] or His majesty&#x27;s Air Force, and captured during the war from retreating German forces.

DVS officially launched services under the Bulgarian Air Lines (, ) name on 29 June 1947 with a Ju 52 flight from Sofia via Plovdiv to Burgas. Other services soon followed. By the close of the year, the DVS had ordered several Soviet-built Lisunov Li-2 variants of the Douglas DC-3 and at least 13 were operated until 1968. The Soviet forces stationed in Bulgaria took interest in DVS, and by late 1947, had taken DVS into joint ownership, as had been done with all airlines of East-European countries formerly allied with Nazi Germany. The resulting airline was called TABSO (), an acronym for &quot;Transportno-aviacionno balgaro-savetsko obedinenie&quot; (, Bulgarian-Soviet Transport Aviation Corporation). The Ju 52s gradually phased out from service as TABSO re-equipped with Li-2s. These more modern planes allowed the airline to expand services.

=== The 1950s and 1960s ===


Soviet equity in TABSO was reacquired by the Bulgarian government in 1954. The airline with this brand name survived until the end of 1967, often in the shadow of the headline phrase &quot;Bulgarian Air Transport&quot;. In 1956, TABSO bought its first Ilyushin Il-14 aircraft. These aircraft, along with Li-2s, were deployed on services to seven domestic destinations, including Burgas, Gorna Oryahovitsa, Ruschuk, Plovdiv, Sofia, Stara Zagora and Varna; and international destinations Amsterdam, Athens, Beirut, Belgrade, Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest, Damascus, Frankfurt, Kiev, Moscow, Odessa, Prague, Vienna and Warsaw.

In 1962, it began services with the Ilyushin Il-18; these and the expansion of Bulgaria&#x27;s inclusive-tour tourism industry began to put the airline&#x27;s name on the European and world map. The turboprop type crossed the Equator to Kenya and the Atlantic to Peru. By 1967, Antonov An-24s had arrived for domestic and regional flights.
By the mid-1960s, tourism was a major hard currency earner for Bulgaria and TABSO faced home-grown competition. Executives of the Teksim trading company had decided to start their own aviation business which included crop-spraying and inclusive-tour charter airline operations under the name of Булер (Bulair). Despite trying to buy Sud Aviation Caravelle jet airliners, Bulair ended up buying more Il-18s turboprops under heavy Soviet and Bulgarian political pressure. These were operated to several Western European countries to bring holiday makers to Bulgarian resorts.

The Teksim venture proved a success and a thorn in the side of TABSO. By 1967, TABSO had the inside track in government circles, and the Teksim operation was largely disbanded by 1970. Amid rumours of scandal and embezzling several Teksim directors were sent to jail, accused of performing capitalism-ruled economic behaviour. Their venture had operated under the TABSO banner for reasons of expediency (not least international rights). The last Bulair-branded aircraft had been rebranded as TABSO machines by 1972.

The carrier bought three Tupolev Tu-134 jets in late 1967. On 1 January 1968, TABSO was rebranded &quot;Balkan Bulgarian Airlines&quot; (, ). The wider commercial aviation scene was put under Balkan&#x27;s control via subsidiaries such as the aforementioned Bulair, Селскостопанска авиация [ССА] or &quot;Selskostopanska aviacia&quot; [SSA] (the Agricultural Aviation Company) and a separate profit centre which performed &quot;ad hoc&quot; aviation contracting, mostly with helicopters.

The first Tu-134 was put into service in , initially flying scheduled services between Sofia and London. The airline became the first foreign customer of the type, leading to a close association with the Tupolev design bureau that lasted two decades. There were several reasons why Bulgaria was allowed to put a new Soviet type into service ahead of more important Soviet-bloc nations. Andrei Tupolev was President of the Soviet-Bulgarian Society. He had cemented personal links with his Bulgarian counterpart, formidable wartime Resistance figure and Politburo member Tsola Dragoycheva. She lobbied him for delivery preferences in return for campaigning before the Bulgarian authorities to buy his products rather than Western or other Soviet aircraft types. Indeed, Balkan never bought the Ilyushin Il-62 long-range airliner, preferring to misuse its Tu-154s for long-range work. Similarly, it eschewed Ilyushin&#x27;s Il-86 wide-body despite arguably having the precise role for it on its sea or ski charter flights.

=== The 1970s ===
At , Balkan served countries in Africa, Asia and Europe plus domestic destinations. At this time, the fleet included Antonov An-2s, An-10s and An-24Bs, Ilyushin Il-14s and Il-18s, Tupolev Tu-134s, Z-37 Cmelaks and Mil helicopters. Lazar Beloukhov was the general manager. On 18 January 1971, an Ilyushin Il-18 crashed and caught fire while attempting to land at Kloten Airport in fog; only two people survived the crash. During 1971, Balkan was the first airline beyond the USSR borders to operate the Tupolev Tu-134A. On 21 December, the crash of another Il-18 during takeoff left fatalities.
Again in 1972, this time with the Tupolev Tu-154, the carrier became the first foreign customer to incorporate a new Tupolev aircraft into its fleet. The latter type was deployed first on charter flights, and later on scheduled services. By the same year, Balkan had two of these aircraft in service. It also launched non-Soviet use of the Tu-154A, Tu-154B, Tu-154B-2 and Tu-154M. Balkan was a useful test-bed for new ideas by the Tupolev bureau. The airline pioneered the use of three-person flightdeck crews on the Tu-154 by removing navigators (flight crew members whom the designers had intentionally inserted into the Tu-134 and Tu-154) between 1972 and 1976. Balkan also removed the Tu-154&#x27;s concrete ballast trim on which conservative Tupolev engineers had insisted. In the mid-1980s, a team of Bulgarian engineers interlinked the automatic flight control systems of the airline&#x27;s Tu-154s with OMEGA Navigation System receivers, enabling very accurate automatic long-range overwater navigation. In the 1990s, Balkan was among the first to fit GPS navigation to its Tu-154 fleet. A Tu-154B was flown non-stop from Montreal to Sofia, a distance of over and a record for the type, during a charter flight.

As the Soviet-bloc economies gradually entered into stagnation in the 1970s, Balkan continued growing apace. In 1974, the airline&#x27;s route network was long. By the mid/late 1970s, it was carrying three million passengers a year, more than any Soviet-bloc airline other than some Directorates of Aeroflot. The fleet comprised aforementioned types plus Antonov An-12s for cargo (since late 1969) and Yakovlev Yak-40 regional jets for short-haul routes (since 1974). The comprehensive route system covered Europe, North Africa and the Middle East. With the delivery of more Tu-154s, Balkan opened longer-range routes, including ones to Zimbabwe, Angola and Nigeria in sub-Equatorial Africa, and to Sri Lanka and Vietnam in Southern Asia.

=== The 1980s ===

In 1986, Balkan was restructured as part of a wholesale shakeup of the late Socialist economy in an attempt to make it more productive and manageable. The airline was divorced from functions such as running airports. It had suffered disastrous traffic falls after the Comecon fuel crisis of 1979, when the number of passengers carried collapsed to under a million. By the late 1980s, loads were back up to 1970s levels. Of the three million annual passengers, a third were carried on domestic services, another third on charter flights, and the remaining million on scheduled international routes.

Balkan joined the International Air Transport Association (IATA) in 1988, becoming its 175th member worldwide. On 10 November 1989, Bulgaria&#x27;s long-ruling leader Todor Zhivkov was removed from power and Bulgaria began moving away from the Soviet bloc. Within a year, Balkan had been restructured yet again, with Hemus Air emerging from within it as a &quot;second force&quot; state-owned airline with mainly domestic and regional flights. Private airlines began to appear, most important among them Singapore-backed Jes Air which launched services to New York and Singapore using Airbus A310s.

=== The 1990s ===

By mid-1991, Balkan had leased two Boeing 767-200ERs from Air France to compete with failing Jes Air on North American and Southern Asian routes. At the same time Balkan acquired four Airbus A320s from Oryx. The Soviet-build types remained in service alongside the new arrivals.

The 1990s were a time of headlong decline at Balkan. The airline suffered in Bulgaria&#x27;s transition to a market economy. Former managers of state-owned industry began forming private companies to supply the industries they had once managed (at high prices), and yet other private companies to purchase their production (at low prices). The aim was to control both supply and sales, charging high prices and paying low prices to strangle state companies and then privatise them at very low prices. The entire Bulgarian economy was in deep recession. This was due to severe political instability at home and protracted wars and economic sanctions in neighbouring Yugoslavia. These factors upset potential investment and tourism and cut off Bulgaria from many trading partners.
In , Balkan had a fleet of four Airbus A320-200s, three Antonov An-12Fs, fourteen Antonov An-24s, three Boeing 737-500s, two Boeing 767-200ERs, six Ilyushin Il-18s, five Tupolev Tu-134A-3s, fifteen Tupolev Tu-154B-2s and seven Tupolev Tu-154Ms. At this time, the company had 3,889 employees and the route network included 52 destinations. By 1998, Balkan&#x27;s 767s returned to Air France and the A320s were passed on to other lessees. The Tu-154B fleet was overdue for replacement, and the Tu-154M was aging. Bulgaria&#x27;s government appeared to pledge some funds for Airbus A310 acquisition so that long-range services could be sustained, but nothing came of this.

Late in 1998, the company was ready to be sold to a holding named Balkan Air, comprising Bulgarian and US investors, but the transaction was later suspended. All through the decade, there had been rumours of investor interest in Balkan. These rumours consistently named Russian and German airline interests which were said to be eager to buy the carrier. There was also lobbying by the airline&#x27;s managers for a management buyout. Nevertheless, a consortium comprising two Israeli companies —the Zeevi investment group and Knafaim-Arkia (the owner of Arkia Israel Airlines) — was assigned a 75 percent stake in Balkan Bulgarian in mid-1999 for a bargain price of , with the commitment of investing  million in the airline over the following ten years. Arkia left the consortium once title in the airline was transferred. It was disclosed in 2001 that Balkan had been declared bankrupt months prior to the sale.

=== 2000 and beyond ===
Balkan had 3,889 employees at . At this time, the fleet included three Antonov An-12s; six Antonov An-24Bs and an An-24RV; two Boeing 737-300s and three 737-500s; an Ilyushin Il-18 and an Il-18D; three Let L 410 UVP-Es; and fourteen Tupolev Tu-154Bs and ten Tu-154Ms. These operated services to Abu Dhabi, Accra, Algiers, Amsterdam, Athens, Bahrain, Bangkok, Belgrade, Berlin, Bourgas, Brussels, Budapest, Cairo, Casablanca, Chișinău, Colombo, Copenhagen, Dubai, Frankfurt, Helsinki, Istanbul, Kyiv, Kuwait, Lagos, Larnaca, London, Madrid, Malé, Malta, Milan, Moscow, Paris, Prague, Rome, Sofia, Stockholm, Tehran, Tel Aviv, Tripoli, Varna, Vienna, Warsaw and Zurich. The Israeli connection led to difficulties in operating the Arab routes. Its assets seemed to be being sold-off in an asset-stripping manner and by early 2001, Balkan&#x27;s fleet was not even up to the task of meeting the airline&#x27;s summer charter commitments, despite taking on some used 737-300s. In , the Zeevi group ceased funding the carrier and initiated legal action against the Bulgarian government over a  million debt. Although the company was grounded and entered receivership, it resumed flying later that year.

Short of cash, in 2002 Balkan&#x27;s six weekly slots for Heathrow airport were sold to British Airways for  million. In that year, creditors turned down a restructuring plan and voted for the closure of the airline, which was liquidated. The number of employees at the time of closure was 1,269. Balkan was succeeded as Bulgaria&#x27;s national carrier by the newly formed Bulgaria Air.

==Fleet==
Until 1990, Balkan&#x27;s signs were carried both by normal airliners and special government detachment, agricultural aviation, sanitary wings, cargo planes. Here follows the fleet except An-2 /281 pieces/ and Ка-26, as well as civil Mi-8s /17 pieces/, Mi-17 /1 piece/, Mi-2, training L-410s.

==Accidents and incidents==
, &quot;Aviation Safety Network&quot; records 15 occurrences and four hijackings for Balkan, and two fatal accidents plus one hijacking for TABSO. Only events that led to fatalities, wrote off the aircraft involved, or both, are presented in the list below.

==See also==

*Transport in Bulgaria
==References==

==Sources==

==External links==

* Historical timetables
* Video at AirlineFan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q278906" start="0" end="25" title="Balkan Bulgarian Airlines" label="Balkan Bulgarian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="33" end="41" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="66" end="78" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="161" end="167" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q900636" start="260" end="286" title="Central and Eastern Europe" label="Central and Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="389" end="402" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q822130" start="480" end="492" title="Bulgaria Air" label="Bulgaria Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000057" start="621" end="628" title="Bunavad" label="Bunavad"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="718" end="730" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q26066" start="1064" end="1077" title="Junkers Ju 52" label="Junkers Ju 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="1686" end="1691" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q459" start="1696" end="1703" title="Plovdiv" label="Plovdiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509" start="1707" end="1713" title="Burgas" label="Burgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q662591" start="1812" end="1824" title="Lisunov Li-2" label="Lisunov Li-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="1841" end="1853" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q275031" start="2709" end="2723" title="Ilyushin Il-14" label="Ilyushin Il-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509" start="2836" end="2842" title="Burgas" label="Burgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q115998" start="2844" end="2861" title="Gorna Oryahovitsa" label="Gorna Oryahovitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q160173" start="2863" end="2870" title="Ruschuk" label="Ruschuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q459" start="2872" end="2879" title="Plovdiv" label="Plovdiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="2881" end="2886" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170415" start="2888" end="2900" title="Stara Zagora" label="Stara Zagora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="2905" end="2910" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2943" end="2952" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="2954" end="2960" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="2962" end="2968" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="2970" end="2978" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2980" end="2986" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="2988" end="2997" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="2999" end="3007" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="3009" end="3017" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="3019" end="3028" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3036" end="3042" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="3044" end="3050" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="3052" end="3058" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="3060" end="3066" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3071" end="3077" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q160266" start="3116" end="3130" title="Ilyushin Il-18" label="Ilyushin Il-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="3317" end="3322" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="3343" end="3347" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="3358" end="3371" title="Antonov An-24" label="Antonov An-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503" start="3753" end="3775" title="Sud Aviation Caravelle" label="Sud Aviation Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159067" start="4537" end="4551" title="Tupolev Tu-134" label="Tupolev Tu-134"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5098" end="5104" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q219734" start="5387" end="5401" title="Andrei Tupolev" label="Andrei Tupolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="5553" end="5562" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167512" start="5570" end="5587" title="Tsola Dragoycheva" label="Tsola Dragoycheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q182575" start="5793" end="5807" title="Ilyushin Il-62" label="Ilyushin Il-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="5854" end="5861" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tu-154s"/>
<link wikidata="Q62167" start="5922" end="5927" title="Ilyushin Il-86" label="Il-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q540629" start="6237" end="6248" title="Zlín Z 37" label="Z-37 Cmelak"/>
<link wikidata="Q898825" start="6254" end="6269" title="Mil Helicopters" label="Mil helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15114" start="6402" end="6416" title="Kloten Airport" label="Kloten Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q159067" start="6542" end="6557" title="Tupolev Tu-134" label="Tupolev Tu-134A"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="6668" end="6682" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tupolev Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q517149" start="7545" end="7568" title="OMEGA Navigation System" label="OMEGA Navigation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q271559" start="8210" end="8223" title="Antonov An-12" label="Antonov An-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q505663" start="8257" end="8272" title="Yakovlev Yak-40" label="Yakovlev Yak-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="8492" end="8500" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="8502" end="8508" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="8513" end="8520" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="8554" end="8563" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="8568" end="8575" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19755" start="9231" end="9270" title="International Air Transport Association" label="International Air Transport Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q28517" start="9380" end="9393" title="Todor Zhivkov" label="Todor Zhivkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q729175" start="9530" end="9539" title="Hemus Air" label="Hemus Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185678" start="9734" end="9741" title="Jes Air" label="Jes Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471" start="9798" end="9809" title="Airbus A310" label="Airbus A310"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="9867" end="9884" title="Boeing 767" label="Boeing 767-200ERs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185678" start="9925" end="9932" title="Jes Air" label="Jes Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="10016" end="10027" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q271559" start="10947" end="10961" title="Antonov An-12" label="Antonov An-12F"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="10995" end="11009" title="Boeing 737 Classic" label="Boeing 737-500"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="12039" end="12045" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q553915" start="12117" end="12138" title="Arkia Israel Airlines" label="Arkia Israel Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="12629" end="12643" title="Boeing 737 Classic" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q157925" start="12704" end="12719" title="Let L-410 Turbolet" label="Let L 410 UVP-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="12797" end="12806" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="12808" end="12813" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="12815" end="12822" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="12843" end="12850" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="12852" end="12859" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509" start="12879" end="12886" title="Bourgas" label="Bourgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="12888" end="12896" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="12908" end="12913" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="12915" end="12925" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="12927" end="12935" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="12937" end="12944" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="12946" end="12956" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="12958" end="12963" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="12976" end="12984" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="12986" end="12994" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="12996" end="13000" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="13002" end="13008" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="13010" end="13015" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q171882" start="13017" end="13024" title="Larnaca" label="Larnaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="13026" end="13032" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="13034" end="13040" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347" start="13042" end="13046" title="Malé" label="Malé"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="13048" end="13053" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="13055" end="13060" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="13070" end="13075" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="13085" end="13089" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="13098" end="13107" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="13109" end="13115" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="13117" end="13125" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="13127" end="13134" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="13136" end="13141" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="13162" end="13168" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894831" start="13288" end="13303" title="asset-stripping" label="asset-stripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594302" start="13650" end="13662" title="receivership" label="receivership"/>
<link wikidata="Q822130" start="14074" end="14086" title="Bulgaria Air" label="Bulgaria Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459239" start="14429" end="14452" title="Flight Safety Foundation" label="Aviation Safety Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="14491" end="14500" title="Aircraft hijacking" label="hijacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551716" start="14604" end="14613" title="Write-off" label="wrote off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276487" start="14695" end="14716" title="Transport in Bulgaria" label="Transport in Bulgaria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262426" wikidata="Q1324245" url="?curid=262426" title="Sapper">
<text>A sapper, also called a [[combat engineer]], is a combatant or soldier who performs a variety of military engineering duties, such as breaching fortifications, demolitions, bridge-building, laying or clearing minefields, preparing field defenses, and road and airfield construction and repair.

Sappers are also trained and equipped to serve secondarily as provisional infantry.

Sappers facilitate and support the movement, defense, and survival of superordinate and allied forces, and impede those of enemies.

The term &quot;sapper&quot; is used in the British Army and Commonwealth nations, the U.S. military, and the militaries of other countries.

==Historical origin==
=== Sapper ===

A sapper, in the sense first used by the French military, was one who dug trenches to allow besieging forces to advance towards the enemy defensive works and forts over ground that is under the defenders&#x27; musket or artillery fire. It comes from the French word &quot;sapeur&quot;, itself being derived from the verb &quot;saper&quot; (to undermine, to dig under a wall or building to cause its collapse). This digging was referred to as sapping the enemy fortifications. Saps were excavated by brigades of trained sappers or instructed troops. When an army was defending a fortress with cannons, they had an obvious height and therefore range advantage over the attacker&#x27;s guns. The attacking army&#x27;s artillery had to be brought forward, under fire, so as to facilitate effective counter-battery fire.

This was achieved by digging what the French termed a &quot;sappe&quot; (derived from the archaic French word for spade or entrenching tool). Using techniques developed and perfected by Vauban, the sappers began the trench at such an angle so as to avoid enemy fire &quot;enfilading&quot; the &quot;sappe&quot; by firing down its length. As they pressed forward, a position was prepared from which a cannon could suppress the defenders on the fort&#x27;s bastions. The sappers would then change the course of their trench, zig-zagging toward the fortress wall. Each leg brought the attacker&#x27;s artillery closer until the besieged cannon would be sufficiently suppressed for the attackers to breach the walls. Broadly speaking, sappers were originally experts at demolishing or otherwise overcoming or bypassing fortification systems.

=== Miner ===

An additional term applied to sappers of the British Indian Army was &quot;miner.&quot; The native engineer corps were called &quot;sappers and miners,&quot; for example, the Royal Bombay Sappers and Miners. The term arose from a task done by sappers to further the battle after saps were dug. The saps permitted cannons to be brought into firing range of the besieged fort and its cannons, but often the cannons themselves were unable to breach the fort walls. The engineers would dig a tunnel from the forward-most sap up to and under the fort wall, then place a charge of gunpowder and ignite it, causing an explosion that would destroy the wall and permit attacking infantry to close with the enemy. This was dangerous work, often lethal to the sappers, and was fiercely resisted by the besieged enemy. Since the two tasks went hand in hand and were done by the same troops, native Indian engineer corps came to be called &quot;sappers and miners&quot;.

== Specific usage ==
=== Commonwealth of Nations ===

Sapper (abbreviated Spr) is the Royal Engineers&#x27; equivalent of private. This is also the case within the Indian Army Corps of Engineers, Pakistan Army Corps of Engineers, Royal Canadian Engineers, Royal Australian Engineers, South African Army Engineer Formation, Jamaica Defence Force Engineer Regiment, and Royal New Zealand Engineers. The term &quot;sapper&quot; was introduced in 1856, when the Corps of Royal Sappers and Miners was amalgamated with the officer corps of the Royal Engineers to form the Corps of Royal Engineers.

During the course of the First World War, some Royal Marines also took the rank of Sapper. This was adopted as tradition in the Royal Marine Divisional Engineers of the Royal Naval Division.

=== Australia ===

During the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of World War I, Australian sappers repaired a bridge at the historic crossing of the Jordan River at Jisr Benat Yakub (also known as Jacob&#x27;s Ford). Here the retreating Ottoman and German rearguard had blown up the bridge&#x27;s central arch, which was repaired in five hours by sappers attached to the Australian Mounted Division. While the light horse brigades forded the river, continuing the Desert Mounted Corps&#x27; advance to Damascus, the sappers worked through the night of 27/28 September 1918, to repair the bridge to enable the division&#x27;s wheeled vehicles and guns to follow on 28 September.

===Canada===

In the Canadian Forces, sappers exist both in the regular force and reserve force. The rank of sapper is used instead of private trained to signify completion of the basic Engineer training course. Canadian sappers have been deployed in many major conflicts in recent history including World War I, World War II, the Korean War, and the War in Afghanistan. The roles of a sapper entail: Bridging with the ACROW or Medium Girder Bridge as well as non-standard bridge construction; obstacle and defensive construction; enemy obstacle reduction and clearance, mine warfare; explosive ordnance disposal; water supply using the reverse-osmosis water purification unit; building and maintaining roadways and airfields; combat diving; tactical breaching; and camp construction. Ultimately, the objective of the sappers is to facilitate the living, moving, and to fight for friendly troops on the battlefield and denying the same to enemy forces. The motto of the Canadian Military Engineers is &quot;Ubique&quot; () a motto shared with the Royal Canadian Artillery.

=== Indian Army ===

The term &quot;sappers&quot;, in addition to the connotation of rank of engineer private, is used collectively to informally refer to the Engineer Corps as a whole and also forms part of the informal names of the three combat engineer groups, viz. Madras Sappers, Bengal Sappers and the Bombay Sappers. Each of these groups consist of about twenty battalion-sized engineer regiments and additional company-sized minor engineer units. The three sapper groups are descended from the sapper and miner groups of the East India Company and later the British Indian Army of the British Raj.

=== Israel ===
In the Israel Defense Forces a sapper (in Hebrew: פלס, &quot;palas&quot;) is the military profession of a combat soldier who went through basic combat engineering training. Most of the sappers are soldiers of the Combat Engineering Corps, but there are also infantry sappers, who are part of the infantry brigades and are organized in engineering companies called פלחה&quot;ן (&quot;palchan&quot;). These companies are integral part of the infantry brigades. Combat engineering corps sappers are arranged in battalions.

Each sapper goes through high level infantry training, which qualifies him as rifleman 06 (רובאי 06). Combat engineering sappers are qualified as &quot;sapper 06&quot; (פלס 06). They are skilled in infantry combat, basic sabotage, landmine planting and demining, use of explosives, breaching and opening routes, trench warfare, and operating the IDF Puma combat engineering vehicle. Combat engineering commanders are qualified as &quot;sapper 08&quot; while combat engineering officers are qualified as &quot;sapper 11&quot;. Both go through additional advance training to gain the skills needed for high level sapper profession.

The Israel Police also maintains a bomb disposal specialist unit. All police sappers must graduate from a 10-month training program at the bomb disposal training center in Beit Shemesh, which includes operational exercises, theoretical studies, and fieldwork.

=== Japan ===
==== Imperial Japanese Army (IJA) ====
In Japan, &quot;Kōhei-ka&quot; (, 工 means &quot;engineer&quot; and 兵 means &quot;soldiers&quot;), or Engineer Branch in English, was a branch (兵科) of the Imperial Japanese Army. General Yūsaku Uehara, who introduced the French &quot;sapeur&quot; or &quot;ingénieur&quot; system to IJA and authored the &quot;Kōhei Sōten&quot; (工兵操典, &quot;Engineers&#x27; Manual&quot;), is known as the &quot;father of Japanese &quot;Kōhei&quot;&quot; (&quot;日本工兵の父&quot;).

Engineer Branch officers were considered technology specialists along with Artillery Branch (砲兵科) officers in IJA, except Technical Branch (技術科) officers who have an academic degree in science or engineering and developed military technology.

Selected Engineer and Artillery officers were educated at the Army Artillery and Engineering School (). Artillery and Engineering School&#x27;s &quot;Kōtō-ka&quot; (高等科, &quot;Higher Course&quot;) was equivalent to the Army War College. Some &quot;Kōtōka&quot; graduates, like Lt. Gen. Takeo Yasuda, continued their studies as &quot;Rikugun Ingai Gakusei&quot; (陸軍員外学生) at Imperial University of Tokyo&#x27;s Engineering Faculty and Science Faculty and obtained degrees. Due to the apparent importance of science and technology, Artillery and Engineering School was renamed Army Science School during World War II and was also studied by non-artillery and non-engineer officers.

Ordinary personnel at Engineer Branch are educated at the Army Engineer School () and other schools.

==== Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (JGSDF) ====
JGSDF &quot;Shisetsu-ka&quot; (, &quot;施設&quot; literally means &quot;facilities&quot;), or Engineer Branch in English, is equivalent to the IJA &quot;Kōhei-ka&quot;. In accordance with the JSDF&#x27;s nomenclature, this title was devised to avoid the character for &#x27;soldier&#x27;, which evokes the military.

JGSDF Engineer Branch personnel are educated at JGSDF Engineer School ().

=== France ===

In France, sapper (&quot;sapeur&quot;) is the title of military combat engineers and firefighters, both civil and military, (sapper-fireman or &quot;sapeur-pompier&quot;). Military sappers fall under the umbrella of the Engineering Arm or &quot;Arme du Génie&quot;. A related title is pioneer (&quot;pionnier&quot;), used only in the Foreign Legion.

* Sapper : title of combat engineers in most Engineer Regiments (3rd, 13th, 19th and 31st), except in the Foreign Legion (1st Foreign Engineer Regiment and 2nd Foreign Engineer Regiment)
* Air Sapper (&quot;sapeur de l&#x27;air&quot;) : title of the privates of the 25th Air Engineering Regiment, an Army regiment seconded to the Air Force.
* Parachute Sapper (&quot;sapeur parachutiste&quot;) : title of the privates of the 17th Parachute Engineer Regiment, the combat engineering unit of the 11th Parachute Brigade
* Marine Sapper (&quot;sapeur de marine&quot;) : since 2006, title of the privates of the 6th Engineer Regiment, the combat engineering unit of the 9th Light Armoured Marine Brigade.
* Sapper firefighter (&quot;sapeur-pompier&quot;) : title of the firefighters in the civilian fire services and the Paris Fire Brigade. 
* Sapper-miner (&quot;sapeur-mineur&quot;) : since the Napoleonic Wars, combat engineers specialized in demining.

====History====

The French Corps of Engineers was created under the command of Marshal Vauban during the late 17th century. Its members were called sappers if their function was to destroy enemy fortifications by using trenches or &quot;sape&quot; and miners if they engaged in tunnel warfare or &quot;mine&quot;. The Corps of the Engineers was suppressed during two short periods (1720-1729 and 1769–1793) and sappers and miners were part of the Artillery regiments. In 1793, the Corps was reorganized into companies of miners and battalions of sappers, each assigned to a particular division.

Eventually, as the missions of the Corps grew more diversified, additional titles were used by combat engineers, such as Conductor (&quot;sapeur-conducteur&quot;) in 1810, entrusted with the logistics of the Corps, Firefighter (&quot;sapeur-pompier&quot;) in 1810 or telegraph sapper (&quot;sapeur-télégraphiste&quot;). In 1814, the companies of miners were integrated into the sapper battalions, themselves organized in Engineers Regiments (&quot;régiments du génie&quot;). In 1875, the distinction between miners and sappers was abolished and all members of the Corps of Engineers were titled sappers-miners, though only sapper was used in common usage. In 1894, the &quot;pontonniers&quot; or bridgemakers were transferred from the Artillery Corps to the Engineers, thus creating the title &quot;sapeurs-pontonniers&quot;. In 1909, the Engineering Arm of the Army Staff was entrusted the burgeoning Air Service (&quot;Aérostation militaire&quot;), its personal was titled sapper-airman (&quot;sapeur-aérostier&quot;). The titled was disused in 1914 when the Air Service took its independence from the Engineering Arm.

====Firefighters====
The first fire company created by Napoléon I was a military sapper company of the French Imperial Guard, created in 1810. This company was tasked with the protection of the Imperial palaces after the tragic fire of the Austrian embassy in Paris on 1 July 1810. The Paris Fire Service (&quot;gardes-pompes&quot;), a civilian institution, was re-organized as a military unit in September 1811, becoming the Paris Sappers-Firefighters Battalion. Other cities kept or created civilian firefighters services but used the military ranks and organization of the Paris Battalion. In 1831, National Guard engineers companies became the reserve components of the Fire Services and kept their military organization even after the disappearance of the National Guard in 1852. Sapper-firefighter is the common title of the civilian and Paris firefighters in France, but the other military firefighters units, such as the Marseille Naval Fire Battalion, do not use the sapper title, as they had no military engineers lineage.

====Pioneers====

Since the 18th century, every grenadier battalion in the French Army had a small unit of pioneers, sometimes called sappers-pioneers (&quot;sapeurs-pionniers&quot;). They had the mission to advance under enemy fire in order to destroy the obstacles drawn by the enemy and to clear the way for the rest of the infantry. The danger of such missions resulted in pioneers having short life expectancies. Because of this, the army allowed them certain privileges such as the authorization to wear beards. In addition to their beards and axes, they traditionally wear leather aprons and gloves.

The pioneers units disappeared during the mid-20th c. century, their last appearance being the short-lived Pioneers Regiments of 1939–1944, a military public works service using the older draftees in the army. Only the Foreign Legion kept using a pioneer unit, mainly for representation duty. The current pioneer unit of the Legion reintroduced the symbols of the Napoleonic pioneers: the beard, the axe, the leather apron, the crossed-axes insignia, and the leather gloves. If the parades of the Legion are opened by this unit, it is to commemorate the traditional role of the pioneers &quot;opening the way&quot; for the troops. The pioneer unit is made up for parades of selected men taken in both the Infantry and the Engineers regiments of the Legion.

=== Greece ===

In the Hellenic Army, there is the &quot;mechanic&quot; or &quot;Corps of Engineers&quot; (μηχανικό; &quot;michaniko&quot;).

===Italy===
The Italian Army uses the term &quot;Guastatori&quot; for its combat engineers, &quot;Pionieri&quot; for its construction engineers, &quot;Pontieri&quot; for its bridging engineers, and &quot;Ferrovieri&quot; for its railroad engineers. 
*2nd Alpine Engineer Regiment
*32nd Alpine Engineer Regiment
*8th Parachute Assault Engineer Regiment

=== Portugal ===
In Portugal, the term &quot;sapper&quot; is used both in the military and in the civilian environment. In the Portuguese Army, a &quot;sapador de engenharia&quot; (engineering sapper) is a soldier of the engineer branch that has specialized combat engineer training. A &quot;sapador de infantaria&quot; (infantry sapper) is a soldier of the infantry branch that has a similar training and who usually serves in the combat support sapper platoon of an infantry battalion. A &quot;sapador NBQ&quot; (NBC sapper) is an engineer branch soldier specialized in nuclear, biological and chemical warfare.

The &quot;bombeiros-sapadores&quot; (&quot;sapper-firefighters&quot;) are the civil municipal professional firefighters that exist in the main cities of the country. The largest unit of this type is the &quot;Regimento de Bombeiros Sapadores&quot; (&quot;sapper-firefighters regiment&quot;) maintained by the Lisbon municipal council. The &quot;sapadores florestais&quot; (forest sappers) are the professionals maintained by the government, local authorities and large private forestry companies, who cleans and maintain forests and prevents and fights forest fires.

===Pakistan Army===
In the Pakistan Army, sapper officers perform combat and normal engineer duties. The Corps is led by the Engineer-in-Chief who is a Lt Gen. The current Engineer-in-Chief is Lt Gen Khalid Asghar. The Frontier Works Organization, Military Engineering Service and the Survey of Pakistan is part of the corps. Initially part of the Indian Corps of Engineers, it dates back to 1780 but came to its modern form in 1947 following the Independence of Pakistan. Since then it has taken part in all wars including 1965 War, 1971 War and Kargil War. It has completed the Pakistan portion of Karakoram Highway. The corps is taking part in Operation Zarb-e-Azb

=== United States Army ===

In the United States Army, sappers are combat engineers who support the front-line infantry, and they have fought in every war in U.S. history. For example, after the Battle of Yorktown, General Washington cited Louis Lebègue Duportail, the chief of engineers, for conduct that afforded &quot;brilliant proofs of his military genius.&quot;

Designation as a &quot;sapper&quot; is also earned as an additional proficiency. The U.S. Army authorizes four skill tabs for permanent wear above the unit patch on the left shoulder (Army Regulation 670-1 Chapter 29–13, Sub-Paragraph f). Along with the Sapper Tab, the Special Forces Tab, Ranger Tab, and President&#x27;s Hundred Tab identify soldiers who have passed a demanding course of military instruction and have demonstrated their competence in particular specialties and skills.

To wear the Sapper Tab, a soldier must graduate from the Sapper Leader Course, which is operated by the U.S. Army Engineer School at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. The Sapper Leader Course is a demanding 28-day leadership development course for combat engineers that reinforces critical skills and teaches advanced techniques needed across the army. It is also designed to build &quot;esprit de corps&quot; by training soldiers in troop-leading procedures, demolitions (conventional and expedient), and mountaineering operations. The course culminates in an intense field-training exercise that reinforces the use of the battle drills and specialized engineer techniques learned throughout the course. The course is open to enlisted soldiers in the grades of E-4 (P) (Army specialists and corporals on the list for promotion to sergeant) through E-7, cadets, and officers O-3 (Captain) and below. The course is primarily for U.S. Army and USMC combat engineers, but may be attended by all service members with an approved waiver.

=== PAVN and Viet Cong ===
PAVN (People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam) and Viet Cong sappers, as they were called by US forces, are better described as commando units. The Vietnamese term &quot;đặc công&quot; can be literally translated as &quot;special task&quot;. Thousands of specially trained elite fighters served in the PAVN and Viet Cong commando–sapper units which were organized as independent formations. While not always successful due to lack of appropriate personal weapon types for combat and assault like other special forces, they were still capable of inflicting heavy damage with their non-firearms arsenal. During the Vietnam War, they were armed with various types of bombs, mines, explosive charges, grenades and even steel-pellet mines which proved especially devastating. These are still the main weapons of the &quot;đặc công&quot;.

These elite units served as raiders against American/ARVN troops, and infiltrated spearheads during the final Ho Chi Minh Campaign in 1975, where they seized key road and bridge assets, destroyed installations, attacked command and control nodes located deep inside enemy territory, planted explosives on U.S. water craft, and otherwise helped the PAVN&#x27;s rapid mobile forces advance. A typical PAVN/VC &quot;đặc công&quot; organization is shown in the diagram. The raiding force was usually grouped into assault teams, each broken down into several 3–5-man assault cells. Overall, there were generally four operational echelons.

An instance of a successful sapper attack conducted by the Viet Cong was the during the Battle of Fire Base Mary Ann. A small number of sappers, through surprise and deft coordination, conducted a successful attack on a superior US force. The battle was described as a &quot;rampage of VC who threw satchels at the command bunker, knifed Americans in their sleep and destroyed all communications equipment.

=== Ottoman Empire ===
The Ottoman Empire had an infantry corp named &quot;Lağımcılar Ocağı&quot; (literally: &quot;Sapper Corps&quot;). These infantries were used in most of the Empire&#x27;s sieges, demolishing enemy fortifications and defences.

== Honors ==
Sapper Island, St. Joseph Channel, Algoma District, Ontario was named in honour of sappers, especially those who graduated from the Royal Military College of Canada. 

In Warsaw (Poland) there is memorial honouring sappers (Pomnik Chwała Saperom)

==In fiction==
In the 1978 song by Australian rock band Cold Chisel, &quot;Khe Sanh&quot;, the narrator (a fictional Australian army Vietnam War veteran) says &quot;I left my heart to the sappers round Khe Sanh&quot;. However, the only sappers or combat engineers present at the historical Battle of Khe Sanh belonged to US, South Vietnamese and (opposing) North Vietnamese units.

In the 2008 science-fiction novel &quot;The Last Colony&quot;, a fictitious &quot;sapper field&quot; technology is used to disrupt enemy weapons operation.

== In popular culture ==
Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s poem &quot;Sappers&quot; (1896) detailed some of the duties of Sappers in the British Army of Victorian times. The notes on this poem further explain the duties referenced.

== See also ==
* Pioneer sergeant
*Assault pioneer
* Trooper (rank)
* Viet Cong and PAVN Sapper attacks

== References ==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 

==External links==
* —First person account of the Revolutionary War, as a continental soldier, which includes references to sappers and miners.
* Royal Engineers Museum – History of the Royal Engineers (The Sappers)
* Royal Engineers Museum – Origins of the term &quot;Sapper&quot;
* Site for tracking down former members of the Royal Engineers
* &quot;Popular Science&quot; January 1919 article about a French engineer using a ground stethoscope to listen for German sappers – &quot;Listening to Enemy Sappers&quot;, page 27, Scanned by Google Books
* Sapper-Museum, virtual museum of Russian engineering troops
* A.-M. Zielenski, Colonel (sapper), Military Engineer
* Adventures of a Revolutionary Soldier</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="2" end="8" title="Sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="24" end="43" title="Sapper" label="[[combat engineer]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414937" start="50" end="59" title="combatant" label="combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="63" end="70" title="soldier" label="soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="97" end="117" title="military engineering" label="military engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="144" end="158" title="fortifications" label="fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="160" end="170" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="173" end="179" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="209" end="218" title="minefield" label="minefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="573" end="585" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q621719" start="1134" end="1141" title="sapping" label="sapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q712918" start="1486" end="1506" title="counter-battery fire" label="counter-battery fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q216642" start="1623" end="1628" title="spade" label="spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231101" start="1632" end="1648" title="entrenching tool" label="entrenching tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q192839" start="1695" end="1701" title="Vauban" label="Vauban"/>
<link wikidata="Q112481674" start="1775" end="1797" title="Enfilade and defilade" label="&amp;quot;enfilading&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q198438" start="2032" end="2039" title="Zigzag" label="zig-zag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940558" start="2538" end="2569" title="Royal Bombay Sappers and Miners" label="Royal Bombay Sappers and Miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="3408" end="3423" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="3444" end="3451" title="Private (rank)" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164370" start="3486" end="3516" title="Indian Army Corps of Engineers" label="Indian Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125518" start="3518" end="3550" title="Pakistan Army Corps of Engineers" label="Pakistan Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q101483519" start="3552" end="3576" title="Royal Canadian Engineers" label="Royal Canadian Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373749" start="3578" end="3604" title="Royal Australian Engineers" label="Royal Australian Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565431" start="3606" end="3643" title="South African Army Engineer Formation" label="South African Army Engineer Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172592" start="3690" end="3717" title="Corps of Royal New Zealand Engineers" label="Royal New Zealand Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="3962" end="3975" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q646534" start="4084" end="4104" title="63rd (Royal Naval) Division" label="Royal Naval Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q727536" start="4137" end="4165" title="Sinai and Palestine Campaign" label="Sinai and Palestine Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236782" start="4226" end="4243" title="Battle of Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ford" label="historic crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="4251" end="4263" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916595" start="4299" end="4316" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ford" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056093" start="4473" end="4500" title="Australian Mounted Division" label="Australian Mounted Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q267531" start="4566" end="4586" title="Desert Mounted Corps" label="Desert Mounted Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="4604" end="4612" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="5112" end="5122" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="5132" end="5150" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11329192" start="5209" end="5229" title="Medium Girder Bridge" label="Medium Girder Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455450" start="5828" end="5852" title="Royal Canadian Artillery" label="Royal Canadian Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164370" start="6014" end="6028" title="Indian Army Corps of Engineers" label="Engineer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728483" start="6124" end="6138" title="Madras Sappers" label="Madras Sappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887616" start="6140" end="6154" title="Bengal Sappers" label="Bengal Sappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940558" start="6163" end="6177" title="Bombay Sappers" label="Bombay Sappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="6388" end="6406" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="6421" end="6440" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="6448" end="6459" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="6484" end="6505" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="6519" end="6525" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="6621" end="6639" title="combat engineering" label="combat engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q619233" start="6690" end="6714" title="Combat Engineering Corps" label="Combat Engineering Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="6773" end="6781" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="6782" end="6789" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="6824" end="6833" title="Company (military unit)" label="companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052080" start="7076" end="7087" title="Rifleman" label="rifleman 06"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="7196" end="7204" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="7219" end="7227" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="7229" end="7237" title="landmine" label="landmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345044" start="7251" end="7259" title="demining" label="demining"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="7268" end="7278" title="explosives" label="explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="7310" end="7324" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411079" start="7344" end="7352" title="IDF Puma" label="IDF Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047443" start="7353" end="7379" title="combat engineering vehicle" label="combat engineering vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="7475" end="7482" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q594444" start="7633" end="7646" title="Israel Police" label="Israel Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q152449" start="7801" end="7813" title="Beit Shemesh" label="Beit Shemesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="8097" end="8119" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q128281" start="8129" end="8142" title="Yūsaku Uehara" label="Yūsaku Uehara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488076" start="8176" end="8182" title="sapeur" label="sapeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="8198" end="8207" title="ingénieur" label="ingénieur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8707" end="8744" title="Imperial Japanese Army Artillery and Engineering School" label="Army Artillery and Engineering School"/>
<link wikidata="Q702605" start="8864" end="8880" title="Army War College (Japan)" label="Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678064" start="8931" end="8943" title="Takeo Yasuda" label="Takeo Yasuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9246" end="9258" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9383" end="9403" title="Imperial Japanese Army Engineer School" label="Army Engineer School"/>
<link wikidata="Q889751" start="9477" end="9482" title="Japan Ground Self-Defense Force" label="JGSDF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9840" end="9861" title="JGSDF Engineer School" label="JGSDF Engineer School"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="9947" end="9962" title="combat engineer" label="combat engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="9968" end="9980" title="firefighters" label="firefighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882680" start="10103" end="10118" title="Engineering Arm" label="Engineering Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393921" start="10168" end="10175" title="pioneer (military)" label="pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="10217" end="10231" title="French Foreign Legion" label="Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401423" start="10356" end="10385" title="1st Foreign Engineer Regiment" label="1st Foreign Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715556" start="10390" end="10419" title="2nd Foreign Engineer Regiment" label="2nd Foreign Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809678" start="10659" end="10691" title="17th Parachute Engineer Regiment" label="17th Parachute Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697127" start="10728" end="10750" title="11th Parachute Brigade (France)" label="11th Parachute Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818175" start="10841" end="10862" title="6th Engineer Regiment (France)" label="6th Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818794" start="10899" end="10932" title="9th Light Armoured Marine Brigade (France)" label="9th Light Armoured Marine Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345044" start="11175" end="11183" title="demining" label="demining"/>
<link wikidata="Q192839" start="11266" end="11280" title="Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban" label="Marshal Vauban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852785" start="11406" end="11412" title="trench" label="trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q88222" start="11465" end="11479" title="tunnel warfare" label="tunnel warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920473" start="11904" end="11913" title="Conductor (military appointment)" label="Conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="12050" end="12059" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="12960" end="12970" title="Napoleon" label="Napoléon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090710" start="13008" end="13029" title="French Imperial Guard" label="French Imperial Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059047" start="13507" end="13521" title="National Guard (France)" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891011" start="13834" end="13864" title="Marseille Naval Fire Battalion" label="Marseille Naval Fire Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q313303" start="13987" end="13996" title="grenadier" label="grenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="14014" end="14025" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393921" start="14046" end="14054" title="Pioneer (military)" label="pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="14266" end="14274" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42804" start="14449" end="14455" title="beards" label="beards"/>
<link wikidata="Q21803281" start="14844" end="14864" title="Foreign Legion Pioneers (Pionniers)" label="current pioneer unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q122204616" start="14911" end="14921" title="Napoleonic era" label="Napoleonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="15328" end="15341" title="Hellenic Army" label="Hellenic Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598749" start="15698" end="15726" title="2nd Alpine Engineer Regiment" label="2nd Alpine Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598881" start="15728" end="15757" title="32nd Alpine Engineer Regiment" label="32nd Alpine Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600087" start="15759" end="15798" title="8th Parachute Assault Engineer Regiment (Italy)" label="8th Parachute Assault Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542269" start="15927" end="15942" title="Portuguese Army" label="Portuguese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="16372" end="16412" title="nuclear, biological and chemical warfare" label="nuclear, biological and chemical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="16724" end="16730" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q740205" start="16844" end="16854" title="Government of Portugal" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="16968" end="16979" title="forest fire" label="forest fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078095" start="17010" end="17023" title="Pakistan Army" label="Pakistan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377760" start="17108" end="17125" title="Engineer-in-Chief (Pakistan Army)" label="Engineer-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="17135" end="17141" title="Lt Gen" label="Lt Gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="17176" end="17182" title="Lt Gen" label="Lt Gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506047" start="17202" end="17229" title="Frontier Works Organization" label="Frontier Works Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131696598" start="17231" end="17259" title="Military Engineering Service" label="Military Engineering Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647092" start="17268" end="17286" title="Survey of Pakistan" label="Survey of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164370" start="17331" end="17356" title="Indian Corps of Engineers" label="Indian Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="17446" end="17454" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q233583" start="17507" end="17515" title="1965 War" label="1965 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="17517" end="17525" title="1971 War" label="1971 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q404517" start="17530" end="17540" title="Kargil War" label="Kargil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="17563" end="17571" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217099" start="17583" end="17600" title="Karakoram Highway" label="Karakoram Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17195717" start="17630" end="17650" title="Operation Zarb-e-Azb" label="Operation Zarb-e-Azb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="17687" end="17705" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="17763" end="17771" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="17847" end="17865" title="Siege of Yorktown" label="Battle of Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q544754" start="17892" end="17915" title="Louis Lebègue Duportail" label="Louis Lebègue Duportail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673580" start="18275" end="18285" title="Sapper Tab" label="Sapper Tab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574570" start="18291" end="18309" title="Special Forces Tab" label="Special Forces Tab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930071" start="18311" end="18321" title="Ranger Tab" label="Ranger Tab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241165" start="18327" end="18355" title="President&amp;#x27;s Hundred Tab" label="President&amp;#x27;s Hundred Tab"/>
<link wikidata="Q124328775" start="18568" end="18588" title="Sapper Leader Course" label="Sapper Leader Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157426" start="18615" end="18640" title="U.S. Army Engineer School" label="U.S. Army Engineer School"/>
<link wikidata="Q964399" start="18644" end="18661" title="Fort Leonard Wood (military base)" label="Fort Leonard Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="18663" end="18671" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="18894" end="18909" title="Esprit-de-corps" label="esprit de corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="19448" end="19452" title="United States Marine Corps" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="19567" end="19603" title="Vietnam People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="PAVN (People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="19608" end="19617" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="19685" end="19693" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="20059" end="20073" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="20444" end="20448" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="ARVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821674" start="20501" end="20521" title="Ho Chi Minh Campaign" label="Ho Chi Minh Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448421" start="21015" end="21023" title="Echelon formation" label="echelons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678423" start="21124" end="21142" title="Battle of FSB Mary Ann" label="Fire Base Mary Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496823" start="21325" end="21333" title="Satchel charge" label="satchels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="21461" end="21475" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140691" start="21731" end="21755" title="Algoma District, Ontario" label="Algoma District, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565941" start="21828" end="21860" title="Royal Military College of Canada" label="Royal Military College of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="21867" end="21873" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="21875" end="21881" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21920" end="21941" title="Pomnik Chwała Saperom" label="Pomnik Chwała Saperom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107765" start="22000" end="22011" title="Cold Chisel" label="Cold Chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401165" start="22019" end="22027" title="Khe Sanh (song)" label="Khe Sanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="22077" end="22088" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q247253" start="22234" end="22252" title="Battle of Khe Sanh" label="Battle of Khe Sanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="22269" end="22282" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="22301" end="22314" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745634" start="22366" end="22381" title="The Last Colony" label="The Last Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196786" start="22722" end="22738" title="Pioneer sergeant" label="Pioneer sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808603" start="22740" end="22755" title="Assault pioneer" label="Assault pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540989" start="22758" end="22772" title="Trooper (rank)" label="Trooper (rank)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22775" end="22808" title="Viet Cong and PAVN battle tactics#Sapper attacks" label="Viet Cong and PAVN Sapper attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="23222" end="23237" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262428" wikidata="Q3066234" url="?curid=262428" title="Family Compact">
<text>The Family Compact was a small closed group of men who exercised most of the political, economic and judicial power in Upper Canada (today&#x27;s Ontario) from the 1810s to the 1840s. It was the Upper Canadian equivalent of the Château Clique in Lower Canada. It was noted for its conservatism and opposition to democracy.

The Family Compact emerged from the War of 1812 and collapsed in the aftermath of the Rebellions of 1837–1838. Its resistance to the political principle of responsible government contributed to its short life. At the end of its lifespan, the compact would be condemned by Lord Durham, a leading Whig, who summarised its grip on power:

Fortified by family connexion, and the common interest felt by all who held, and all who desired, subordinate offices, that party was thus erected into a solid and permanent power, controlled by no responsibility, subject to no serious change, exercising over the whole government of the Province an authority utterly independent of the people and its representatives, and possessing the only means of influencing either the Government at home, or the colonial representative of the Crown.

==Etymology==
Thomas Dalton described the ruling class in Kingston as &quot;all one family compacted junto.&quot; The term &quot;Family Compact&quot; appeared in a letter written by Marshall Spring Bidwell to William Warren Baldwin in 1828. &quot;Family&quot; did not mean relations by marriage, but rather a close brotherhood. Lord Durham noted in 1839 &quot;There is, in truth, very little of family connection among the persons thus united&quot;. The phrase was popularised by William Lyon Mackenzie in 1833 in its use to describe the elite in York.

==&quot;Gentlemanly capitalism&quot; and British colonialism==
The historians P. J. Cain and A. G. Hopkins have emphasized that the British Empire at &quot;the mid-nineteenth century represented the extension abroad of the institutions and principles entrenched at home&quot;. Upper Canada, created in the very &quot;image and transcript&quot; of the British constitution is but one example. Like that of the United Kingdom, the constitution of Upper Canada was established on the mixed monarchy model. Mixed monarchy is a form of government that integrates elements of democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy. Upper Canada, however, had no aristocracy. The methods pursued to create one were similar to that used in Britain itself. The result was the Family Compact.

Cain and Hopkins point out that &quot;new money&quot;, the financiers rather than the industrial &quot;barons&quot;, were gradually gentrified through the purchase of land, intermarriage and the acquisition of titles. In the United Kingdom, the control exercised by the aristocracy over the House of Commons remained undisturbed before 1832 and was only slowly eroded thereafter, while its dominance of the executive lasted well beyond 1850.&quot; Hopkins and Cain refer to this alliance of aristocracy and financiers as &quot;gentlemanly capitalism&quot;: &quot;a form of capitalism headed by improving aristocratic landlords in association with improving financiers who served as their junior partners.&quot; A similar pattern is seen in other colonial empires, such as the Dutch Empire.

This same process is seen in Upper Canada. The historian J. K. Johnson&#x27;s analysis of the Upper Canadian elite between 1837 and 1840 measured influence according to overlapping leadership roles on the boards of the main social, political and economic institutions. For example, William Allan, one of the most powerful, &quot;was an executive councillor, a legislative councillor, President of the Toronto and Lake Huron Railroad, Governor of the British American Fire and Life Assurance Company and President of the Board of Trade.&quot; Johnson&#x27;s conclusion contests the common assertion that &quot;none of the leading members of the Compact were business men, and ... the system of values typical of the Compact accorded scant respect to business wealth as such.&quot; The overlapping social, political and economic leadership roles of the Family Compact demonstrates, he argues, that they were not a political elite taking political decisions in a vacuum, but an overlapping elite whose political and economic activities cannot be entirely separated from each other. They might even be called &#x27;entrepreneurs&#x27;, most of whose political views may have been highly conservative but whose economic outlook was clearly &#x27;developmental&#x27;. The Family Compact&#x27;s role in the Welland Canal is one example.

Elite Upper Canadians sought &quot;gentility&quot; including the acquisition of landed estates, roles as Justices of the Peace, military service, the pursuit of &quot;improved farming&quot;, grammar school education, ties to the Church of England – all in combination with the acquisition of wealth through the Bank of Upper Canada amongst others. It is through the pursuit of gentility that the Family Compact was born.

===Constitutional context===
Upper Canada did not have a hereditary nobility. In its place, senior members of Upper Canada bureaucracy, the Executive Council of Upper Canada and Legislative Council of Upper Canada, made up the elite of the compact. These men sought to solidify their personal positions into family dynasties and acquire all the marks of gentility. They used their government positions to extend their business and speculative interests.

The origins of the Family Compact lay in overlapping appointments made to the Executive and Legislative councils of Upper Canada. The councils were intended to operate independently. Section 38 of the Constitutional Act of 1791 referred to the independence of the offices indirectly. While Sir Guy Carleton, Lieutenant Governor of Lower Canada, pointed out that the offices were intended to be separate, Lord Grenville set the wheels in motion with John Graves Simcoe, Lieutenant Governor of Upper Canada, by pointing out that there was no legal impediment to prevent cross-appointments. Simcoe used the vague statement in Section 38 to make the following appointments

The Family Compact exerted influence over the government through the Executive Council and Legislative Council, the advisers to the lieutenant governor, leaving the popularly elected Legislative Assembly with little real power. As became clear with Lieutenant Governor Sir Francis Bond Head, the influence of the Family Compact could be quite limited as well. Members ensured their conservative friends held the important administrative and judicial positions in the colony through political patronage.

===Membership===
The centre of the compact was York (later renamed Toronto), the capital. Its most important member was Bishop John Strachan; many of the other members were his former students, or people who were related to him. The most prominent of Strachan&#x27;s pupils was Sir John Beverley Robinson who was from 1829 the Chief Justice of Upper Canada for 34 years. The rest of the members were mostly descendants of United Empire Loyalists or recent upper-class British settlers such as the Boulton family, builders of the Grange.

A triumvirate of lawyers, Levius Sherwood (speaker of the Legislative Council, judge in the Court of King&#x27;s Bench), Judge Jonas Jones, and Attorney General Henry John Boulton were linked by professional and business ties, and by marriage; both Sherwood and Boulton being married to Jones’ sisters. Collectively, their extended family (if we include the Robinsons, and James B. Macaulay, Boulton&#x27;s former clerk) comprise three quarters of the &quot;Family Compact&quot; listed by Mackenzie in 1833.

===Loyalist ideology===

The uniting factors amongst the compact were its loyalist tradition, hierarchical class structure and adherence to the established Anglican church. Leaders such as Sir John Robinson and John Strachan proclaimed it an ideal government, especially as contrasted with the rowdy democracy in the nearby United States.

Not all views of the elite were universally shared, but a critical element was the idea of &quot;loyalty&quot;. The original members of the Family Compact were United Empire Loyalists who had fled the United States immediately after the Revolutionary War. The War of 1812 led the British to suspect the loyalty of the so-called &quot;Later Loyalists&quot; – &quot;Americans&quot; who had emigrated after 1800 for land. The issue came to a head around 1828 in the &quot;Alien Question&quot;. Following the war, the colonial government took active steps to prevent Americans from swearing allegiance, thereby making them ineligible to obtain land grants. Without land they could not vote or hold office.

The issue became a provincewide complaint in 1828 when Barnabas Bidwell was deprived of his seat in the Legislative Assembly. Educated at Yale, he practiced law in western Massachusetts and served as treasurer of Berkshire County. He served in the state legislature, and was the state attorney general from 1807 to 1810, when irregularities in the Berkshire County books prompted his flight to Upper Canada. There he won a seat in the provincial assembly, but was denied on account of his status as a fugitive from justice. A provincewide petitioning campaign by these numerically superior &quot;aliens&quot; led the British government to grant them citizenship retroactively. In the minds of the Family Compact, they remained politically suspect and barred from positions of power.

== Levers of power ==

In the absence of a landed elite, these men believed that the law should be the basis of social preeminence. Bound by the ideals of public service and a spirit of loyalty to king, church and empire, solidified in the crucible of the War of 1812, they used the Law Society of Upper Canada as a means of regulating entry to elite positions of power.

===Government position===

==== Executive and Legislative councils ====
The Executive Council was composed of local advisers who provided the colonially appointed lieutenant governor with advice on the daily workings of government, and especially with appointments to the administration. Members of the Executive Council were not necessarily members of the Legislative Assembly but were usually members of the Legislative Council. The longest serving members were James Baby (1792–1833), John Strachan (1815–1836), George Markland (1822–1836), and Peter Robinson (1823–1836).

The Legislative Council of Upper Canada was the upper house governing the province of Upper Canada. It was modelled after the British House of Lords. Members were appointed, often for life. The longest serving members were Baby (1792–1833), Jacob Mountain, Anglican Bishop of Quebec (1794–1825), Strachan (1820–1841), Markland (1822–1836), Peter Robinson (1823–1836), Thomas Talbot (1809–1841), Thomas Clark (1815–1841), William Dickson (1815–1841), John Henry Dunn (1822–1841), and William Allan (1825–1841).

====Magistracy and courts of Quarter Sessions====
Justices of the peace were appointed by the lieutenant governor. Any two justices meeting together could form the lowest level of the justice system, the Courts of Request. A Court of Quarter Sessions was held four times a year in each district composed of all the resident justices. The Quarter Sessions met to oversee the administration of the district and deal with legal cases. They formed, in effect, the municipal government &quot;and&quot; judiciary until an area was incorporated as either a police board or a city after 1834. The men appointed to the magistracy tended to be United Empire Loyalists or &quot;half-pay&quot; military officers who were placed in semi-retirement after the Napoleonic Wars.

====Law Society and Juvenile Advocate&#x27;s Society====
The Law Society was created in 1797 to regulate the legal profession in the province. The society was headed by a treasurer. Every treasurer of the society before 1841 was a member of the Family Compact with the exception of William Warren Baldwin.

The control that the Family Compact exerted over the legal profession and the corruption that resulted was most clearly demonstrated in the &quot;Types Riot&quot; in 1826, in which the printing press of William Lyon Mackenzie was destroyed by the young lawyers of the Juvenile Advocate&#x27;s Society with the complicity of the attorney general, the solicitor general and the magistrates of Toronto.

Mackenzie had published a series of satires under the pseudonym of &quot;Patrick Swift, nephew of Jonathan Swift&quot; in an attempt to humiliate the members of the Family Compact running for the board of the Bank of Upper Canada, and Henry John Boulton, the solicitor general, in particular. Mackenzie&#x27;s articles worked, and they lost control. In revenge they sacked Mackenzie&#x27;s press, throwing the type into the lake. The &quot;juvenile advocates&quot; were the students of the attorney general and the solicitor general, and the act was performed in broad daylight in front of William Allan, bank president and magistrate. They were never charged, and it was left to Mackenzie to launch a civil lawsuit instead.

There are three implications of the Types Riot according to historian Paul Romney. First, he argues the riot illustrates how the elite&#x27;s self-justifications regularly skirted the rule of law they held out as their Loyalist mission. Second, he demonstrated that the significant damages Mackenzie received in his civil lawsuit against the vandals did not reflect the soundness of the criminal administration of justice in Upper Canada. And lastly, he sees in the Types Riot &quot;the seed of the Rebellion&quot; in a deeper sense than those earlier writers who viewed it simply as the start of a highly personal feud between Mackenzie and the Family Compact. Romney emphasizes that Mackenzie&#x27;s personal harassment, the &quot;outrage&quot;, served as a lightning rod of discontent because so many Upper Canadians had faced similar endemic abuses and hence identified their political fortunes with his.

===Church of England===
====Established church====
In 1836, as he was preparing to leave office, Lt Governor John Colborne endowed 44 Church of England rectories with about of land each ( in all) in an effort to make the church more self-sufficient and less dependent on government aid.

====Clergy reserves====
The Clergy Corporation was incorporated in 1819 to manage the Clergy Reserves. After John Strachan was appointed to the Executive Council, the advisory body to the Lieutenant Governor, in 1815, he began to push for the Church of England&#x27;s autonomous control of the clergy reserves on the model of the Clergy Corporation created in Lower Canada in 1817. Although all clergymen in the Church of England were members of the body corporate, the act prepared in 1819 by Strachan&#x27;s former student, Attorney General John Beverly Robinson, also appointed the inspector general and the surveyor general to the board, and made a quorum of three for meetings; these two public officers also sat on the Legislative Council with Strachan. These three were usually members of the Family Compact.

====Upper Canada College and King&#x27;s College====
Grammar schools provided a classical education and were preparation for higher learning and entry into the law or the ministry. Entrance was limited by high tuition fees, even though they were government supported. Common schools for teaching basic education received little support or regulation in comparison at this time. Working class education was trades based through the Master-journeyman-apprentice relationship.

Upper Canada College was the successor to the Home District Grammar School taught by John Strachan, which became the Royal Grammar School in 1825. Upper Canada College was founded in 1829 by Lieutenant Governor Sir John Colborne (later Lord Seaton), to serve as a feeder school to the newly established King&#x27;s College. It was modelled on the great public schools of Britain, most notably Eton. The school began teaching in the original Royal Grammar School and for several years the two organizations were essentially unified.

On March 15, 1827, a royal charter was formally issued for King&#x27;s College (now the University of Toronto). The granting of the charter was largely the result of intense lobbying by John Strachan, who took office as the first president of the college. The original three-storey Greek Revival school building was constructed on the present site of Queen&#x27;s Park. Upper Canada College merged with King&#x27;s College for a period after 1831. Under Strachan&#x27;s guidance, King&#x27;s College was a religious institution that closely aligned with the Church of England and the Family Compact.

===Bank of Upper Canada===
The Bank of Upper Canada&#x27;s principal promoters were Strachan and Allan. Allan, who became president, was also an executive and legislative councillor. He, like Strachan, played a key role in solidifying the Family Compact, and ensuring its influence within the colonial state. Boulton, the solicitor general, author of the bank incorporation bill, and the bank&#x27;s lawyer, admitted the bank was a &quot;terrible engine in the hands of the provincial administration&quot;. The government, its officers, and legislative councillors owned 5,381 of its 8,000 shares. The lieutenant governor appointed four of the bank&#x27;s fifteen directors making for a tight bond between the nominally private company and the state. Forty-four men served as bank directors during the 1830s; eleven of them were executive councillors, fifteen of them were legislative councillors, and thirteen were magistrates in Toronto. Furthermore, all 11 men who had ever sat on the Executive Council also sat on the board of the bank at one time or another. Ten of these men also sat on the Legislative Council. The overlapping membership on the boards of the Bank of Upper Canada and on the Executive and Legislative councils served to integrate the economic and political activities of church, state, and the &quot;financial sector&quot;. These overlapping memberships reinforced the oligarchic nature of power in the colony and allowed the administration to operate without any effective elective check. Despite these tight bonds, the receiver general, the reform-leaning John Henry Dunn, refused to use the bank for government business. The Bank of Upper Canada held a near monopoly, and as a result, controlled much of the trade in the province.

===Land and agriculture===

The role of speculation in the vacant lands of Upper Canada ensured the development of group solidarity and cohesion of interest among the members of the Family Compact. Of the 26 largest landowners in Peel County between 1820 and 1840, 23 were absentee proprietors, of whom 17 were involved in the administration of the province; of these 17, 12 were part of the Family Compact. Society and politics in Upper Canada were dominated by interest and connection based on landed property, and only secondarily affected by ideologies and personalities.

Members of the Family Compact were interested in building up estates in which they imitated the &quot;improved farming&quot; methods of the English aristocracy. &quot;Improved farming&quot; refers to a capital-intensive form of farming introduced by the &quot;improving landlords&quot; of Great Britain on large estates that were beginning to be farmed as capitalist enterprises. These improved farming methods were introduced to Upper Canada by the half-pay military officers from aristocratic background who tended to become magistrates in Upper Canada and build large estates. &quot;Mixed or improved farming was one part of a total life-style ... As well as permitting them to practice improved farming and to develop a reasonably elegant life-style, their financial independence allowed them the leisure time necessary for them to act as &#x27;leaders&#x27; of their community.&quot;

The city of Toronto was surrounded by the estates of the Family Compact. One of these estates, the Grange, was owned by Boulton and was one of the chief centres of the Family Compact. Although many meetings took place at the Grange, John Ross Robertson noted the small dining room, which could not hold more than 14 people, probably meant that many of the stories about the Family Compact gatherings were probably exaggerated.

== Opposition ==

===Reform movement===

The Family Compact was one of many, distinguished primarily by its access to the offices of state. Other compact groups, such as the Baldwin-Russell-Sullivan family, in fact, shared many of the same values. The primary opposition to the Family Compact and these loyalist ideals came from the reform movement led by William Lyon Mackenzie. His ability to agitate through his newspaper &quot;The Colonial Advocate&quot; and petitioning was effective. Speeches and petitions led directly to the redress of grievances in Upper Canada that otherwise had no means of redress.

Mackenzie&#x27;s frustration with Compact control of the government was a catalyst for the failed Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837. Their hold on the government was reduced with the creation of the united Province of Canada and later the installation of the system of Responsible Government in Canada.

===Colborne Clique===
The Colborne Clique, named for John Colborne, 1st Baron Seaton, was a federation united by geography in Goderich, Scottish heritage, time of immigration to Upper Canada, and an association with the Dunlop brothers William &quot;Tiger&quot; Dunlop and Robert Graham Dunlop. Although their prime animosity was towards the Canada Company, the Canada Company and the Family Compact were seen as one and the same thing causing the Colbornites to align themselves firmly against the Family Compact.

Members:

* John Galt Jr.
* William Tiger Dunlop
* Robert Graham Dunlop
* Henry Hyndman
* Anthony Van Egmond
* William Dickson
* John Longworth
* David Clark
== Post-Rebellion decline ==
After the Rebellions of 1837, Lord Durham was sent to Canada to make recommendations on reform. Durham&#x27;s Report on the Affairs of British North America states that it is impossible &quot;To understand how any English statesman could have ever imagined that representative and irresponsible government could be successfully combined.&quot;

However, rather than pursue the Reformers&#x27; dream of responsible government, the British imposed the Union of the Canadas. The aim of the new Governor General, Charles Poulett Thomson was to strengthen the power of the Governor General, to minimize the impact of the numerically superior French vote, and to build a &quot;middle party&quot; that answered to him, rather than the Family Compact or the Reformers. Thomson was a Whig who believed in rational government, not &quot;responsible government&quot;. But he was also intent on marginalizing the influence of the Family Compact.

The Family Compact began to reconfigure itself after 1841 as it was squeezed out of public life in the new Province of Canada. The conservative values of the Family Compact was succeeded by the Upper Canada Tories after 1841. The current Canadian establishment grew out of the Family Compact. Although the families and names changed, the basic template for power and control remained the same through to the end of World War II. With greater immigration from a variety of nations and cultures came the meritocracy so desired during the early years of Upper Canada.

However, as John Porter noted, a form of Family Compact in Canadian business and politics is to be expected.

Canada is probably not unlike other western industrial nations in relying heavily on its elite groups to make major decisions and to determine the shape and direction of its development. The nineteenth-century notion of a liberal citizen-participating democracy is obviously not a satisfactory model by which to examine the processes of decision-making in either the economic or the political contexts. ... If power and decision-making must always rest with elite groups, there can at least be open recruitment from all classes into the elite.

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* John G. Bourinot. &quot;Canada Under British Rule 1790—1900&quot;. Toronto, Copp, Clark Company, 1901.
* Patrick Brode. &quot;Sir John Beverley Robinson: Bone and Sinew of the Compact&quot;, 1984.
* G. M. Craig. &quot;Upper Canada: The Formative Years, 1784–1841&quot; (1963).
* Donald Creighton. &quot;John A. Macdonald: The Young Politician&quot;. Toronto: Macmillan &amp; Co. 1952.
* David W. L. Earl, ed. &quot;The Family Compact: Aristocracy or Oligarchy?&quot;, 1967.
* David Gagan. &quot;Property and &#x27;Interest&#x27;; Some Preliminary Evidence of Land Speculation by the &#x27;Family Compact&#x27; in Upper Canada 1820–1840,&quot; &quot;Ontario History,&quot; March 1978, Vol. 70 Issue 1, pp. 63–70
* A. Ewart and J. Jarvis, &quot;Canadian Historical Review&quot;, The Personnel of the Family Compact 1926.
* Robert C. Lee. &quot;The Canada Company and the Huron Tract, 1826—1853: Personalities, Profits and Politics&quot; Toronto: Natural Heritage Books, 2004.
* Kathleen Macfarlane Lizars. &quot;In the Days of the Canada Company: The Story of the Settlement of the Huron Tract and a view of the Social Life of the Period, 1825—1850&quot;. Nabu Public Domain Reprints.
* David Mills. &quot;Idea of Loyalty in Upper Canada, 1784–1850&quot;. 1988. .
* Graeme Patterson. &quot;An Enduring Canadian Myth: Responsible Government and the Family Compact&quot;. 1989.
* Gilbert Parker and Claude G. Bryan. &quot;Old Quebec&quot;. London: Macmillan &amp; Co. 1903.
* W. Stewart Wallace. &quot;The Family Compact&quot; (Toronto, 1915).
* W. Stewart Wallace, ed., &quot;The Encyclopedia of Canada&quot;, Vol. II, Toronto, University Associates of Canada, 1948, 411 p., p. 318.

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Wrong, George M., &quot;Canada and the American Revolution: The Disruption of the First British Empire&quot; (1935)

== External links ==
* Library and Archives Canada: &quot;Search Terms: Family Compact&quot;
* &quot;Archives of Ontario, Canada Company Fonds.&quot;
* &quot;Historical Narratives of Early Canada&quot; by W.R. Wilson
* &quot;L’Encyclopédie de l&#x27;histoire du Québec: Family Compact&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3066234" start="4" end="18" title="Family Compact" label="Family Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="119" end="131" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516561" start="146" end="153" title="History of Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979393" start="228" end="242" title="Château Clique" label="Château Clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="246" end="258" title="Lower Canada" label="Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="360" end="371" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560445" start="410" end="433" title="Rebellions of 1837–1838" label="Rebellions of 1837–1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="480" end="502" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q336437" start="596" end="607" title="John Lambton, 1st Earl of Durham" label="Lord Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="619" end="623" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q385166" start="1193" end="1205" title="ruling class" label="ruling class"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="1209" end="1217" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773778" start="1333" end="1356" title="Marshall Spring Bidwell" label="Marshall Spring Bidwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020037" start="1360" end="1382" title="William Warren Baldwin" label="William Warren Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q336437" start="1479" end="1490" title="John Lambton, 1st Earl of Durham" label="Lord Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q182454" start="1631" end="1653" title="William Lyon Mackenzie" label="William Lyon Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q361916" start="2186" end="2200" title="mixed monarchy" label="mixed monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="2275" end="2284" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="2286" end="2297" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="2303" end="2311" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533739" start="2998" end="3020" title="gentlemanly capitalism" label="gentlemanly capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004326" start="3544" end="3557" title="William Allan (banker)" label="William Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14348" start="4562" end="4575" title="Welland Canal" label="Welland Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419828" start="5155" end="5188" title="Executive Council of Upper Canada" label="Executive Council of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518249" start="5193" end="5228" title="Legislative Council of Upper Canada" label="Legislative Council of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090855" start="5671" end="5697" title="Constitutional Act of 1791" label="Constitutional Act of 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q335163" start="5760" end="5776" title="Guy Carleton, 1st Baron Dorchester" label="Sir Guy Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q561352" start="5919" end="5937" title="John Graves Simcoe" label="John Graves Simcoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519762" start="6272" end="6291" title="Lieutenant Governor of Upper Canada" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518216" start="6323" end="6343" title="Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600811" start="6691" end="6695" title="York, Upper Canada" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q919169" start="6711" end="6718" title="Old Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182532" start="6771" end="6784" title="John Strachan" label="John Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528023" start="6922" end="6948" title="Sir John Robinson, 1st Baronet, of Toronto" label="Sir John Beverley Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="6988" end="7000" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829231" start="7066" end="7089" title="United Empire Loyalists" label="United Empire Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737530" start="7173" end="7179" title="The Grange (Toronto)" label="Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535742" start="7208" end="7223" title="Levius Peters Sherwood" label="Levius Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272134" start="7309" end="7320" title="Jonas Jones" label="Jonas Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723949" start="7343" end="7361" title="Henry John Boulton" label="Henry John Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528023" start="7880" end="7897" title="Sir John Robinson, 1st Baronet, of Toronto" label="Sir John Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182532" start="7902" end="7915" title="John Strachan" label="John Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829231" start="8191" end="8213" title="United Empire Loyalist" label="United Empire Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8500" end="8514" title="Upper Canada Rebellion#The Alien Question" label="Alien Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q808402" start="8789" end="8805" title="Barnabas Bidwell" label="Barnabas Bidwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="8872" end="8876" title="Yale College" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q54165" start="8947" end="8963" title="Berkshire County, Massachusetts" label="Berkshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="8982" end="8999" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406492" start="9013" end="9035" title="Massachusetts Attorney General" label="state attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="9774" end="9785" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q677937" start="9801" end="9828" title="Law Society of Upper Canada" label="Law Society of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518249" start="10300" end="10319" title="Legislative Council of Upper Canada" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="10515" end="10526" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="10553" end="10565" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="10601" end="10615" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207247" start="10708" end="10722" title="Jacob Mountain" label="Jacob Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269253" start="11203" end="11228" title="Quarter Sessions" label="Court of Quarter Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q144134" start="11645" end="11653" title="half-pay" label="half-pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020037" start="12023" end="12045" title="William Warren Baldwin" label="William Warren Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="12439" end="12446" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="12547" end="12561" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182532" start="14482" end="14495" title="John Strachan" label="John Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528023" start="14916" end="14937" title="Sir John Robinson, 1st Baronet, of Toronto" label="John Beverly Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542352" start="15665" end="15685" title="Upper Canada College" label="Upper Canada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q335402" start="15880" end="15893" title="John Colborne" label="John Colborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="16058" end="16062" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161225" start="16106" end="16126" title="Jarvis Collegiate Institute" label="Royal Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="16219" end="16232" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="16286" end="16307" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182532" start="16384" end="16397" title="John Strachan" label="John Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="16480" end="16493" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419018" start="16549" end="16566" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park (Toronto)" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="16756" end="16773" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q474971" start="16830" end="16850" title="Bank of Upper Canada" label="Bank of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994119" start="16958" end="16980" title="legislative councillor" label="legislative councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889936" start="18343" end="18359" title="receiver general" label="receiver general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238795" start="18380" end="18395" title="John Henry Dunn" label="John Henry Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701612" start="20257" end="20276" title="John Ross Robertson" label="John Ross Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020037" start="20626" end="20650" title="William Warren Baldwin" label="Baldwin-Russell-Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182454" start="20808" end="20830" title="William Lyon Mackenzie" label="William Lyon Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148273" start="20887" end="20904" title="Colonial Advocate" label="Colonial Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q389091" start="21162" end="21184" title="Upper Canada Rebellion" label="Upper Canada Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="21267" end="21285" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="21330" end="21352" title="Responsible Government" label="Responsible Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q335402" start="21418" end="21449" title="John Colborne, 1st Baron Seaton" label="John Colborne, 1st Baron Seaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q33974" start="21491" end="21499" title="Goderich, Ontario" label="Goderich"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003838" start="21601" end="21633" title="William &amp;quot;Tiger&amp;quot; Dunlop" label="William &amp;quot;Tiger&amp;quot; Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344903" start="21638" end="21658" title="Robert Graham Dunlop" label="Robert Graham Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935768" start="21707" end="21721" title="Canada Company" label="Canada Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642740" start="21893" end="21906" title="John Galt (novelist)" label="John Galt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q8003838" start="21909" end="21929" title="William Tiger Dunlop" label="William Tiger Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344903" start="21932" end="21952" title="Robert Graham Dunlop" label="Robert Graham Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q548271" start="21955" end="21968" title="Henry Hyndman" label="Henry Hyndman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773633" start="21971" end="21989" title="Anthony Van Egmond" label="Anthony Van Egmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007822" start="21992" end="22007" title="William Dickson (Upper Canada)" label="William Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q336437" start="22098" end="22109" title="John Lambton, 1st Earl of Durham" label="Lord Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325421" start="22164" end="22184" title="Report on the Affairs of British North America" label="Durham&amp;#x27;s Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="22470" end="22492" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823561" start="22518" end="22538" title="Union Act of 1840" label="Union of the Canadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959005" start="22577" end="22600" title="Charles Poulett Thomson, 1st Baron Sydenham" label="Charles Poulett Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760029" start="22818" end="22827" title="The Reform Movement (Upper Canada)" label="Reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="22843" end="22847" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="23110" end="23128" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898540" start="23197" end="23216" title="Upper Canada Tories" label="Upper Canada Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="23418" end="23430" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253208" start="23581" end="23592" title="John Porter (sociologist)" label="John Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036031" start="24556" end="24572" title="Donald Creighton" label="Donald Creighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542007" start="25986" end="26002" title="George MacKinnon Wrong" label="Wrong, George M."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262429" wikidata="Q2014199" url="?curid=262429" title="White Guard (Finland)">
<text>The White Guard, officially known as the Civil Guard (, ; ; ), was a voluntary militia, part of the Finnish Whites movement, that emerged victorious over the socialist Red Guards in the Finnish Civil War of 1918. They were generally known as the &quot;White Guard&quot; in the West due to their opposition to the &quot;communist&quot; Red Guards. In the White Army of Finland many participants were recruits, draftees and German-trained Jägers – rather than part of the paramilitary. The central organization was named the White Guard Organization, and the organization consisted of local chapters in municipalities.

The Russian Revolution of 1905 led to social and political unrest and a breakdown of security in Finland, which was then a Grand Duchy under the rule of the Russian Tsar. Citizen militias formed as a response, but soon these would be transformed along political (left-right) lines. The Russian Revolution of 1917 and the subsequent independence of Finland (declared in December 1917) also caused conflicts in the country. On January 27, 1918, the Finnish government ordered the disarming of all remaining Russian garrisons by the forces of the White Guard, and on the same day the Reds proclaimed revolution, leading to a bloody civil war. White Guards, led by General Gustaf Mannerheim, constituted the bulk of the victorious White Army during the Finnish Civil War (1918).

After the war the Finnish Defence Forces and a regular police service were founded. From 1919–1934 White Guards were considered a voluntary part of the army, and separate Guard formations served in the reserve, but in 1934 all defence was consolidated into the regular army and the Guard became a voluntary defence-training organization only. Politically it was neutral, although unofficially it was anti-leftist, clearly anti-Communist, conservative, largely rejected by the labour movement and by the political left. Units of it formed the main forces of the Lapua Movement&#x27;s abortive coup d&#x27;état (the Mäntsälä Rebellion) in 1932, however only a small fraction of the Guard participated and the majority of it stayed loyal to the government. White Guardsmen served in the regular army during the Second World War. The White Guard was disbanded according to the terms of the 1944 Moscow Armistice, following the end of the Continuation War.

Similar militias operated in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, lands that, like Finland, came under Russian sovereignty until the collapse of Tsarist Russia in 1917. These militias remained in existence until World War II, evolving somewhat into home-guard militias. The phenomenon should be distinguished from the Freikorps established in Germany after its defeat in World War I, although some similarities exist.

== Historical context ==

During the first years of the 20th century, Russia had been working on the abolition of Finland&#x27;s autonomous status. As a result, there was strong discontent in Finnish society. In 1905 Russia lost the Russo-Japanese War. This stunning and unexpected defeat led to the Russian Revolution of 1905. In Finland the unrest was expressed in the Finnish general strike of 1905. During the strike Finnish police forces were effectively disbanded, as they had been closely associated with the occupying Russian authorities. Municipal, mostly unarmed, security guards were spontaneously organised by individuals associated with the constitutional and Social Democratic parties. At first all political groups were able to work together, but towards 1906 the civil guards of large towns had become divided along party lines. The first violent clash between Red and White Guards occurred in July 1906 in Helsinki, but after the return of Finnish autonomy the moderate Social Democrats and the whole constitutional party withdrew from military activities. However, the radicalized Red Guard of Helsinki did not disband, despite an order from the Social Democratic leadership to do so, and took part in the mutiny at Viapori fortress alongside revolutionary, anti-imperial Russian soldiers. In the ensuing fighting Czarist Russian troops destroyed the Red Guard as an organisation.
The February Revolution in Russia in 1917 caused the collapse of Russian political and military power in Finland. Again, the Russian-associated Finnish police were effectively disbanded, while the largely undisciplined Russian troops engaged in violence, mostly towards their own officers. During the summer of 1917 paramilitary groups were formed for protection and to preserve order. Although the founding of these &quot;fire brigades&quot; was often done in a non-partisan manner, they often split into two opposing factions during the autumn of 1917. The initially unarmed Red and White Guards strove to obtain weapons. The Red Guards usually were able to get arms from revolutionary Russian military units, while the White Guards got theirs from Swedish and German supporters abroad. At the same time, political tensions between socialists and non-socialists escalated. Inside the Social Democratic party, the official leadership was derailed while the executive committee of the Red Guards and the labour unions gained more power.

== The White Guards in the Civil War ==

The Senate, led by Pehr Evind Svinhufvud, proposed a Declaration of Independence, which the Parliament adopted on December 6, 1917. Declaring independence was one thing, but exercising control over the territory was another. Svinhufvud&#x27;s &quot;White Senate&quot; had nothing but the White Guards to rely on as yet. There were 42,500 Russian soldiers in Finland. Although the Imperial Russian Army was slowly disintegrating and had already started to withdraw its units from Finland, the demoralized, poorly trained and undisciplined Russian military forces in the country posed a substantial challenge to Finnish authority.

In parliament the question on forming a new security force was hotly debated. On January 13, 1918, the non-socialist majority gave authorization to the Senate (Finnish cabinet) to organize a police force of the White Guard. Soon the Senate asked General Mannerheim to form a new Finnish army on the basis on the White Guard militia. In southern Karelia the White and Red Guards clashed in small-scale engagements as both sides attempted to secure the railway to St. Petersburg. During the night of January 27–28, 1918, the White Guards started to disarm and arrest the Russian garrisons in Ostrobothnia. During the night the executive committee of the Red Guards declared the Finnish Socialist Workers&#x27; Republic in Helsinki. The Civil War of Finland had begun.
Neither the Red nor the White Guard were trained for combat. Structures had to be built in extreme haste by both parties. The White Army had a better foundation for this, as it received the Finnish Jaeger troops, some 1,900 men trained by Germany since 1915. These soldiers were able to act as instructors and officers, forming the officer and NCO corps of the new conscript army. In addition, the White side had 1,200 volunteers from Sweden (many of whom were officers), and a significant number of Finnish officers who had previously served in the imperial Russian Army but returned home after the revolution.

Although in the beginning of the war the White Guard formed the bulk of the White army, the conscript units very soon matched the White Guard units in number. These troops, which were much better disciplined and trained than the volunteer Guards, proved to be crucial for the outcome of the war. The Red side never accomplished conscription, which was one of the reasons for its demise.

After four months of bitter fighting, the Red Guards were defeated and the White Guards were recognized as one of the key agents in the victory, downplaying for political reasons the role of the German intervention units and the German-trained 2,000 Jaegers. The Civil War was portrayed as a liberation from Russian control after a 20-year-long Russification programme, with the Whites stressing the links of the Reds to the Russian Bolshevik regime. However the White victory was achieved with assistance from the Germans. German influence after the war was so strong that the independence of Finland was greatly in question until the end of World War I.

There were reparations in the aftermath of the Civil War. As the Reds had murdered some 1,100 people in their zone of control (the so-called &quot;Red terror&quot;), the Whites retaliated ruthlessly, executing some 7,370 people after the recapture of the Red areas (the so-called &quot;White terror&quot;). Approximately 4,000 Whites and 4,500 Reds were killed in action. The famine of 1918 claimed another 20,000 lives. Of those who perished, some 13,000 died in the prison camps. Because of their ruthlessness and eagerness to retaliate, the White Guards earned the title &quot;Lahtarikaarti&quot; (Butcher Guard) among the Reds.

== The White Guards after the Civil War ==
After the Civil War the function of the White Guards was unclear. In some municipalities the local White Guard was understood to be a part of the municipal administration. In others, the organisation was considered to have a primarily political role in safeguarding the result of the war. The organisation was given a legal basis on August 2, 1918 by a decree of the Finnish Council of State. Changes to the decree were made later, refining the organisation&#x27;s structure. From the beginning, the White Guard was considered to be a voluntary part of the Finnish military.

The local White Guards&#x27; function in the following 20 years—up to the Winter War—was a mixture of Veteran Corps and Home Guards. After 1921 the White Guard organisation consisted of the General Staff, White Guard districts and local White Guard chapters. Every municipality had at least a single chapter, which in part acted as an NGO (non-governmental organization) but in military affairs was part of the national chain of command. In an economical sense, each chapter was responsible for its own funding, although it received a minor grant from the state budget. The White Guard was active in numerous areas of Finnish life. It organised sports activities, especially cross-country skiing, shooting, orienteering and Finnish baseball. For fundraising, the chapters organised numerous informal events and lotteries. It is estimated that about one-fifth of all get-togethers in Finland were organised by the White Guard. To this end, the White Guard chapters had several hundred choirs, orchestras and theatre groups.

The Chief of the White Guard and the district chiefs were selected by the President of Finland. From 1921 until the organisation&#x27;s demise, this post was occupied by General Lauri Malmberg who took command in the aftermath of the White Guard Affair. Usually, the district chiefs and most officers in the district headquarters were from the regular army.

Only able-bodied males between 17 and 40 years of age could be full members of the White Guard. Every member was required to attend a specified amount of training on pain of losing membership. The members were required to buy their own equipment and rifle, but the local chapters helped their members if the chapters had funds for it. Until 1934 the White Guard would have formed a division in the full-scale mobilisation.

In 1934 the Finnish mobilisation system was changed. The new system was based on military districts acting as the local mobilization centers. In practice, the military districts coincided with the White Guard districts. In case of mobilisation these two would be unified to act as a single home front district. After the change, the White Guard members formed the cadre of all wartime units, but no specific guard units were planned for mobilisation. On the other hand, the separate wartime White Guard units were removed from the mobilisation plans. The aim of the White Guard was no longer to provide ready fighting units but to act as a voluntary training organisation for reservists. Only the Guard chapters immediately adjacent to the eastern border had responsibility for starting the initial defence against invasion. This effectively ended the role of the White Guard as a separate, political armed force.

During the war the Guard membership mostly served at the front. In the home area the Guard districts formed the local headquarters for the military districts and the oldest and youngest Guard members served in guard and anti-aircraft duties. There were some small anti-desant actions on the home front, e.g. in Hollola in 1941. After the Continuation War, the Finnish White Guards were disbanded in November 1944, as demanded by the Soviet Union. However, the military district system as the basis for mobilisation was retained, now fully as an army structure. In the Winter War the White Guard was responsible for the carrying out of the mobilisation. A quarter of the manpower of the field army consisted of Guard members. This contribution proved important, as Guard members were the best trained and equipped personnel in an army which lacked even basic supplies.

==Strength==

==Relations with politicians==
The frosty relations between White Guards and Socialists started to ease during the 1930s. During the 1920s Socialists had demanded the White Guards be demobilised, but as the Guard leadership and the overwhelming majority of the members remained loyal to the government during Mäntsälä rebellion, the demands were changed to making the Guards an official part of the army.

The political rift between the White Guard and the labour movement was ultimately healed during the Winter War, when leadership of the Guard and the Social Democratic Party issued a joint statement February 15, 1940, in which the Guard leadership recommended local Guards to recruit Socialists and the Party leadership recommended to its members that they join the Guards. At the same time, the employers&#x27; associations conceded to collective-bargaining agreements with the trade unions.

The White Guards&#x27; relations towards non-socialist parties were mostly warm. The Guard did not distinguish between any non-socialist political views and received the support of all non-socialist parties. Only during the Mäntsälä rebellion did these relations deteriorate, as some more radical parts of the Guard were linked with the extreme right-wing.

==Heritage==

One of the chapters of the Treaty of Paris (1947) was disbandment of all &quot;fascist-like organizations&quot;. The Soviet Union considered that the White Guard and Lotta Svärd were fascist organizations, and they were disbanded.

The disbanding of the White Guard effectively ended all Finnish voluntary military training for the next several decades. The sports activities of the Guard were taken over by ordinary civilian sports associations, while the psychological work of instilling a national defence spirit was continued by the reservists&#x27; associations. However, the Guard itself is a contentious issue, which still divides the people along political lines.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Finland unilaterally renounced the military articles of the Paris Peace Treaty of 1947. Following this, the NGOs working in fields with connections to total defence formed the National Defence Training Association of Finland (), which started to organise supplemental voluntary training primarily for Finnish Defence Forces reservists in conjunction with the Defence Forces. The legal basis for the activities was given by changing the Act on Defence Forces in 1994. More accurate basis was given by the Act on Voluntary Defence Work of 2007, which will make the Association a nominally independent public organization under political state control. As the heritage of the White Guard in Finland is very mixed, the National Defence Training Association does not consider itself to be the successor of the White Guard.

In 2007 formation of Territorial Forces was started, a volunteer military organization composed of reservists. Some political groups have criticized formation of these units, saying that they are too close to White Guards that were abolished as fascist organization in 1944. However, unlike the White Guard, local defense troops are not a separate organization, but fully in the control of the Finnish Defence Forces.

== Dress and insignia ==
The first &quot;ad hoc&quot; symbols were a white armband and a small, three-branched shoot from a spruce branch, placed into the hat. The basic insignia was an embroidered badge with a white &quot;S&quot; topped by three single shoots of spruce branches. The badge and the &quot;S&quot; were embroidered with a gold-colored border. The symbol worn by General C.G.E. Mannerheim had a blue field, but in the provinces, the field was divided (party per sinister), with two or three colors representing each province. The white armband also bore the name of the municipality. Each chapter had its own flag, but generally it was a symmetric variant of the modern State Flag of Finland where the cross was extended with small swastika arms, the &quot;S&quot; symbol in the canton and local symbols instead of the coat of arms.

The rank insignia was rather different from modern Finnish insignia. In principle, the enlisted did not have a rank system, and there was only one officer rank (&quot;suojeluskuntaupseeri&quot;), marked by a single metal spruce branch worn on the collar. However, task-specific insignia was used instead. Underofficers wore a chevron pointed downwards, and chiefs of local chapters wore 1–4 horizontal bars, the number depending on the size of the chapter. It must be kept in mind that &quot;Suojeluskunnat&quot; were a civilian organization and many members did not have formal military training. Those members who had served in the military held a separate rank in reserve.

Uniforms were Swedish and German-style and in &quot;field gray&quot; (&quot;Feldgrau&quot;) color.

== See also ==
* Jyväskylä Defence Corps Building
* Local Defence troops (Finland)
* Lotta Svärd – voluntary auxiliary organisation for women
* Seinäjoki Civil Guard House, now housing the Civil Guard &amp; Lotta Svärd Museum

== Explanatory notes==
==References==
==External links==
*THE SUOJELUSKUNTA: A History of the Finnish Civil Guard by Jarkko Vihavainen</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2014199" start="4" end="15" title="White Guard (Finland)" label="White Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014199" start="41" end="52" title="White Guard (Finland)" label="Civil Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="79" end="86" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115002" start="100" end="114" title="Whites (Finland)" label="Finnish Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="158" end="167" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006649" start="168" end="178" title="Red Guard (Finland)" label="Red Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="186" end="203" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="273" end="281" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="319" end="328" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006649" start="335" end="345" title="Red Guards (Finland)" label="Red Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115002" start="354" end="364" title="Whites (Finland)" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q701803" start="422" end="443" title="Jäger Movement" label="German-trained Jägers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="622" end="648" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="715" end="722" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q165116" start="741" end="752" title="Grand Duchy" label="Grand Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="775" end="787" title="Russian Tsar" label="Russian Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="904" end="930" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916528" start="950" end="973" title="independence of Finland" label="independence of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450844" start="1279" end="1286" title="Finnish military ranks" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q152306" start="1287" end="1304" title="Gustaf Mannerheim" label="Gustaf Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115002" start="1345" end="1355" title="Whites (Finland)" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="1367" end="1384" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q327042" start="1412" end="1434" title="Finnish Defence Forces" label="Finnish Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412941" start="1955" end="1969" title="Lapua Movement" label="Lapua Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441292" start="2008" end="2026" title="Mäntsälä Rebellion" label="Mäntsälä Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315504" start="2202" end="2218" title="Finland in World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321586" start="2285" end="2301" title="Moscow Armistice" label="Moscow Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="2328" end="2344" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="2355" end="2362" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="2376" end="2383" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="2385" end="2391" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="2396" end="2405" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="2452" end="2463" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2553" end="2565" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="2659" end="2668" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2712" end="2723" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328052" start="2861" end="2906" title="Russification of Finland" label="abolition of Finland&amp;#x27;s autonomous status"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="2993" end="3011" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="3060" end="3086" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="3131" end="3161" title="Finnish general strike of 1905" label="Finnish general strike of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="3433" end="3450" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="Social Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="3683" end="3691" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="4163" end="4182" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q209439" start="5257" end="5278" title="Pehr Evind Svinhufvud" label="Pehr Evind Svinhufvud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994771" start="5291" end="5318" title="Finnish Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115002" start="5487" end="5499" title="Whites (Finland)" label="White Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="5618" end="5639" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152306" start="6114" end="6132" title="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim" label="General Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="6213" end="6220" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="6330" end="6344" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702" start="6458" end="6470" title="Ostrobothnia (region)" label="Ostrobothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042497" start="6493" end="6530" title="Finnish People&amp;#x27;s Delegation" label="executive committee of the Red Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811029" start="6544" end="6584" title="Finnish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Republic" label="Finnish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="6602" end="6622" title="Civil War of Finland" label="Civil War of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q701803" start="6824" end="6845" title="Finnish Jaeger troops" label="Finnish Jaeger troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="7184" end="7205" title="imperial Russian Army" label="imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="7980" end="7993" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q615902" start="8166" end="8175" title="Kingdom of Finland (1918)" label="influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="8668" end="8674" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366737" start="9335" end="9359" title="Finnish Council of State" label="Finnish Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="9618" end="9628" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9646" end="9659" title="Veteran Corps" label="Veteran Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="9664" end="9675" title="Militia" label="Home Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="10219" end="10239" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q29358" start="10251" end="10263" title="orienteering" label="orienteering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295867" start="10268" end="10284" title="Finnish baseball" label="Finnish baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558" start="10642" end="10662" title="President of Finland" label="President of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404912" start="10746" end="10760" title="Lauri Malmberg" label="Lauri Malmberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10670809" start="10802" end="10820" title="White Guard Affair" label="White Guard Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="12535" end="12541" title="desant" label="desant"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="12604" end="12620" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12699" end="12711" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441292" start="13458" end="13476" title="Mäntsälä rebellion" label="Mäntsälä rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="14447" end="14469" title="Treaty of Paris (1947)" label="Treaty of Paris (1947)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348453" start="14586" end="14597" title="Lotta Svärd" label="Lotta Svärd"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="15193" end="15219" title="Treaty of Paris (1947)" label="Paris Peace Treaty of 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827994" start="15284" end="15297" title="total defence" label="total defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972165" start="15309" end="15357" title="National Defence Training Association of Finland" label="National Defence Training Association of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q327042" start="15434" end="15456" title="Finnish Defence Forces" label="Finnish Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663994" start="15973" end="15991" title="Territorial Forces (Finland)" label="Territorial Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q680343" start="16446" end="16453" title="armband" label="armband"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="16495" end="16501" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q799000" start="16569" end="16574" title="badge" label="badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q152306" start="16756" end="16773" title="C.G.E. Mannerheim" label="C.G.E. Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q47891" start="17055" end="17076" title="Flag of Finland" label="State Flag of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450844" start="17263" end="17286" title="Finnish military ranks" label="modern Finnish insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883124" start="17524" end="17536" title="Underofficer" label="Underofficer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26935196" start="17545" end="17552" title="Chevron (insignia)" label="chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q492192" start="17972" end="17980" title="Feldgrau" label="Feldgrau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17384736" start="18013" end="18045" title="Jyväskylä Defence Corps Building" label="Jyväskylä Defence Corps Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663994" start="18048" end="18078" title="Local Defence troops (Finland)" label="Local Defence troops (Finland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348453" start="18081" end="18092" title="Lotta Svärd" label="Lotta Svärd"/>
<link wikidata="Q11892837" start="18140" end="18167" title="Seinäjoki Civil Guard House" label="Seinäjoki Civil Guard House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262438" wikidata="Q78704" url="?curid=262438" title="Hanns Eisler">
<text>Hanns Eisler (6 July 1898 – 6 September 1962) was a German-Austrian composer. He is best known for composing the national anthem of East Germany, for his long artistic association with Bertolt Brecht, and for the scores he wrote for films. The Hochschule für Musik Hanns Eisler Berlin is named after him.

==Family background==
Johannes Eisler was born in Leipzig in Saxony, the third child of Rudolf Eisler, a professor of philosophy, and Marie Ida Fischer. His father was an atheist of Jewish descent and his mother was Lutheran of Swabian descent. In 1901, the family moved to Vienna. His older brother Gerhart was a Communist journalist, and his older sister Elfriede was a leader of the Communist Party of Germany in the 1920s. After emigrating to North America, she turned into an anti-Stalinist, his sister testified against him and his brother before the House Un-American Activities Committee.

==Early years==

As his family could not afford music lessons nor a piano, Eisler had to teach himself music. At age 14, Eisler joined a socialist youth group.

In 1917, one year after Eisler graduated high school, then 18-year-old Eisler was drafted into the Austro-Hungarian Army to fight during World War I, where served as a front-line soldier. He found this time physically demanding, due to his poor health and small stature, and was injured several times in combat.

Returning to Vienna after Austria&#x27;s defeat, he studied from 1919 to 1923 under Arnold Schoenberg. Eisler was the first of Schoenberg&#x27;s disciples to compose in the twelve-tone or serial technique.

Eisler married Charlotte Demant in 1920; they separated in 1934. In 1925, he moved to Berlin, which was then a hothouse of experimentation in music, theater, film, art and politics. There he became an active supporter of the Communist Party of Germany and became involved with the November Group. In 1928, he taught at the Marxist Workers&#x27; School in Berlin and his son Georg Eisler was born. His music became increasingly oriented towards political themes and, to Schoenberg&#x27;s dismay, more &quot;popular&quot; in style with influences drawn from jazz and cabaret. At the same time, he became close with Bertolt Brecht, whose own turn towards Marxism happened at about the same time. The collaboration between the two artists lasted for the rest of Brecht&#x27;s life.

In 1929, Eisler composed the song cycle &quot;Zeitungsausschnitte&quot;, Op. 11. The work is dedicated to the singer Margot Hinnenberg-Lefebre. Though not written in the twelve-tone technique, it was perhaps the forerunner of a musical art style later known as &quot;News Items&quot; (or perhaps better characterized as &quot;news clippings&quot;) – musical compositions that parodied a newspaper&#x27;s content and style, or that included lyrics lifted directly from newspapers, leaflets, magazines or other written media of the day. The cycle parodies a newspaper&#x27;s layout and content, with the songs comprising it given titles similar to headlines. Its content reflects Eisler&#x27;s socialist leanings, with lyrics memorializing the struggles of ordinary Germans subject to post–World War I hardships.

Eisler wrote music for several Brecht plays, including &quot;The Decision (Die Maßnahme)&quot; (1930), &quot;The Mother&quot; (1932) and &quot;Schweik in the Second World War&quot; (1957). They also collaborated on protest songs that celebrated, and contributed to, the political turmoil of Weimar Germany in the early 1930s. Their &quot;Solidarity Song&quot; became a popular militant anthem sung in street protests and public meetings throughout Europe, and their &quot;Ballad of Paragraph 218&quot; was the world&#x27;s first song protesting laws against abortion. Brecht-Eisler songs of this period tended to look at life from &quot;below&quot;—from the perspective of prostitutes, hustlers, the unemployed and the working poor. From 1931 to 1932, he collaborated with Brecht and director Slatan Dudow on the working-class film &quot;Kuhle Wampe&quot;.

==Exile==
After 1933, Eisler&#x27;s music and Brecht&#x27;s poetry were banned by the Nazi Party. Both artists went into exile. While Brecht settled in Svendborg, Denmark, Eisler traveled for a number of years, working in Prague, Vienna, Paris, London, and Moscow, and living briefly in Spain, Mexico, and Denmark. He made two visits to the United States, with speaking tours from coast to coast.

In 1934, Eisler composed music for a song written by Brecht called the &quot;United Front Song&quot;. The song was simple to follow to allow workers with limited musical training to be able to sing it.

In 1938, Eisler finally managed to emigrate to the United States with a permanent visa. In New York City, he taught composition at The New School for Social Research and wrote experimental chamber and documentary music. In 1942, he moved to Los Angeles where he joined Brecht, who had arrived in California in 1941 after a long trip eastward from Denmark across the Soviet Union and the Pacific Ocean.

In the US, Eisler composed music for various documentary films and for eight Hollywood film scores, two of which – &quot;Hangmen Also Die!&quot; and &quot;None but the Lonely Heart&quot; – were nominated for Oscars in 1944 and 1945 respectively. Also working on &quot;Hangmen Also Die!&quot; was Bertolt Brecht, who wrote the story along with director Fritz Lang. From 1927 to the end of his life, Eisler wrote the music for 40 films, making film music the largest part of his compositions after vocal music for chorus and/or solo voices.

On 1 February 1940, he began work on the &quot;Research Program on the Relation between Music and Films&quot; funded by a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation, which he got with the help of film director Joseph Losey and The New School. This work resulted in the book &quot;Composing for the Films&quot; which was published in 1947, with Theodor W. Adorno as co-author.

In several chamber and choral compositions of this period, Eisler returned to the twelve-tone method he had abandoned in Berlin. His &quot;Fourteen Ways of Describing the Rain&quot;, composed for Arnold Schoenberg&#x27;s 70th birthday celebration, is considered a masterpiece of the genre.

Eisler&#x27;s works of the 1930s and 1940s included &quot;Deutsche Sinfonie&quot;, a choral symphony in 11 movements based on poems by Brecht and Ignazio Silone, and a cycle of art songs published as the &quot;Hollywood Songbook&quot;. With lyrics by Brecht, Eduard Mörike, Friedrich Hölderlin, and Goethe, it established Eisler&#x27;s reputation as one of the 20th century&#x27;s great composers of German lieder.

==HUAC investigation==
Eisler&#x27;s promising career in the U.S. was interrupted by the Cold War. He was one of the first artists placed on the Hollywood blacklist by the film studio bosses. In two interrogations by the House Committee on Un-American Activities, the composer was accused of being &quot;the Karl Marx of music&quot; and the chief Soviet agent in Hollywood. Among his accusers was his sister Ruth Fischer, who also testified before the Committee that her other brother, Gerhart, was a Communist agent.

===His supporters===
Eisler&#x27;s supporters—including his friend Charlie Chaplin and the composers Igor Stravinsky, Aaron Copland and Leonard Bernstein—organized benefit concerts to raise money for his defense fund, but to no avail. Eisler was deported early in 1948. His deportation disrupted a number of collaborations, such as composing a new film score for Chaplin&#x27;s 1928 &quot;The Circus&quot;, the last &quot;Tramp&quot; movie, which Chaplin had requested. Eisler turned the score in the 1950s into concert music, which would be performed. Folksinger Woody Guthrie protested the composer&#x27;s deportation in his lyrics for &quot;Eisler on the Go&quot;—recorded 50 years later by Billy Bragg and Wilco in the 1998 album &quot;Mermaid Avenue&quot;. In the song, an introspective Guthrie asked himself what he would do if called to testify before the House Committee on Un-American Activities: &quot;I don&#x27;t know what I&#x27;ll do / I don&#x27;t know what I&#x27;ll do / Eisler&#x27;s on the come and go / and I don&#x27;t know what I&#x27;ll do.&quot;

===On departing from the U.S.===
On 26 March 1948, Eisler and his wife Lou departed from LaGuardia Airport and flew to Prague. Before he left, he read the following statement:

I leave this country not without bitterness and infuriation. I could well understand it when in 1933 the Hitler bandits put a price on my head and drove me out. They were the evil of the period; I was proud at being driven out. But I feel heartbroken over being driven out of this beautiful country in this ridiculous way.

==In East Germany==

Eisler returned to Austria, and later moved to East Berlin. In East Germany, he composed the national anthem of the German Democratic Republic, a cycle of cabaret-style songs to satirical poems by Kurt Tucholsky and incidental music for theater, films, television and party celebrations.

His most ambitious project of the period was the opera &quot;Johannes Faustus&quot; on the Faust theme. The libretto, written by Eisler himself, was published in the fall of 1952. It portrayed Faust as an indecisive man who betrayed the cause of the working class by not joining the German Peasants&#x27; War. In May 1953, Eisler&#x27;s libretto was attacked by a major article in Neues Deutschland, the SED organ, which disapproved of the negative depiction of Faust as a renegade and accused the work of being &quot;a slap in the face of German national feeling&quot; and of having &quot;formalistically deformed one of the greatest works of our German poet Goethe&quot; (Ulbricht). Eisler&#x27;s opera project was discussed in three of the bi-weekly meetings &quot;Mittwochsgesellschaft&quot; [Wednesday club] of a circle of intellectuals under the auspices of the Berlin Academy of Arts beginning on 13 May 1953. The last of these meetings took place on Wednesday, 10 June 1953.
A week later, the East German uprising of 1953 pushed those debates from the agenda. Eisler fell into a deep depression, and consequently did not write the music for the opera. In his last work, &quot;Ernste Gesänge&quot; (&#x27;Serious Songs&#x27;), written between spring 1961 and August 1962, Eisler attempted to work through his depression, taking up the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union with its demise of the Stalin cult, as a sign of hope for a future enabling to &quot;live without fear&quot;. Although he continued to work as a composer and to teach at the East Berlin conservatory, the gap between Eisler and the cultural functionaries of East Germany grew wider in the last decade of his life. During this period, he befriended musician Wolf Biermann and tried to promote him, but in 1976, Biermann would be stripped of his GDR citizenship while on concert tour in West Germany.

Eisler collaborated with Brecht until the latter&#x27;s death in 1956. He never recovered completely from his friend&#x27;s demise, and his remaining years were marred by depression and declining health.

==Illness and death==
On 6 September 1962, he died of a fatal heart attack in East Berlin at the age of 64, and is buried near Brecht in the Dorotheenstadt cemetery. Previously, he had been bedridden for 3 months after his first heart attack. He had been a heavy smoker since he was a child, smoking up to 100 cigarettes a day on occasion. He became a heavy drinker later in life and developed alcoholism. He had slept very little and ate poorly, and as a result he also suffered from chronic fatigue and malnutrition.

==Compositions==
* 1918: &quot;Gesang des Abgeschiedenen&quot; (&quot;Die Mausefalle&quot;) (after Christian Morgenstern); &quot;Wenn es nur einmal so ganz still wäre&quot; (after Rainer Maria Rilke)
* 1919: &quot;Drei Lieder&quot; (Li-Tai-Po, Klabund); &quot;Sehr leises Gehn im lauen Wind&quot;;
* 1922: Allegro moderato and Waltzes; Allegretto and Andante for Piano
* 1923: Piano Sonata No. 1, Op. 1
* 1923: Divertimento; Four Piano Pieces
* 1923: Divertimento for wind quintet, Op. 4
* 1924: Piano Sonata No. 2, Op. 6
* 1925: Eight Piano Pieces
* 1926: &quot;Tagebuch des Hanns Eisler&quot; (&quot;Diary of Hanns Eisler&quot;); &quot;11 Zeitungsausschnitte&quot;; Ten Lieder; Three Songs for Men&#x27;s Chorus (after Heinrich Heine)
* 1928: &quot;Drum sag der SPD ade&quot;; &quot;Lied der roten Matrosen&quot; (&quot;Song of the Red Sailors&quot;, with Erich Weinert); &quot;Pantomime&quot; (with Béla Balázs); &quot;Kumpellied&quot;; &quot;Red Sailors&#x27; Song&quot;; &quot;Couplet vom Zeitfreiwilligen&quot;; &quot;Newspaper&#x27;s Son&quot;; &quot;Auch ein Schumacher (verschiedene Dichter)&quot;; &quot;Was möchst du nicht&quot; (from Des Knaben Wunderhorn); &quot;Wir sind das rote Sprachrohr&quot;
* Between 1929 and 1931: &quot;Solidaritätslied&quot;
* 1929: &quot;Tempo der Zeit&quot; (&quot;Tempo of Time&quot;) for chorus and small orchestra, Op. 16; Six Lieder (after Weinert, Weber, Jahnke and Vallentin); &quot;Lied der Werktätigen&quot; (&quot;Song of the Working People&quot;; with Stephan Hermlin)
* 1930: &quot;Die Maßnahme&quot; (&quot;The Measures Taken&quot;, Lehrstück, text by Bertolt Brecht), Op. 20; &quot;Six Ballads&quot; (after Weber, Brecht, and Walter Mehring); &quot;Four Ballads&quot; (after B. Traven, Kurt Tucholsky, Wiesner-Gmeyner, and Arendt); &quot;Suite No. 1&quot;, Op. 23
* 1931 incidental music for &quot;Die Mutter&quot; (&quot;The Mother&quot;) by Bertolt Brecht (after Maxim Gorky), for small theatre orchestra
* 1931: &quot;Lied der roten Flieger&quot; (after Semyon Kirsanov); &quot;Four Songs&quot; (after Frank, Weinert) from the film &quot;Niemandsland&quot;; film music for &quot;Kuhle Wampe&quot; (texts by Brecht) with the famous &quot;Ballad of the Pirates&quot;, &quot;Song of Mariken&quot;, &quot;Four Ballads&quot; (with Bertolt Brecht); &quot;Suite No. 2&quot;, Op. 24 (&quot;Niemandsland&quot;); Three Songs after Erich Weinert; &quot;Das Lied vom vierten Mann&quot; (&quot;The Song of the Fourth Man&quot;); &quot;Streiklied&quot; (&quot;Strike Song&quot;); &quot;Suite No. 3&quot;, Op. 26 (&quot;Kuhle Wampe&quot;)
* 1932: Kleine Sinfonie, Op. 29
* 1932: &quot;Ballad of the Women and the Soldiers&quot; (with Brecht); &quot;Seven Piano Pieces&quot;; &quot;Suite No. 4&quot;, Music for the Russian film &quot;Pesn&#x27; o geroyakh&quot; (Song of Heroes) by Joris Ivens with &quot;Song from the Urals&quot; (after Sergei Tretyakov); reissued as instrumental piece Op. 30 (&quot;Die Jugend hat das Wort&quot;)
* 1934: &quot;Einheitsfrontlied&quot; (&quot;United Front Song&quot;); &quot;Saarlied&quot; (&quot;Saar Song&quot;), &quot;Lied gegen den Krieg&quot; (&quot;Song Against War&quot;), &quot;Ballade von der Judenhure Marie Sanders&quot; (&quot;Ballad of the Jews&#x27; Whore Marie Sanders&quot;), songs from &quot;Die Rundköpfe und die Spitzköpfe&quot;; &quot;Sklave, wer wird dich befreien&quot; (&quot;Slave, who will liberate you&quot;; with Brecht); &quot;California Ballad&quot;; &quot;Six Pieces&quot;; &quot;Prelude and Fugue on B–A–C–H&quot; (string trio); &quot;Spartakus 1919&quot;, Op. 43
* 1935: &quot;Die Mutter&quot; (&quot;The Mother&quot;) rewritten as cantata for chorus, solo voices and two pianos for a New York stage production
* 1935: &quot;Lenin Requiem&quot; for solo voices, chorus and orchestra
* 1936: Cantata &quot;Gegen den Krieg&quot;
* 1937: Seven cantatas based on texts taken from Ignazio Silone&#x27;s novels &quot;Bread and Wine&quot; and &quot;Fontamara&quot; for solo voice, strings and woodwind instruments
: &quot;Die Römische Kantate&quot;, Op. 60;
: &quot;Kantate im Exil&quot; (Man lebt von einem Tag zu dem andern), Op. 62;
: &quot;Kantate &quot;Nein&quot;&quot; (Kantate im Exil No. 2);
: &quot;Kantate auf den Tod eines Genossen&quot;, Op. 64;
: &quot;Kriegskantate&quot;, Op. 65;
: &quot;Die den Mund auf hatten&quot;;
: &quot;Die Weißbrotkantate&quot;.
* &quot;Friedenssong&quot; (&quot;Peace Song&quot;, after Petere); &quot;Kammerkantaten&quot; (&quot;Chamber Cantatas&quot;); Ulm 1592; &quot;Bettellied &quot;(&quot;Begging Song&quot;, with Brecht); &quot;Lenin Requiem&quot; (with Brecht)
* 1938: &quot;Cantata on Herr Meyers&#x27; First Birthday&quot;
* 1938: String Quartet
* 1938: Fünf Orchesterstücke
* 1938: Theme and Variations &quot;Der lange Marsch&quot;
* 1939: Nonet No. 1
* 1940: Music for the documentary film &quot;White Flood&quot; (Frontier Films)
* 1941: Music for the documentary film &quot;A Child went forth&quot; (directed by Joseph Losey), reissued as Suite for Septet No. 1, op. 92a
* 1940/41: Film music for &quot;The Forgotten Village&quot; (directed by Herbert Kline and Alexander Hammid, written by John Steinbeck)
* 1940/41: Nonet No. 2
* 1941: &quot;Woodbury-Liederbüchlein&quot; (&quot;Woodbury Songbook&quot;, 20 children songs for female choir written in Woodbury, Connecticut); &quot;14 Arten den Regen zu beschreiben&quot; (14 ways to describe rain) (inspired by the Joris Ivens film &quot;Rain&quot; (1929), later dedicated to Arnold Schoenberg for his 70th birthday)
* 1942: &quot;Hollywood-Elegien&quot; (&quot;Hollywood Elegies&quot;; with Brecht) in the &quot;Hollywooder Liederbuch&quot; (&quot;Hollywood Songbook&quot;)
* 1943: Film music for &quot;Hangmen Also Die!&quot;; Piano Sonata No. 3
* 1943: Songs for &quot;Schweik in the Second World War&quot;; &quot;Deutsche Misere&quot; (with Brecht)
* 1943: Piano sonata no. 3
* 1943: Kammer-Sinfonie, Op. 69
* 1945: Film score for &quot;The Spanish Main&quot;, directed by Frank Borzage
* 1946: &quot;Glückliche Fahrt&quot; (&quot;Prosperous Voyage&quot;, after Goethe); Songs and ballad for Brecht&#x27;s play &quot;Life of Galileo&quot;.
* 1946: Film scores for &quot;A Scandal in Paris&quot; and &quot;Deadline at Dawn&quot;
* 1947: Septet No. 2
* 1947: Music for &quot;The Woman on the Beach&quot;, film directed by Jean Renoir
* 1948: Incidental music for Johann Nestroy&#x27;s play &quot;Höllenangst&quot;
* 1948: &quot;Lied über die Gerechtigkeit&quot; (&quot;Song of Justice&quot;, after W. Fischer)
* 1948: Ouvertüre zu einem Lustspiel
* 1949: &quot;Berliner-Suite&quot;; &quot;Rhapsody&quot;; &quot;Lied über den Frieden&quot; (&quot;Song about Peace&quot;); &quot;Auferstanden aus Ruinen&quot; (National Anthem of the DDR (text by Johannes R. Becher)); &quot;Treffass&quot;
* 1950: &quot;&quot;, collection of songs to texts by Becher
* 1950: &quot;Mitte des Jahrhunderts&quot; (after Becher); Four Lieder on &quot;Die Tage der Commune&quot;; Children&#x27;s Songs (with Brecht)
* 1950: &quot;Kinderhymne&quot; to a poem by Brecht
* 1952: &quot;Das Lied vom Glück&quot; (&quot;The Song of Happiness&quot;; after Brecht); &quot;Das Vorbild&quot; (after Goethe)
* 1954 : &quot;Winterschlacht-Suite&quot;
* 1955: &quot;Night and Fog&quot;, music for the film &quot;Herr Puntila and His Servant Matti&quot;; &quot;Puntila-Suite&quot;; &quot;Im Blumengarten&quot; (&quot;In the flower garden&quot;); &quot;Die haltbare Graugans&quot;; Three Lieder after Brecht; music for the 1955 film &quot;Bel Ami&quot;
* 1956: &quot;Vier Szenen auf dem Lande&quot; (&quot;Katzgraben&quot;) (&quot;Four Scenes from the Country&quot;, after Erwin Strittmatter); Children&#x27;s Songs (after Brecht); &quot;Fidelio&quot; (after Beethoven)
* 1957: &quot;Sturm-Suite für Orchester&quot;; &quot;Bilder aus der Kriegsfibel&quot;; &quot;Die Teppichweber von Kujan-Bulak&quot; (&quot;The Carpetweavers of Kujan-Bulak&quot;, with Brecht); &quot;Lied der Tankisten&quot; (text by Weinert); &quot;Regimenter gehn&quot;; &quot;Marsch der Zeit&quot; (&quot;March of Time&quot;, after Vladimir Mayakovsky); Three Lieder (after Mayakovsky and Peter Hacks); &quot;Sputnik-Lied&quot; (&quot;Sputnik Song&quot;, text of Kuba (Kurt Barthel)); film music for &quot;Les Sorcières de Salem&quot; (&quot;The Crucible&quot;)
* 1935–1958: &quot;Deutsche Sinfonie&quot; (after texts of Bertolt Brecht and Ignazio Silone)
* 1958: &quot;Am 1. Mai&quot; (&quot;To May Day&quot;, with Brecht)
* 1959: 36 more songs on texts by Kurt Tucholsky for Gisela May and Ernst Busch;
* 1962: &quot;Ernste Gesänge&quot; (&quot;Serious Songs&quot;), seven &quot;Lieder&quot; after Friedrich Hölderlin, Berthold Viertel, Giacomo Leopardi, Helmut Richter, and Stephan Hermlin

Brilliant Classics issued in 2014 the 10-CD collection &quot;Edition Hanns Eisler&quot;.

==Writings==
*&quot;A Rebel in Music: Selected Writings&quot;. New York: International Publishers, 1978 

==References==
===Works cited===

==Further reading==
* Alonso, Diego. (6 December 2019) &quot;From the People to the People: The Reception of Hanns Eisler&#x27;s Critical Theory of Music in Spain through the Writings of Otto Mayer-Serra&quot;, in: &quot;Musicologica Austriaca. Journal for Austrian Music Studies&quot; ()
* Boyd, Caleb (2013). &quot;&quot;They Called Me An Alien&quot;: Hanns Eisler&#x27;s American Years, 1935–1948&quot;. M.A. thesis. Arizona State University.
* Horn, Eva, &quot;Bertolt Brecht and the Politics of Secrecy&quot;, p. 17
* 

==External links==

* The International Hanns Eisler Society
* North American Hanns Eisler Forum 
* Orel Foundation Hanns Eisler – biography, bibliography, works and discography.
* Hanns Eisler Complete Edition (projected publication of all his scores and writings)
* Hanns Eisler Project
* Georg Eisler Gallery
* Hanns Eisler FBI File</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q78704" start="0" end="12" title="Hanns Eisler" label="Hanns Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q48147" start="113" end="128" title="Auferstanden aus Ruinen" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="132" end="144" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="185" end="199" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q569460" start="244" end="284" title="Hochschule für Musik Hanns Eisler Berlin" label="Hochschule für Musik Hanns Eisler Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="356" end="363" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="367" end="373" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q84800" start="394" end="407" title="Rudolf Eisler" label="Rudolf Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="477" end="484" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="522" end="530" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970302" start="534" end="541" title="Swabians" label="Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="580" end="586" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q105273" start="606" end="613" title="Gerhart Eisler" label="Gerhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q71775" start="663" end="671" title="Ruth Fischer" label="Elfriede"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="692" end="718" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="753" end="766" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774292" start="787" end="801" title="anti-Stalinism" label="anti-Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="863" end="901" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="1164" end="1185" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1202" end="1213" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="1462" end="1479" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="1551" end="1562" title="Twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="1566" end="1572" title="Serialism" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q88364" start="1600" end="1616" title="Charlotte Demant" label="Charlotte Demant"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="1810" end="1836" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q700202" start="1866" end="1880" title="November Group (German)" label="November Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q215199" start="1959" end="1971" title="Georg Eisler" label="Georg Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="2141" end="2145" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="2150" end="2157" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="2198" end="2212" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="2237" end="2244" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q318208" start="3237" end="3264" title="The Decision (play)" label="The Decision (Die Maßnahme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q874809" start="3285" end="3295" title="The Mother (Brecht play)" label="The Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q544256" start="3319" end="3350" title="Schweik in the Second World War" label="Schweik in the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="3467" end="3481" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298798" start="3514" end="3529" title="Solidarity Song" label="Solidarity Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q124842" start="3969" end="3981" title="Slatan Dudow" label="Slatan Dudow"/>
<link wikidata="Q582569" start="4014" end="4025" title="Kuhle Wampe" label="Kuhle Wampe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="4120" end="4130" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28031" start="4186" end="4195" title="Svendborg" label="Svendborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="4256" end="4262" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4264" end="4270" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4272" end="4277" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4279" end="4285" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="4291" end="4297" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="4321" end="4326" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4328" end="4334" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="4340" end="4347" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="4415" end="4420" title="East Coast of the United States" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="4424" end="4429" title="West Coast of the United States" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q322543" start="4509" end="4526" title="Einheitsfrontlied" label="United Front Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918599" start="4707" end="4721" title="United States visa" label="permanent visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4726" end="4739" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q599316" start="4766" end="4800" title="The New School" label="The New School for Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4876" end="4887" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4931" end="4941" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q758585" start="5159" end="5176" title="Hangmen Also Die!" label="Hangmen Also Die!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704665" start="5193" end="5218" title="None but the Lonely Heart (film)" label="None but the Lonely Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="5246" end="5252" title="Academy Award" label="Oscars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="5390" end="5400" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="5715" end="5737" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q269357" start="5783" end="5795" title="Joseph Losey" label="Joseph Losey"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="5917" end="5934" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Theodor W. Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="6146" end="6163" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001632" start="6299" end="6316" title="Deutsche Sinfonie" label="Deutsche Sinfonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q168431" start="6387" end="6401" title="Ignazio Silone" label="Ignazio Silone"/>
<link wikidata="Q63699" start="6500" end="6513" title="Eduard Mörike" label="Eduard Mörike"/>
<link wikidata="Q75889" start="6515" end="6534" title="Friedrich Hölderlin" label="Friedrich Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="6540" end="6546" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q216860" start="6648" end="6652" title="lied" label="lied"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6746" end="6754" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864771" start="6802" end="6821" title="Hollywood blacklist" label="Hollywood blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q375336" start="6829" end="6840" title="film studio" label="film studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="6878" end="6919" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Committee on Un-American Activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="7020" end="7029" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q71775" start="7065" end="7077" title="Ruth Fischer" label="Ruth Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="7243" end="7258" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="7277" end="7292" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="7294" end="7307" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="7312" end="7329" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q669929" start="7565" end="7575" title="The Circus (1928 film)" label="The Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="7740" end="7753" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7820" end="7836" title="Eisler on the Go" label="Eisler on the Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q508412" start="7870" end="7881" title="Billy Bragg" label="Billy Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q637771" start="7886" end="7891" title="Wilco" label="Wilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q847859" start="7916" end="7930" title="Mermaid Avenue" label="Mermaid Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q319654" start="8336" end="8353" title="LaGuardia Airport" label="LaGuardia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q99172" start="8366" end="8372" title="Václav Havel Airport Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="8788" end="8795" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="8816" end="8827" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="8832" end="8844" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48147" start="8862" end="8877" title="Auferstanden aus Ruinen" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="8885" end="8911" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="8924" end="8931" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q57386" start="8966" end="8980" title="Kurt Tucholsky" label="Kurt Tucholsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="9149" end="9154" title="Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="9166" end="9174" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="9308" end="9321" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q154031" start="9341" end="9366" title="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War" label="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q158547" start="9439" end="9456" title="Neues Deutschland" label="Neues Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="9462" end="9465" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="SED"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628" start="9732" end="9740" title="Walter Ulbricht" label="Ulbricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q414110" start="9926" end="9948" title="Berlin Academy of Arts" label="Berlin Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="10059" end="10087" title="East German uprising of 1953" label="East German uprising of 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140920" start="10400" end="10456" title="20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q569460" start="10631" end="10655" title="Hochschule für Musik &amp;quot;Hanns Eisler&amp;quot;" label="East Berlin conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q323063" start="10813" end="10826" title="Wolf Biermann" label="Wolf Biermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="10941" end="10953" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q564922" start="11302" end="11325" title="Dorotheenstadt cemetery" label="Dorotheenstadt cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="11555" end="11565" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="11646" end="11661" title="Chronic Fatigue" label="chronic fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="11666" end="11678" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q44652" start="11780" end="11801" title="Christian Morgenstern" label="Christian Morgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="11861" end="11879" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q61263" start="11925" end="11932" title="Klabund" label="Klabund"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="12402" end="12416" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62115" start="12539" end="12552" title="Erich Weinert" label="Erich Weinert"/>
<link wikidata="Q469963" start="12583" end="12594" title="Béla Balázs" label="Béla Balázs"/>
<link wikidata="Q140453" start="12827" end="12848" title="Des Knaben Wunderhorn" label="Des Knaben Wunderhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298798" start="12923" end="12939" title="Solidaritätslied" label="Solidaritätslied"/>
<link wikidata="Q318208" start="13216" end="13228" title="The Decision (play)" label="Die Maßnahme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="13287" end="13301" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q77984" start="13362" end="13376" title="Walter Mehring" label="Walter Mehring"/>
<link wikidata="Q55072099" start="13411" end="13420" title="B. Traven" label="B. Traven"/>
<link wikidata="Q57386" start="13422" end="13436" title="Kurt Tucholsky" label="Kurt Tucholsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q874809" start="13558" end="13568" title="The Mother (Brecht play)" label="The Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="13601" end="13612" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Maxim Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519739" start="13693" end="13708" title="Semyon Kirsanov" label="Semyon Kirsanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q582569" start="13818" end="13829" title="Kuhle Wampe" label="Kuhle Wampe"/>
<link wikidata="Q238616" start="14505" end="14516" title="Joris Ivens" label="Joris Ivens"/>
<link wikidata="Q722164" start="14561" end="14577" title="Sergei Tretyakov (writer)" label="Sergei Tretyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q322543" start="14670" end="14687" title="Einheitsfrontlied" label="Einheitsfrontlied"/>
<link wikidata="Q116777435" start="14967" end="14999" title="Round Heads and Pointed Heads" label="Die Rundköpfe und die Spitzköpfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q584238" start="15189" end="15196" title="BACH motif" label="B–A–C–H"/>
<link wikidata="Q874809" start="15291" end="15301" title="The Mother (Brecht play)" label="The Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="15322" end="15329" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q168431" start="15566" end="15580" title="Ignazio Silone" label="Ignazio Silone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013723" start="15601" end="15615" title="Bread and Wine (novel)" label="Bread and Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435803" start="15632" end="15641" title="Fontamara" label="Fontamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q269357" start="16649" end="16661" title="Joseph Losey" label="Joseph Losey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734844" start="16740" end="16761" title="The Forgotten Village" label="The Forgotten Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q15815220" start="16781" end="16794" title="Herbert Kline" label="Herbert Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q357624" start="16799" end="16815" title="Alexander Hammid" label="Alexander Hammid"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="16828" end="16842" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16881" end="16904" title="Woodbury, Connecticut#The Woodbury Songbook" label="Woodbury-Liederbüchlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q607420" start="16989" end="17010" title="Woodbury, Connecticut" label="Woodbury, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q238616" start="17103" end="17114" title="Joris Ivens" label="Joris Ivens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057777" start="17126" end="17130" title="Rain (1929 film)" label="Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="17164" end="17181" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q758585" start="17392" end="17409" title="Hangmen Also Die!" label="Hangmen Also Die!"/>
<link wikidata="Q544256" start="17460" end="17491" title="Schweik in the Second World War" label="Schweik in the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268591" start="17629" end="17645" title="The Spanish Main" label="The Spanish Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q369190" start="17665" end="17678" title="Frank Borzage" label="Frank Borzage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="17754" end="17760" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q302750" start="17809" end="17824" title="Life of Galileo" label="Life of Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474998" start="17862" end="17880" title="A Scandal in Paris" label="A Scandal in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020579" start="17897" end="17913" title="Deadline at Dawn" label="Deadline at Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762509" start="17965" end="17987" title="The Woman on the Beach" label="The Woman on the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q50713" start="18012" end="18023" title="Jean Renoir" label="Jean Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q44862" start="18053" end="18067" title="Johann Nestroy" label="Johann Nestroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48147" start="18367" end="18390" title="Auferstanden aus Ruinen" label="Auferstanden aus Ruinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58057" start="18434" end="18452" title="Johannes R. Becher" label="Johannes R. Becher"/>
<link wikidata="Q872842" start="18696" end="18707" title="Kinderhymne" label="Kinderhymne"/>
<link wikidata="Q706373" start="18919" end="18932" title="Night and Fog (1956 film)" label="Night and Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613921" start="18965" end="18999" title="Herr Puntila and His Servant Matti (1960 film)" label="Herr Puntila and His Servant Matti"/>
<link wikidata="Q815070" start="19190" end="19197" title="Bel Ami (1955 film)" label="Bel Ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q132964" start="19755" end="19774" title="Vladimir Mayakovsky" label="Vladimir Mayakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q61194" start="19812" end="19823" title="Peter Hacks" label="Peter Hacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q876259" start="19965" end="19977" title="The Crucible (1957 film)" label="The Crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001632" start="20004" end="20021" title="Deutsche Sinfonie" label="Deutsche Sinfonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q57386" start="20181" end="20195" title="Kurt Tucholsky" label="Kurt Tucholsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q452526" start="20200" end="20210" title="Gisela May" label="Gisela May"/>
<link wikidata="Q159117" start="20215" end="20226" title="Ernst Busch (actor)" label="Ernst Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q75889" start="20323" end="20342" title="Friedrich Hölderlin" label="Friedrich Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q78966" start="20344" end="20360" title="Berthold Viertel" label="Berthold Viertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172599" start="20362" end="20378" title="Giacomo Leopardi" label="Giacomo Leopardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q77744" start="20400" end="20415" title="Stephan Hermlin" label="Stephan Hermlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644784" start="20417" end="20435" title="Brilliant Classics" label="Brilliant Classics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262448" wikidata="Q670257" url="?curid=262448" title="Weissenstein">
<text>The Weissenstein () is a mountain of the Jura, located north of Solothurn in the Swiss canton of Solothurn. The culminating point of the chain is distinguished by the name . It is the easternmost summit above 1,300 metres in the Jura Mountains.

Until the end of 2009, there was a chairlift from Oberdorf to the spa hotel on the summit near the Weissenstein Pass. It was replaced by a gondola lift at the end of 2014. The tunnel of the railway line Solothurn–Moutier from Oberdorf to Gänsbrunnen on the other side was opened in 1908. The gondola lift crosses the railway track in front of the tunnel portal at Oberdorf, which is the only setting of this kind in Switzerland.

The pass road leading from the village of Oberdorf across the Weissenstein Pass () to Gänsbrunnen is one of the steepest in Switzerland (22%).

==References==
==External links==
* Seilbahn Weissenstein, the gondola lift operator, in German.
* Weissenstein on Hikr</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q670257" start="4" end="16" title="Weissenstein" label="Weissenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="25" end="33" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q178611" start="41" end="45" title="Jura Mountains" label="Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q68965" start="64" end="73" title="Solothurn" label="Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11929" start="87" end="106" title="canton of Solothurn" label="canton of Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q850767" start="281" end="290" title="chairlift" label="chairlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q70237" start="296" end="304" title="Oberdorf, Solothurn" label="Oberdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="316" end="321" title="hotel" label="hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q681744" start="345" end="362" title="Weissenstein Pass" label="Weissenstein Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576693" start="385" end="397" title="gondola lift" label="gondola lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="422" end="428" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="436" end="443" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q67157" start="459" end="466" title="Moutier" label="Moutier"/>
<link wikidata="Q66349" start="484" end="495" title="Gänsbrunnen" label="Gänsbrunnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133056" start="680" end="689" title="pass road" label="pass road"/>
<link wikidata="Q681744" start="738" end="755" title="Weissenstein Pass" label="Weissenstein Pass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262457" wikidata="Q353978" url="?curid=262457" title="R. Lee Ermey">
<text>Ronald Lee Ermey (March 24, 1944 – April 15, 2018) was an American actor and U.S. Marine drill instructor. He achieved fame for his role as Gunnery Sergeant Hartman in the 1987 film &quot;Full Metal Jacket&quot;, which earned him a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actor. Ermey was also a United States Marine Corps staff sergeant and an honorary gunnery sergeant.

Ermey was often typecast in authority figure roles, such as Mayor Tilman in the film &quot;Mississippi Burning&quot; (1988), Bill Bowerman in &quot;Prefontaine&quot; (1997), Sheriff Hoyt in &quot;The Texas Chainsaw Massacre&quot; (2003) and its prequel &quot;The Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Beginning&quot; (2006), Jimmy Lee Farnsworth in &quot;Fletch Lives&quot; (1989), a police captain in &quot;Seven&quot; (1995), plastic army men leader Sarge in the first three films of the &quot;Toy Story&quot; franchise (1995–2010), Major &quot;Maddogg&quot; Madison in &quot;Rocket Power,&quot; and John House in &quot;House&quot;.

On television, Ermey hosted two programs on the History Channel: &quot;Mail Call&quot;, in which he answered viewers&#x27; questions about various military issues both modern and historic; and &quot;Lock n&#x27; Load with R. Lee Ermey&quot;, which concerned the development of different types of weapons. He also hosted &quot;GunnyTime&quot; on the Outdoor Channel.

==Early life==
Ermey was born in Emporia, Kansas, on March 24, 1944, to John Edward (1924–2016) and Betty (née Pantle) Ermey (1926–2004). A few years after his birth, his father moved the family (including Ermey and his five brothers) to a small farm outside Kansas City, Kansas. Then, in 1958, when Ermey was 14, his father moved the family to a rural home between Zillah, Washington, and Granger, Washington.

As a teenager, Ermey was an admitted &quot;troublemaker and a bit of a hell-raiser&quot;, and frequently got into trouble. In 1961, when Ermey was 17, his mother took him to a judge in an attempt to correct his behavior. The judge gave the young Ermey a choice between military service or jail; Ermey chose military service.

==Military career==
Ermey enlisted in the United States Marine Corps in 1961 at age 17 and went through recruit training at Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego in San Diego, California. He served in the aviation support field for a few years before becoming a drill instructor in India Company, 3rd Recruit Training Battalion, at Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego, where he was assigned from 1965 to 1967.

Ermey then served in Marine Wing Support Group 17 at Marine Corps Air Station Futenma on Okinawa, Japan. In 1968, he was ordered to South Vietnam with MWSG-17, and spent 14 months in-country. The remainder of his service was on Okinawa, where he was advanced to Staff Sergeant (E-6). He was medically retired in 1972 because of several injuries. On May 17, 2002, he received an honorary promotion to Gunnery Sergeant (E-7) by Commandant of the Marine Corps General James L. Jones.

Ermey regularly took the opportunity to speak with new recruits, visiting the Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego in San Diego, California, and the Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island (located within Port Royal, South Carolina, approximately five miles (8.0 km) south of Beaufort). An episode of &quot;Mail Call&quot; was filmed at the latter of these two training bases.

==Acting career==
===Early technical advice and first roles===
After his discharge from the Marine Corps, Ermey attended the University of Manila in the Philippines, using his G.I. Bill benefits. While there, he was cast in his first film role, playing a Marine drill instructor in &quot;The Boys in Company C&quot; (1978). Then, while serving as a technical advisor to director Francis Ford Coppola, he was also cast as a First Air Cavalry helicopter pilot in one scene in &quot;Apocalypse Now&quot; (1979). He also appeared as a Gunnery Sergeant in 1984&#x27;s &quot;Purple Hearts&quot;: shot, like all his early films, in the Philippines.

=== &quot;Full Metal Jacket&quot; ===
Ermey had infrequent film roles until 1987, when he was cast as drill instructor Gunnery Sergeant Hartman in Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s &quot;Full Metal Jacket&quot;. As with &quot;The Boys in Company C&quot; and &quot;Apocalypse Now&quot;, he was initially hired by the production only as a technical advisor. 

Ermey recorded several 30-minute sessions on videocassette with the first casting choice for Hartman, Tim Colceri, in which they hurled insults at a group of extras. Kubrick had intended these rehearsals as a venue for Colceri to learn how drill instructors could remove the civilian mindset from the personalities of new recruits. Ermey, realizing that Kubrick was watching the tapes he recorded with Colceri, treated the recordings as an audition for the role of Hartman. To this end, Ermey not only continued berating recruits long after Colceri&#x27;s 30-minute practice session had ended, but had stagehands pelt him with tennis balls and oranges as he did it, showing a real drill instructor&#x27;s level of concentration while at work.

Kubrick grew fascinated with Ermey&#x27;s performances, which sometimes ran to two hours—the maximum time that could be recorded on VHS cassettes. The director later said to &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; that Ermey&#x27;s intense familiarity with the role had perfected his delivery and fluency of improvisation to a level he could not hope to discover in a professional actor, no matter how many takes they were given. Colceri was replaced by Ermey before filming. In consolation for his months of preparation for the role of Hartman, Colceri was given the smaller role of a helicopter door-gunner. 

Seeking authenticity for the war movie, Kubrick allowed Ermey to write, edit and improvise his own dialogue. His was the only performance in a Kubrick film that had a significant proportion of improvised dialogue, with Ermey writing more than 50 percent of his dialogue. Kubrick later praised Ermey as an excellent performer. Despite the technical demands of Ermey&#x27;s extended dialogue scenes — his character has by far the most lines in the film — the actor sometimes satisfied Kubrick after only three takes, because he was prepared. This was extremely unusual on a Kubrick production, where the director would regularly demand 40 takes, and in some circumstances considerably more due to actors focusing more on remembering their lines than delivering believable emotions. Ermey&#x27;s performance was extremely well-received and he was nominated for a Golden Globe Award as Best Supporting Actor.

=== Later films ===
Ermey eventually appeared in about 60 films, often in roles of authority figures similar to his character in &quot;Full Metal Jacket&quot;. These include Mayor Tilman in &quot;Mississippi Burning&quot; (1988), Sergeant Major Bill Hafner in &quot;The Siege of Firebase Gloria&quot; (also a Vietnam film, 1989), Jimmy Lee Farnsworth in &quot;Fletch Lives&quot; (1989), General Kramer in &quot;Toy Soldiers&quot; (1991), a police captain in &quot;Se7en&quot; (1995), the ghost of a drill instructor in &quot;The Frighteners&quot; (1996), Bill Bowerman in &quot;Prefontaine&quot; (1997), Frank Martin in the remake of &quot;Willard&quot; (2003), and Sheriff Hoyt in &quot;The Texas Chainsaw Massacre&quot; (2003) and &quot;The Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Beginning&quot; (2006). He also appeared in &quot;Sommersby&quot;, &quot;Naked Gun : The Final Insult&quot;, &quot;On Deadly Ground&quot;, &quot;Murder in the First&quot;, &quot;Leaving Las Vegas&quot;, &quot;Dead Man Walking&quot;, &quot;Switchback&quot;, &quot;Life&quot;, &quot;Saving Silverman&quot;, &quot;The Salton Sea&quot;, &quot;Man of the House&quot;, and &quot;The Watch&quot;.

Ermey also lent his voice as plastic army men leader Sarge to &quot;Toy Story&quot; (1995), &quot;Toy Story 2&quot; (1999), and &quot;Toy Story 3&quot; (2010), as well as a sergeant in &quot;X-Men 3&quot; (2006). His voice was also briefly heard through a voice disguise machine in &quot;&quot; (2001).

===Television===

Ermey hosted two programs on the History Channel. The first program, &quot;Mail Call&quot; (2002–2009), consisted of him answering viewers&#x27; questions about various military issues both modern and historic. Ermey frequently discussed weaponry, tactical matters, and military history. &quot;Mail Call&quot;″s subject matter was dictated by viewer emails; one episode focused on an M1 Abrams tank, while others involved World War II secrets, and others focused on elements of medieval warfare. The set consisted of a military tent, other military gear and weapons, and a World War II jeep. According to a 2005 episode of &quot;Mail Call&quot; filmed at Whiteman Air Force Base, he was the 341st person to fly in the B-2 stealth bomber. 

Ermey hosted a second History Channel program entitled &quot;Lock n&#x27; Load with R. Lee Ermey&quot; (2009), which discussed the history of various weapons used by militaries of today. 

Ermey served as host of &quot;GunnyTime&quot;, a show that debuted on Outdoor Channel in 2015.

Ermey guest-starred on a number of shows, usually appearing in a commanding military role. The shows included &quot;Kim Possible&quot;, &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Family Guy&quot;, &quot;SpongeBob SquarePants&quot;, &quot;The Grim Adventures of Billy &amp; Mandy&quot;, &quot;Rocket Power&quot;, &quot;The Angry Beavers&quot;, &quot;Fillmore!&quot;, &quot;Miami Vice&quot;, &quot;Human Target&quot;, &quot;All Dogs Go to Heaven: The Series&quot;, &quot;Rough Riders&quot;, &quot;Cracker&quot;, &quot;My Life as a Teenage Robot&quot;, and &quot;Invader Zim&quot;. 

In 1993, Ermey appeared as the father of Bruce Campbell&#x27;s character in &quot;The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.&quot; for two episodes (1 and 8) of season one. On December 14, 1994, Ermey played a sheriff in &quot;Tales from the Crypt&quot;, season six, episode nine, &quot;Staired in Horror&quot;. In 1995, Ermey played Sergeant Major Frank Bougus, USMC in the pilot episode of &quot;&quot;. He also played the role of Reverend Patrick Findley, a minister, on &quot;The X-Files&quot; season 3, episode 11, &quot;Revelations&quot;.

Ermey also made guest appearances on the television drama &quot;House&quot;, playing the role of Dr. Gregory House&#x27;s father, who was a decorated naval aviator while serving in the Marine Corps (&quot;Daddy&#x27;s Boy&quot;, &quot;Birthmarks&quot;), and the sitcom &quot;Scrubs&quot;, playing the Janitor&#x27;s father. He also voiced Wildcat in several episodes of &quot;&quot;. 

Ermey voiced Colonel Leslie &quot;Hap&quot; Hapablap in two episodes of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; (&quot;Sideshow Bob&#x27;s Last Gleaming&quot; and &quot;Waiting for Duffman&quot;). In the episode of &quot;SpongeBob SquarePants&quot; &quot;Inmates of Summer&quot;, he voiced an irate warden of a maximum-security island prison who demoralized the inmates whenever he could. In the episode of &quot;The Angry Beavers&quot; &quot;Fancy Prance&quot;, he voiced the Lipizzaner stallions&#x27; instructor, Drill Sergeant Goonther.

Ermey was also featured each week on ESPN&#x27;s &quot;College GameDay&quot;. His role was to insult the experts&#x27; incorrect picks from the previous week. In 2010, Ermey appeared in the &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot; episode &quot;Trophy&quot; as a paroled sex offender. In 2011, Ermey starred as a drill instructor on the &quot;X-Play&quot; special on &quot;Bulletstorm&quot;. In the &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode &quot;Grumpy Old Man&quot;, Ermey guest-starred, again as a drill instructor.

===Video games===
In 1993, Ermey played Lyle The Handyman in the full motion video game Mega-CD/Sega CD game &quot;Double Switch&quot;. In 1996, he was the player character&#x27;s superior officer in &quot;Earthsiege 2&quot;.

Ermey lent his voice to several video games, including &quot;Fallout Tactics: Brotherhood of Steel&quot; (as General Barnaky) and &quot;Crash Bandicoot: The Wrath of Cortex&quot; (as Wa-Wa). He also made a cameo in &quot;Real War: Air, Land, Sea&quot;, a real-time strategy video game based on the official Joint Chiefs of Staff training game. In 2014, he did voice-over work for &quot;Call of Duty: Ghosts&quot;.

Several characters have made references to Ermey and the character of Hartman. In the game &quot;Fallout 3&quot;, a recruitable companion is named Sergeant RL-3, a modified military robot with a personality very similar to Ermey (the companion&#x27;s name is a reference to Ermey&#x27;s initials wherein the 3 is leetspeak for the letter E). In the &quot;World of Warcraft: Cataclysm&quot; expansion there is a character named &quot;Lieutenant Emry&quot; that speaks some of Ermey&#x27;s signature lines from &quot;Full Metal Jacket&quot;. In &quot;Half-Life: Opposing Force&quot;, the drill sergeant from the initial boot camp stage had dialogue and mannerisms very similar to Ermey&#x27;s character in &quot;Full Metal Jacket&quot;.

===Commercials===
Ermey was an official spokesman for Black Book (National Auto Research), Glock firearms, TRU-SPEC apparel, Tupperware, Victory Motorcycles, Hoover, SOG Specialty Knives, WD-40, Young Marines, and appeared in commercials for Coors Light, Dick&#x27;s Sporting Goods, GEICO, and pistachio nuts. In late 2010, Ermey starred in a GEICO commercial as a drill-instructor-turned-therapist who insults a client, in a parody of some of his iconic characters. He provided the introduction for the Professional Bull Riders. He can be seen giving a service announcement for Alamo Drafthouse Cinemas, demanding that viewers be quiet during the film. He was a board member of the National Rifle Association of America.

==Personal life==
Ermey married his wife, Nila, in 1975. They had four children and remained married until his death.

===Business venture===
Ermey was a co-founder of Bravery Brewing in Lancaster, California.

===Military appearances===
On May 17, 2002, Ermey received an honorary post-service promotion to gunnery sergeant (E-7) from the Commandant of the Marine Corps General James L. Jones in recognition of his continuing support to Americans in military service.

Ermey traveled to Kuwait in June 2003 during the first phase of Operation Iraqi Freedom to film mail distribution by the Defense Department to service personnel for an episode of &quot;Mail Call&quot;.

He conducted morale tours, visiting United States troops in locations such as Al Kut, Iraq, and Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan, in which he filmed parts for his television show &quot;Mail Call&quot;. While at Bagram Airfield, he held a USO-type show in which he portrayed GySgt Hartman and conducted a comedy routine. He also did the same at Doha, Qatar and Camp Doha, Kuwait City, Kuwait, in 2003.

===Political views===
Ermey described himself as an independent. In the 2008 presidential election, Ermey voted for Barack Obama, but subsequently criticized his economic policies, accusing him of attempting to &quot;impose socialism&quot; on the American people and &quot;destroying the country.&quot; Ermey said in a 2015 interview that he supported Texas Senator Ted Cruz for president. He said, &quot;You know what, I just watched Ted Cruz – I mean, what a tough act to follow. I&#x27;m not going to tell you who I&#x27;m going to vote for, but I&#x27;m going to let you guess [...] and the first two guesses don&#x27;t count!&quot; He endorsed presidential candidate Donald Trump in 2016. 

Ermey was a supporter of the Second Amendment and a board member of the National Rifle Association.

==Death==
Ermey died at a hospital in Santa Monica, California, from complications related to pneumonia on the morning of April 15, 2018, at the age of 74. His funeral was held in Arlington National Cemetery on Friday, January 18, 2019.

==Awards and decorations==

Ermey was retroactively awarded the Marine Corps Drill Instructor Ribbon after he retired from the military due to his prior service as a Marine Corps recruit training instructor. Ermey&#x27;s military awards included:


==Filmography==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Video games ===
==Other media==

* Ermey recorded voice lines for a &quot;talking&quot; 12-inch tall &quot;motivational action figure&quot; depicting him in USMC drill instructor uniform, which replays his signature put-downs with the press of an electronic button on the back. Sideshow Collectibles manufactured the figure in two versions, one with (somewhat) family-friendly language and one with &quot;extra-salty&quot; remarks that include profanity; the latter is packaged with an R rating as a warning to consumers. One of these figures appears occasionally on &quot;Mail Call&quot;, wherein it is often referred to as &#x27;Mini-Lee&#x27; by the host, and is sometimes seen berating a G.I. Joe.
* Avenue N in Palmdale, CA was successfully petitioned to be renamed &quot;R. Lee Ermey Avenue&quot; in memoriam of the Antelope Valley resident. On 10 November 2023, at 1110 hours, an eastbound stretch of Avenue N east of El Camino Sierra was officially opened as the R. Lee Ermey Musical Highway. By driving over the grooved pavement at 45 mph, the road will play 30 seconds of the Marine Corps Hymn.

==See also==
* 

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q353978" start="0" end="16" title="R. Lee Ermey" label="Ronald Lee Ermey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="77" end="88" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307556" start="89" end="105" title="drill instructor" label="drill instructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q925133" start="140" end="156" title="Gunnery sergeant" label="Gunnery Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q243439" start="188" end="205" title="Full Metal Jacket" label="Full Metal Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="232" end="244" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q723830" start="260" end="281" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="300" end="326" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337825" start="327" end="341" title="staff sergeant" label="staff sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="393" end="401" title="Typecasting (acting)" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q918367" start="468" end="487" title="Mississippi Burning" label="Mississippi Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q861967" start="502" end="515" title="Bill Bowerman" label="Bill Bowerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657831" start="525" end="536" title="Prefontaine (film)" label="Prefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="551" end="563" title="List of The Texas Chainsaw Massacre characters#Charlie Hewitt / Sheriff Hoyt" label="Sheriff Hoyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q392696" start="573" end="600" title="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (2003 film)" label="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="" start="636" end="678" title="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Beginning" label="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754850" start="723" end="735" title="Fletch Lives" label="Fletch Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q190908" start="776" end="781" title="Seven (1995 film)" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241623" start="796" end="812" title="Army men" label="plastic army men"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="820" end="825" title="List of Toy Story characters#Sarge and the Bucket O Soldiers" label="Sarge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316015" start="858" end="889" title="Toy Story (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Toy Story&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349634" start="946" end="958" title="Rocket Power" label="Rocket Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q23558" start="990" end="995" title="House (TV series)" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="1052" end="1067" title="History Channel" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735680" start="1075" end="1084" title="Mail Call (TV series)" label="Mail Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q13451815" start="1203" end="1238" title="Lock n&amp;#x27; Load with R. Lee Ermey" label="Lock n&amp;#x27; Load with R. Lee Ermey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046083" start="1353" end="1368" title="Outdoor Channel" label="Outdoor Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583523" start="1404" end="1419" title="Emporia, Kansas" label="Emporia, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="1630" end="1649" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q781706" start="1737" end="1755" title="Zillah, Washington" label="Zillah, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503906" start="1761" end="1780" title="Granger, Washington" label="Granger, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2052" end="2076" title="Deferred adjudication#Federal_Consequences" label="military service or jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="2151" end="2177" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q615972" start="2233" end="2269" title="Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego" label="Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="2273" end="2294" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764247" start="2541" end="2569" title="Marine Wing Support Group 17" label="Marine Wing Support Group 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031547" start="2573" end="2605" title="Marine Corps Air Station Futenma" label="Marine Corps Air Station Futenma"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="2609" end="2616" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2618" end="2623" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="2652" end="2665" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863490" start="2798" end="2801" title="Uniformed services pay grades of the United States" label="E-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863490" start="2938" end="2941" title="Uniformed services pay grades of the United States" label="E-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115074" start="2946" end="2976" title="Commandant of the United States Marine Corps" label="Commandant of the Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q467451" start="2985" end="2999" title="James L. Jones" label="James L. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q615972" start="3080" end="3116" title="Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego" label="Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="3120" end="3141" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424369" start="3151" end="3191" title="Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island" label="Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q926275" start="3208" end="3234" title="Port Royal, South Carolina" label="Port Royal, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q813376" start="3279" end="3287" title="Beaufort, South Carolina" label="Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735680" start="3310" end="3319" title="Mail Call (TV series)" label="Mail Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q658984" start="3506" end="3526" title="University of Manila" label="University of Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484269" start="3557" end="3566" title="G.I. Bill" label="G.I. Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520085" start="3669" end="3690" title="The Boys in Company C" label="The Boys in Company C"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692317" start="3730" end="3747" title="technical advisor" label="technical advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="3760" end="3780" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q182692" start="3861" end="3875" title="Apocalypse Now" label="Apocalypse Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261423" start="3950" end="3963" title="Purple Hearts (1984 film)" label="Purple Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q243439" start="4200" end="4217" title="Full Metal Jacket" label="Full Metal Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="4416" end="4429" title="VHS" label="videocassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433896" start="4473" end="4484" title="Tim Colceri" label="Tim Colceri"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="5295" end="5308" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="6573" end="6591" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q723830" start="6595" end="6616" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q918367" start="6815" end="6834" title="Mississippi Burning" label="Mississippi Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337466" start="6885" end="6913" title="The Siege of Firebase Gloria" label="The Siege of Firebase Gloria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754850" start="6979" end="6991" title="Fletch Lives" label="Fletch Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q895856" start="7030" end="7042" title="Toy Soldiers (1991 film)" label="Toy Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190908" start="7083" end="7088" title="Seven (1995 film)" label="Se7en"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332274" start="7144" end="7159" title="The Frighteners" label="The Frighteners"/>
<link wikidata="Q861967" start="7174" end="7187" title="Bill Bowerman" label="Bill Bowerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657831" start="7197" end="7208" title="Prefontaine (film)" label="Prefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892163" start="7259" end="7266" title="Willard (2003 film)" label="Willard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7285" end="7297" title="List of The Texas Chainsaw Massacre characters#Charlie Hewitt / Sheriff Hoyt" label="Sheriff Hoyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q392696" start="7307" end="7334" title="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (2003 film)" label="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7358" end="7400" title="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Beginning" label="The Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q918901" start="7441" end="7450" title="Sommersby" label="Sommersby"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7464" end="7492" title="Naked Gun 33 1/3: The Final Insult" label="Naked Gun : The Final Insult"/>
<link wikidata="Q759351" start="7506" end="7522" title="On Deadly Ground" label="On Deadly Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154802" start="7536" end="7555" title="Murder in the First (film)" label="Murder in the First"/>
<link wikidata="Q280918" start="7569" end="7586" title="Leaving Las Vegas" label="Leaving Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q587891" start="7600" end="7616" title="Dead Man Walking (film)" label="Dead Man Walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092528" start="7630" end="7640" title="Switchback (film)" label="Switchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534737" start="7654" end="7658" title="Life (1999 film)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q198451" start="7672" end="7688" title="Saving Silverman" label="Saving Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544258" start="7702" end="7716" title="The Salton Sea (2002 film)" label="The Salton Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194283" start="7730" end="7746" title="Man of the House (2005 film)" label="Man of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q29313" start="7764" end="7773" title="The Watch (2012 film)" label="The Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241623" start="7811" end="7827" title="Army men" label="plastic army men"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7835" end="7840" title="List of Toy Story characters#Sarge and the Bucket O Soldiers" label="Sarge"/>
<link wikidata="Q171048" start="7850" end="7859" title="Toy Story" label="Toy Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q187266" start="7880" end="7891" title="Toy Story 2" label="Toy Story 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q187278" start="7916" end="7927" title="Toy Story 3" label="Toy Story 3"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7973" end="7980" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="8137" end="8152" title="History (U.S. TV network)" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735680" start="8179" end="8188" title="Mail Call (TV series)" label="Mail Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="8488" end="8497" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8526" end="8538" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q655045" start="8582" end="8598" title="medieval warfare" label="medieval warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="8690" end="8694" title="jeep" label="jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940767" start="8759" end="8782" title="Whiteman Air Force Base" label="Whiteman Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q180285" start="8822" end="8840" title="Northrop Grumman B-2 Spirit" label="B-2 stealth bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13451815" start="8905" end="8940" title="Lock n&amp;#x27; Load with R. Lee Ermey" label="Lock n&amp;#x27; Load with R. Lee Ermey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046083" start="9103" end="9118" title="Outdoor Channel" label="Outdoor Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q203707" start="9245" end="9257" title="Kim Possible" label="Kim Possible"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="9271" end="9283" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="9311" end="9321" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83279" start="9335" end="9356" title="SpongeBob SquarePants" label="SpongeBob SquarePants"/>
<link wikidata="Q13923" start="9370" end="9410" title="The Grim Adventures of Billy &amp;amp; Mandy" label="The Grim Adventures of Billy &amp;amp; Mandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349634" start="9424" end="9436" title="Rocket Power" label="Rocket Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q647296" start="9450" end="9467" title="The Angry Beavers" label="The Angry Beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q958123" start="9481" end="9490" title="Fillmore!" label="Fillmore!"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="9504" end="9514" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937592" start="9528" end="9540" title="Human Target (1992 TV series)" label="Human Target"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9554" end="9587" title="All Dogs Go to Heaven: The Series" label="All Dogs Go to Heaven: The Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941857" start="9601" end="9613" title="Rough Riders (miniseries)" label="Rough Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001962" start="9627" end="9634" title="Cracker (U.S. TV series)" label="Cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q786120" start="9648" end="9674" title="My Life as a Teenage Robot" label="My Life as a Teenage Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q607346" start="9692" end="9703" title="Invader Zim" label="Invader Zim"/>
<link wikidata="Q309932" start="9754" end="9768" title="Bruce Campbell" label="Bruce Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210824" start="9795" end="9831" title="The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr." label="The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q715013" start="9934" end="9954" title="Tales from the Crypt (TV series)" label="Tales from the Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="10187" end="10198" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317849" start="10233" end="10244" title="Revelations (The X-Files)" label="Revelations"/>
<link wikidata="Q842945" start="10354" end="10367" title="Gregory House" label="Gregory House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="10403" end="10416" title="Naval aviation" label="naval aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q166017" start="10458" end="10474" title="Daddy&amp;#x27;s Boy (House)" label="Daddy&amp;#x27;s Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169086" start="10488" end="10498" title="Birthmarks (House)" label="Birthmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440387" start="10554" end="10561" title="Janitor (Scrubs)" label="Janitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24684" start="10592" end="10599" title="Wildcat (DC Comics)" label="Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443590" start="10743" end="10776" title="Sideshow Bob&amp;#x27;s Last Gleaming" label="Sideshow Bob&amp;#x27;s Last Gleaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595361" start="10793" end="10812" title="Waiting for Duffman" label="Waiting for Duffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q83279" start="10845" end="10866" title="SpongeBob SquarePants" label="SpongeBob SquarePants"/>
<link wikidata="Q647296" start="11037" end="11054" title="The Angry Beavers" label="The Angry Beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217671" start="11101" end="11121" title="Lipizzan" label="Lipizzaner stallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="11203" end="11207" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109034" start="11221" end="11236" title="College GameDay (football)" label="College GameDay"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11362" end="11399" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q795602" start="11518" end="11524" title="X-Play" label="X-Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q733561" start="11548" end="11559" title="Bulletstorm" label="Bulletstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="11580" end="11590" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612071" start="11611" end="11625" title="Grumpy Old Man" label="Grumpy Old Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="11749" end="11766" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853876" start="11799" end="11812" title="Double Switch (video game)" label="Double Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q820415" start="11890" end="11902" title="Earthsiege 2" label="Earthsiege 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11972" end="12009" title="Fallout Tactics: Brotherhood of Steel" label="Fallout Tactics: Brotherhood of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12047" end="12083" title="Crash Bandicoot: The Wrath of Cortex" label="Crash Bandicoot: The Wrath of Cortex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12094" end="12099" title="List of Crash Bandicoot characters#Elementals" label="Wa-Wa"/>
<link wikidata="Q57017301" start="12132" end="12156" title="Real War" label="Real War: Air, Land, Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="12166" end="12184" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="12218" end="12239" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12297" end="12317" title="Call of Duty: Ghosts" label="Call of Duty: Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q221164" start="12423" end="12432" title="Fallout 3" label="Fallout 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337" start="12639" end="12643" title="leet" label="leet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12681" end="12709" title="World of Warcraft: Cataclysm" label="World of Warcraft: Cataclysm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12875" end="12900" title="Half-Life: Opposing Force" label="Half-Life: Opposing Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q20313363" start="13116" end="13151" title="Black Book (National Auto Research)" label="Black Book (National Auto Research)"/>
<link wikidata="Q739882" start="13153" end="13158" title="Glock" label="Glock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090456" start="13169" end="13177" title="TRU-SPEC" label="TRU-SPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129117" start="13187" end="13197" title="Tupperware" label="Tupperware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879651" start="13199" end="13218" title="Victory Motorcycles" label="Victory Motorcycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535858" start="13220" end="13226" title="The Hoover Company" label="Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459879" start="13228" end="13248" title="SOG Specialty Knives" label="SOG Specialty Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q898762" start="13250" end="13255" title="WD-40" label="WD-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058283" start="13257" end="13270" title="Young Marines" label="Young Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168060" start="13304" end="13315" title="Coors Light" label="Coors Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272601" start="13317" end="13343" title="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods" label="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498689" start="13345" end="13350" title="GEICO" label="GEICO"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="13356" end="13370" title="Pistachio" label="pistachio nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617040" start="13566" end="13590" title="Professional Bull Riders" label="Professional Bull Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705954" start="13641" end="13664" title="Alamo Drafthouse Cinema" label="Alamo Drafthouse Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="13745" end="13782" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q494711" start="13972" end="13993" title="Lancaster, California" label="Lancaster, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q888238" start="14111" end="14114" title="United States Marine Corps rank insignia" label="E-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="14156" end="14163" title="General officer" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q467451" start="14164" end="14178" title="James L. Jones" label="James L. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="14273" end="14279" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="14319" end="14342" title="Iraq War" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="14376" end="14394" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Defense Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q328030" start="14536" end="14542" title="Kut" label="Al Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q800126" start="14554" end="14569" title="Bagram Airfield" label="Bagram Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="14692" end="14695" title="United Service Organizations" label="USO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="14798" end="14809" title="Doha" label="Doha, Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q201806" start="14814" end="14823" title="Camp Doha" label="Camp Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567308" start="14908" end="14919" title="Independent voter" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="14928" end="14954" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="14972" end="14984" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="15208" end="15213" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="15222" end="15230" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="15528" end="15540" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="15581" end="15597" title="Second Amendment" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="15691" end="15715" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="15747" end="15756" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="15833" end="15860" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307545" start="15968" end="15991" title="Drill Instructor Ribbon" label="Drill Instructor Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="16313" end="16326" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508472" start="16471" end="16492" title="Sideshow Collectibles" label="Sideshow Collectibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="16637" end="16646" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="16679" end="16687" title="Motion Picture Association of America film rating system" label="R rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052347" start="16885" end="16893" title="G.I. Joe" label="G.I. Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q488940" start="16909" end="16921" title="Palmdale, California" label="Palmdale, CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624332" start="17015" end="17030" title="Antelope Valley" label="Antelope Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331540" start="17279" end="17296" title="Marine Corps Hymn" label="Marine Corps Hymn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="262458" wikidata="Q237602" url="?curid=262458" title="Katie Price">
<text>Katrina Amy Alexandra Alexis Price (&quot;née&quot; Infield; born 22 May 1978) is an English media personality and model. She gained recognition in the late 1990s for her glamour modelling work&quot;,&quot; most notably on Page 3 of the tabloid newspaper &quot;The Sun&quot;, under the pseudonym Jordan.

Price appeared on the third series of the reality television show &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&quot; in 2004, and the following year, she was runner-up in the search for the UK&#x27;s entry for the Eurovision Song Contest&quot;.&quot; In 2006, she released her debut studio album, &quot;A Whole New World&quot;, in collaboration with her then-husband Peter Andre. Price returned to &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&quot; for its ninth series in 2009, and was the winner of the fifteenth series of &quot;Celebrity Big Brother&quot; in 2015&quot;.&quot; She has also starred in her own reality television series, including &quot;Jordan&quot; (2002–2005), &quot;Katie &amp; Peter&quot; (2004–2009), &quot;Signed by Katie Price&quot; (2011), &quot;Katie&quot; (2011–2012), and &quot;Katie Price: My Crazy Life&quot; (2017–2020).

Price has released eight autobiographies, eleven novels, one fashion book, and two series of children&#x27;s books. In 2023, she began presenting the podcast &quot;The Katie Price Show&quot;.

==Early life==
Born Katrina Amy Alexandra Alexis Infield in Brighton, East Sussex, in southeast England, Price was the only child of Ray and Amy Infield (&quot;née&quot; Charlier). Her father left the family when she was four, and in 1988 her mother married builder Paul Price, after which she acquired his surname. She has an older brother named Daniel and a younger sister named Sophie. She is of Italian, Spanish, English and Jewish descent. Price&#x27;s maternal grandmother was Jewish, but she is not religious.

Price attended Blatchington Mill School in Hove in East Sussex. She excelled at sport, swimming for Sussex in regional competitions. During her childhood, she also developed a passion for horses and horse-riding. She began modelling as a child, and at 13 she modelled for a clothing line.

At the age of 17, she changed her name, dropping the surname of her birth father Ray, who had left home when she was four, and taking the last name of her mother&#x27;s second husband, Paul Price.

==Career==

=== Modelling ===

At a friend&#x27;s suggestion, Price had professional photographs taken and decided to pursue a modelling career. The pictures were sent to a modelling agency in London, and in 1996 she appeared, billed as &quot;Jordan&quot;, on Page 3 in the British newspaper &quot;The Sun&quot;.

As Jordan, Price was famed for her surgically-enhanced breasts. At 20, she had the first in a succession of breast-enhancement surgeries, increasing her natural 32B to a 32FF.

Price also regularly appeared in the &quot;Daily Star&quot;, &quot;FHM&quot;, the British edition of &quot;Playboy&quot;, &quot;Nuts&quot;, &quot;Maxim&quot;, &quot;Loaded&quot;, &quot;Vogue&quot; and &quot;Esquire&quot; and also ran as a candidate in Stretford and Urmston during the 2001 UK general election, receiving 713 votes, 1.8% of the votes cast. In 2002, she appeared on the September cover of the American edition of &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine.

=== Television ===

Price made cameo appearances as herself in the television dramas &quot;Dream Team&quot; and &quot;Footballers&#x27; Wives&quot; in 2004. She also appeared on &quot;Top Gear&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Star in a Reasonably Priced Car&quot; in 2004, completing the lap in one minute and fifty-two seconds.

Early in her career, Price appeared on &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot;, and she was a guest host on the first series of &quot;The Friday Night Project&quot;. In December 2005, she released an exercise fitness DVD, &quot;The Jordan Workout&quot;, featuring &quot;The Juice Master&quot; Jason Vale.

Price was a contestant on the third series of &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&quot;, between the months of January and February in 2004. It was there that she met Peter Andre, whom she would eventually marry and later divorce. In 2007, with Andre, she hosted the short-lived late-night chat show &quot;Katie &amp; Peter: Unleashed&quot;. In November 2009, Price made a return visit to &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!&quot; in its ninth series. Presenters Ant &amp; Dec insinuated during the broadcast that the surprise of her return had been ruined by the media, and she left the show voluntarily after nine days.

Price has also been the subject of many reality television series that chronicle her domestic life. This started with a trio of Channel 4 documentaries by film-maker Richard Macer: &quot;Jordan: The Truth About Me&quot; (2002), &quot;Jordan: The Model Mum&quot; and &quot;Jordan: You Don&#x27;t Even Know Me&quot; (both 2004), and was followed by &quot;Jordan Gets Even&quot; on Five in 2004. She later appeared in the documentary &quot;Jordan: Living With a Dream &quot; (Channel 4) and then launched the &quot;Katie &amp; Peter&quot; franchise on ITV2, which documented the lives of Price and Andre and included several fly-on-the-wall reality series: &quot;When Jordan Met Peter&quot;, &quot;Jordan &amp; Peter: Laid Bare&quot; and &quot;Jordan &amp; Peter: Marriage and Mayhem&quot; between 2004 and 2005; &quot;Katie &amp; Peter: The Next Chapter&quot;, &quot;Katie &amp; Peter: The Baby Diaries&quot; and &quot;Katie &amp; Peter: Unleashed&quot; in 2007; &quot;Katie &amp; Peter: Down Under&quot; and &quot;Katie &amp; Peter: African Adventures&quot; in 2008; and &quot;Katie &amp; Peter: Stateside&quot; in 2009. The pair&#x27;s separation in 2009 resulted in their individual shows being recorded: &quot;What Katie Did Next&quot; continued on ITV2 until 2011.

Price was runner-up in the selection contest for a representative for the United Kingdom at the 2005 &quot;Eurovision Song Contest&quot;. In 2006 she released her debut studio album, &quot;A Whole New World&quot;, in collaboration with Peter Andre.

Between 2015 and 2018, Price was a regular panellist on the talk show &quot;Loose Women&quot;.

Price danced with her then-boyfriend Leandro Penna on the Argentine television programme &quot;Bailando por un Sueño 2012&quot;, a spin-off of &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;.

In 2015, Price appeared on the fifteenth series of &quot;Celebrity Big Brother&quot;. She had been previously invited to appear on the show. On 6 February 2015, Price finished as the winner of the series.

===Business ventures===
Price has launched a range of nutrition supplements, including meal replacement shakes, that are promoted with unsupported claims about their wholesomeness and benefit. The British Dietetic Association named Katie Price Nutritional Supplements as constituting one of the &quot;top 5 worst celeb diets to avoid in 2018&quot;, noting they were expensive and unnecessary for anybody wanting to lose weight.

In 2007 Price launched her first perfume, &quot;Stunning&quot;.

In 2008 she signed a deal with Derby House to launch her equestrian range of clothing named &quot;KP Equestrian&quot;. In 2009 Price was named as the patron of a charity polo match played near Epping, Essex.

===Music===
Price was runner-up in the selection contest for a representative for the United Kingdom at the 2005 &quot;Eurovision Song Contest&quot;. The selection process, named &quot;Making Your Mind Up&quot;, was broadcast live on television in March 2005. Price sang a song titled &quot;Not Just Anybody&quot;.

In July 2010, Price released &quot;Free to Love Again&quot;, a non-album single. About the release, she explained: &quot;I&#x27;m not a singer, this is just something that I&#x27;m doing for fun. It&#x27;s not like I&#x27;m worried about getting a chart position or number one, this is purely for fun. Whether people like it or not, I&#x27;m doing it.&quot;

===Books===
Price was in the top 100 best-selling authors of the decade for book sales between 2000 and 2009, with nearly three million sales. 

Price released her first autobiography, &quot;Being Jordan&quot;, in May 2004. Price conducted a 10-day book-signing tour which helped to propel her to first position in the Nielsen BookScan hardback sales chart and to sell 97,090 copies in one year, and over 1,000,000 as of January 2007. Her second autobiography, &quot;A Whole New World&quot;, was published in January 2006. It reached number two in the hardback general category and sold 198,105 copies by 1 April 2006.

Price&#x27;s second novel, &quot;Crystal&quot;, about a young woman&#x27;s efforts to become a singer, sold 159,407 copies during the first three months after its release in June 2007. In July 2008, Price released her third novel, &quot;Angel Uncovered&quot;. In July 2009, Price released a novel entitled &quot;Sapphire&quot;, which was number 1 on the hardback fiction chart for four consecutive weeks and sold 42,215 copies in its first two weeks in the UK alone. Price released her fifth novel, &quot;Paradise&quot;, in July 2010. In 2014, she released her tenth novel, &quot;Make My Wish Come True&quot;.

In 2006 Price signed a £300,000 advance with Random House for &quot;Katie Price&#x27;s Perfect Ponies&quot;, a series of children&#x27;s books, with the first six released in 2007. New books in the series have been released to a total of 12 as of 2017.

Price&#x27;s daughter Princess was signed by publishers for her own book deal at the age of nine in 2017.

Price had a regular advice column in &quot;OK!&quot; magazine until 2009. In 2012, she obtained her own column in &quot;The Sun on Sunday&quot;.

===Politics and campaigning===
In the 2001 UK general election, Price stood as an independent candidate in the Stretford and Urmston constituency. She gained 713 votes. The seat was won by Labour&#x27;s Beverley Hughes with 23,836 votes.

Following online abuse focused on her son Harvey, Price began a campaign to make online abuse a criminal offence. She took her campaign to Parliament in 2018. Helen Jones, chairman of the parliamentary Petitions Committee subsequently commented: &quot;The law on online abuse is not fit for purpose and it is truly shameful that disabled people have been forced off social media while their abusers face no consequences. There is no excuse for the continued failure to make online platforms as safe for disabled people as non-disabled people. Self-regulation has failed disabled people and the law must change to ensure more lives are not destroyed.&quot; and went on to make recommendations for legislation. The Government was expected to respond to the recommendations by the end of March 2019.

== Personal life ==
===Relationships===
Price gave birth to her first child, son Harvey, in May 2002. His father is since-retired footballer Dwight Yorke. Harvey was found to be blind with septo-optic dysplasia. He has additionally been diagnosed as autistic and has Prader–Willi syndrome.
Price and Peter Andre, a British singer and television personality, began a relationship after appearing on &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!&quot; and married in September 2005 at Highclere Castle, Hampshire. In June 2005, Price gave birth by Caesarean section to her second son, Junior Savva Andrea. In June 2007, she gave birth to her third child, daughter Princess Tiaamii Crystal Esther. 

In April 2009, Price suffered a miscarriage 10 weeks into pregnancy. In May 2009, Price and Andre announced that they were separating and divorced in September 2009.

In July 2009, Price began dating MMA fighter and actor Alex Reid. They married on 2 February 2010 in a private ceremony at Wynn Hotel on the Las Vegas Strip. Reid and Price separated in January 2011 and their divorce was finalised in March 2012.

On 16 January 2013, Price married her third husband Kieran Hayler at the Sandals Royal Bahamian Resort and Spa in the Bahamas, after Hayler proposed on Christmas Day 2012. The couple had a wedding blessing in Weston-super-Mare in March 2013. In August 2013, Price gave birth to her third son, Jett Riviera Hayler. On 4 August 2014, she gave birth to a second daughter, Bunny Hayler, two weeks prematurely. In May 2014, Price accused Hayler of having an extramarital affair and announced she was beginning divorce proceedings. They reconciled on the condition that Hayler attend therapy for sex addiction and renewed their wedding vows at Long Furlong Wedding Barn, near Worthing, West Sussex in February 2015. In July 2017, the couple renewed their wedding vows for the second time in the Maldives. In October 2017, in Barbados, Price and Hayler renewed their wedding vows for the third time. In May 2018, Price announced she was starting divorce proceedings over an extramarital affair. 

In July 2019, Price announced she was engaged to Kristopher Boyson; the couple split up a month later.

=== Health ===
In 2002, Price was treated for a leiomyosarcoma on her finger. The cancerous tumor was removed at a Nuffield Hospital near her Brighton home.

In 2018, after being robbed and raped in South Africa, Price had a mental breakdown and attempted suicide.

===Criminal and civil cases===
==== Driving offences ====
In June 2008 Price was convicted of driving while using a mobile phone in April 2008 and received three points on her driving licence.

In September 2010 Price was given three points after being convicted for failing to be in proper control of a vehicle in February 2010. In December 2010 Price was banned from driving for six months for accumulating 13 points on her driving licence after being given an additional three points on her licence for speeding in December 2009.

In April 2012 Price won an appeal against a conviction for two counts of failing to give information regarding a driver’s identity regarding speeding tickets issued to her relating to offences in London in 2011. Price argued she had not seen the tickets as she did not open her own post. In July 2015 Price was convicted of failing to stop at a red light at Buck Barn, West Grinstead in West Sussex.

In February 2018 Price was banned from driving for six months. In July 2018 Price reported herself to the police for driving while disqualified. In January 2019, Price faced a three-month ban on driving after breaching the conditions of a previous ban, and the following month, the ban was extended an additional three months due to drunk driving. Price had been found by police in the back seat of a vehicle in August 2018 after it had crashed, but charges of being drunk in charge of a vehicle were dropped due to a lack of evidence. In October 2019, Price was convicted of failing to provide details of the incident and was banned from driving for two years (later reduced to 18 months). In September 2021, Price pleaded guilty to driving drunk without insurance and while disqualified. In December, she was given a 16-week suspended sentence, with a condition of unpaid work, and a two-year driving ban. This was for a crash which resulted in the car overturning near Partridge Green, near Horsham.

In July 2022 two motoring charges were dismissed by Crawley Magistrates Court, one of speeding on 13 September 2021, and one of failing to provide information concerning the speeding charge. The charges were dropped when no evidence was presented by the prosecution.

In July 2023 Price was stopped by an unmarked police car in Worthing, West Sussex for driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence and driving without insurance. As a result, the car she was driving, a Range Rover, was seized by police.

In March 2024 Price was convicted of driving without a valid licence and insurance. It was revealed that her licence had been suspended for medical reasons in April 2023 and had subsequently expired. Price was found guilty after she was filmed at a petrol station in Kettering, Northamptonshire, driving her Range Rover onto the forecourt and exiting from the driver&#x27;s seat. Price was ordered to pay a total of £1,852 in fines and other charges.

==== Other incidents ====
In August 2003 Price was arrested following an incident in July 2003 for an alleged assault at a nightclub in Birmingham. No further action was taken by the police.

In 2006 Joanne Hillman, a nanny employed by Price, was charged with benefit fraud. Hillman was initially tried in 2007 and Price was subsequently summoned to give evidence. As a result of media reporting, however, the trial collapsed. Hillman was retried in 2008 but no evidence was offered and she was acquitted.

In September 2009 Price claimed that she had previously been raped by a &quot;famous celebrity&quot;, although she had not reported the incident. Price said that she would &quot;absolutely never&quot; reveal who the attacker was. Surrey Police stated that they had not contacted Price: &quot;No allegation of rape has been made and Miss Price will not be making a statement to police&quot;.

In June 2013 Price was granted planning permission to convert a barn in the grounds of her home into a permanent structure for the nanny of her son Harvey. The application was reportedly described as &#x27;sneaky&#x27; by the local Parish Council, after the structure was originally listed as temporary before later being applied to be a permanent structure.
In March 2018 Price was carjacked and robbed while filming in Swaziland. In September 2022, she further reported that she had been raped during the incident.

In August 2018 Price had a bankruptcy hearing at the High Court hearing which was adjourned to give her three months to pay off her debts through an individual voluntary arrangement. In November 2019 Price declared bankruptcy. Her debts were listed as totalling more than £3.5 million. Subsequently in February 2024 a garnishment order of 40% of her earnings was entered into and in March 2024, Price was found bankrupt for a second time.

In June 2019 Price was fined after shouting abuse at a woman in a school playground, in Shipley, West Sussex. Price was issued with a five-year restraining order, banning her from making any contact with the woman. Price was additionally ordered to pay £606 in fines and court costs. In May 2022 Price pleaded guilty at Lewes Crown Court to breaching the restraining order. 

In June 2019 Horsham District Council began enforcement action against Price for demolition and construction works undertaken at her property. The enforcement action concluded in October 2019 when Price was given 30 days to remove the new construction and restore the demolished structures. In December 2023 it was reported that, between December 2021 and March 2022, Price and her partner Carl Woods had run a suspected second-hand car dealership from Price&#x27;s home; Horsham District Council began enforcement action against the couple in September 2022 but closed the case as the second-hand car dealership had already closed in July 2023.

In July 2024 an arrest warrant was issued for Price after she failed to attend a court hearing relating to her bankruptcy. She was arrested on 8 August 2024 at Heathrow Airport. According to the BBC, she seemed to have made income from OnlyFans.

On 19 August 2024 her TikTok income was suspended pending further bankruptcy hearings.

== Filmography ==
=== Television ===
=== Film ===
=== DVDs ===
== Discography ==

=== Albums ===
===Singles===
== Awards and nominations ==
== Bibliography ==
The first 14 of Price&#x27;s books were ghostwritten by Rebecca Farnworth.

=== Autobiographies ===

* &quot;Being Jordan&quot; (2004)
* &quot;A Whole New World&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Pushed to the Limit&quot; (2008)
* &quot;You Only Live Once&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Love, Lipstick and Lies&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Reborn&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Katie Price: Harvey and Me (2021)&quot;
* &quot;This Is Me: The high life. The dark times. The FULL story (2024)&quot;

=== Novels ===

* &quot;Angel&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Crystal&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Angel Uncovered&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Sapphire&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Paradise&quot; (2010)
* &quot;The Comeback Girl&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Santa Baby&quot; (2011)
* &quot;In the Name of Love&quot; (2012)
* &quot;He&#x27;s the One&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Make my Wish Come True&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Playing with Fire&quot; (2018)

=== Children series ===

* &quot;Perfect Ponies&quot; (2007–present)
** &quot;Here Comes the Bride&quot;, &quot;Little Treasures&quot;, &quot;Fancy Dress Ponies&quot;, &quot;Pony Club Weekend&quot;, &quot;The New Best Friend&quot;, &quot;Ponies to the Rescue&quot;, &quot;My Pony Care Book&quot;, &quot;Star Ponies&quot;, &quot;Pony &#x27;n&#x27; Pooch&quot;, &quot;Pony in Disguise&quot;, &quot;Stage Fright!&quot;, &quot;Secrets and Surprises&quot;, &quot;Wild West Weekend&quot; (in order of publication date)
* &quot;Mermaids &amp; Pirates&quot; (2008–present)
** &quot;Follow the Fish&quot;, &quot;I Spy&quot;, &quot;Let&#x27;s Build a Sandcastle&quot;, &quot;A Sunny Day&quot;, &quot;Telescope Overboard&quot;, &quot;Time for a Picnic&quot;, &quot;All Around&quot;, &quot;Hide and Seek&quot;, &quot;Katie the Mermaid&quot;, &quot;Katie&#x27;s Day&quot;, &quot;Peter&#x27;s Friends&quot;, &quot;Pirate Olympics&quot; (in order of publication date)

=== Fashion book ===

* &quot;Standing Out&quot; (2009)

== See also ==
* List of glamour models

==References==
== External links ==

* – official site
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q237602" start="0" end="34" title="Katie Price" label="Katrina Amy Alexandra Alexis Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="42" end="45" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q237602" start="52" end="59" title="Katie Price" label="Infield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010947" start="171" end="188" title="Glamour photography" label="glamour modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674924" start="223" end="229" title="Page 3" label="Page 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="255" end="274" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="&amp;quot;The Sun&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="286" end="295" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q237602" start="296" end="302" title="Katie Price" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966943" start="327" end="339" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (British series 3)" label="third series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235466" start="371" end="425" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888104" start="499" end="501" title="United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q10151" start="523" end="546" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282441" start="606" end="635" title="A Whole New World (album)" label="&amp;quot;A Whole New World&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q712765" start="676" end="687" title="Peter Andre" label="Peter Andre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966953" start="770" end="782" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (British series 9)" label="ninth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636292" start="818" end="834" title="Celebrity Big Brother (British series 15)" label="fifteenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057679" start="838" end="871" title="Celebrity Big Brother (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Celebrity Big Brother&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377380" start="1000" end="1017" title="Katie &amp;amp; Peter" label="Katie &amp;amp; Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020731" start="1043" end="1064" title="Signed by Katie Price" label="Signed by Katie Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377383" start="1079" end="1096" title="Katie (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Katie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377383" start="1114" end="1152" title="Katie (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Katie Price: My Crazy Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="1192" end="1207" title="Autobiography" label="autobiographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="1420" end="1428" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925506" start="1893" end="1917" title="Blatchington Mill School and Sixth Form College" label="Blatchington Mill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q989616" start="1921" end="1925" title="Hove" label="Hove"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="1929" end="1940" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674924" start="2626" end="2632" title="Page 3" label="Page 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="2664" end="2671" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q749053" start="2788" end="2816" title="breast implant" label="breast-enhancement surgeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312950" start="2900" end="2910" title="Daily Star (United Kingdom)" label="Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q157015" start="2924" end="2927" title="FHM" label="FHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="2964" end="2971" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070536" start="2985" end="2989" title="Nuts (magazine)" label="Nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552325" start="3003" end="3008" title="Maxim (magazine)" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663336" start="3022" end="3028" title="Loaded (magazine)" label="Loaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351976" start="3042" end="3047" title="Vogue (British magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="3064" end="3071" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q988219" start="3109" end="3130" title="Stretford and Urmston (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Stretford and Urmston"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="3142" end="3166" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 UK general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306461" start="3407" end="3417" title="Dream Team (TV series)" label="Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436495" start="3434" end="3457" title="Footballers&amp;#x27; Wives" label="Footballers&amp;#x27; Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="3500" end="3508" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630372" start="3528" end="3559" title="Star in a Reasonably Priced Car" label="Star in a Reasonably Priced Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="3677" end="3694" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767381" start="3756" end="3780" title="The Sunday Night Project" label="The Friday Night Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163662" start="3915" end="3925" title="Jason Vale" label="Jason Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966943" start="3958" end="3970" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (UK series 3)" label="third series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235466" start="3980" end="4022" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (UK TV series)" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!"/>
<link wikidata="Q712765" start="4108" end="4119" title="Peter Andre" label="Peter Andre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966953" start="4393" end="4405" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (UK series 9)" label="ninth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596068" start="4418" end="4431" title="Ant &amp;amp; Dec" label="Ant &amp;amp; Dec"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="4706" end="4715" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q87429806" start="4744" end="4757" title="Richard Macer" label="Richard Macer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="4957" end="4961" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715155" start="5127" end="5131" title="ITV2" label="ITV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q503391" start="5896" end="5935" title="United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest" label="a representative for the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10151" start="5943" end="5983" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="2005 &amp;quot;Eurovision Song Contest&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282441" start="6030" end="6059" title="A Whole New World (album)" label="&amp;quot;A Whole New World&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451933" start="6173" end="6184" title="Loose Women" label="Loose Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q13628553" start="6288" end="6314" title="Bailando 2012" label="Bailando por un Sueño 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="6342" end="6363" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636292" start="6403" end="6419" title="Celebrity Big Brother (British series 15)" label="fifteenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057679" start="6429" end="6450" title="Celebrity Big Brother (British TV series)" label="Celebrity Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="7242" end="7246" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q990775" start="7265" end="7271" title="Epping, Essex" label="Epping"/>
<link wikidata="Q503391" start="7342" end="7381" title="United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest" label="a representative for the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10151" start="7389" end="7429" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="2005 &amp;quot;Eurovision Song Contest&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500335" start="7632" end="7650" title="Free to Love Again" label="Free to Love Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031605" start="8275" end="8291" title="Nielsen BookScan" label="Nielsen BookScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q675364" start="9591" end="9594" title="OK!" label="OK!"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="9668" end="9685" title="The Sun on Sunday" label="The Sun on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="9732" end="9756" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 UK general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q988219" start="9805" end="9839" title="Stretford and Urmston (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Stretford and Urmston constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="9883" end="9889" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q775059" start="9897" end="9912" title="Beverley Hughes" label="Beverley Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="10072" end="10082" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q750421" start="10092" end="10103" title="Helen Jones" label="Helen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q48771193" start="10135" end="10154" title="Petitions Committee" label="Petitions Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192175" start="10872" end="10884" title="Dwight Yorke" label="Dwight Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756703" start="10920" end="10941" title="septo-optic dysplasia" label="septo-optic dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="10981" end="10989" title="Autism spectrum" label="autistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q594013" start="10998" end="11019" title="Prader–Willi syndrome" label="Prader–Willi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q712765" start="11031" end="11042" title="Peter Andre" label="Peter Andre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508450" start="11218" end="11234" title="Highclere Castle" label="Highclere Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="11281" end="11298" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="11632" end="11635" title="Mixed martial arts" label="MMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717675" start="11654" end="11663" title="Alex Reid (fighter)" label="Alex Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309059" start="11722" end="11732" title="Wynn Hotel" label="Wynn Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="11740" end="11755" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415968" start="11919" end="11956" title="Sandals Resorts" label="Sandals Royal Bahamian Resort and Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="11964" end="11971" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q845623" start="12055" end="12072" title="Weston-super-Mare" label="Weston-super-Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735540" start="12436" end="12449" title="sex addiction" label="sex addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q671348" start="12516" end="12524" title="Worthing" label="Worthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="12635" end="12643" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="12665" end="12673" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504713" start="12988" end="13002" title="leiomyosarcoma" label="leiomyosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068711" start="13055" end="13072" title="Nuffield Health" label="Nuffield Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546644" start="13300" end="13334" title="Mobile phones and driving safety" label="driving while using a mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q847396" start="14109" end="14123" title="West Grinstead" label="West Grinstead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14608" end="14636" title="Drunk driving law by country#United Kingdom" label="drunk in charge of a vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q671348" start="15473" end="15481" title="Worthing" label="Worthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134042" start="15622" end="15633" title="Range Rover" label="Range Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q984613" start="15925" end="15934" title="Kettering" label="Kettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153510" start="16220" end="16227" title="Common assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="16246" end="16256" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q833674" start="16370" end="16383" title="Benefit fraud in the United Kingdom" label="benefit fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646840" start="16847" end="16860" title="Surrey Police" label="Surrey Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q632327" start="17392" end="17401" title="carjacking" label="carjacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="17430" end="17439" title="Swaziland" label="Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10670701" start="17676" end="17708" title="individual voluntary arrangement" label="individual voluntary arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="17742" end="17752" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684261" start="18055" end="18075" title="Shipley, West Sussex" label="Shipley, West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536124" start="18287" end="18304" title="Lewes Crown Court" label="Lewes Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629013" start="18356" end="18380" title="Horsham District" label="Horsham District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137287" start="18764" end="18779" title="Used car" label="second-hand car"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="19150" end="19166" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19185" end="19188" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q61707579" start="19226" end="19234" title="OnlyFans" label="OnlyFans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="19259" end="19265" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="19524" end="19536" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwritten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621721" start="21372" end="21394" title="List of glamour models" label="List of glamour models"/>
</links>
</doc>
