<doc id="261678" wikidata="Q1204290" url="?curid=261678" title="History of Germany (1945–1990)">
<text>The history of Germany from 1945 to 1990 comprises the period following World War II. The period began with the Berlin Declaration, marking the abolition of the German Reich and Allied-occupied period in Germany on 5 June 1945, and ended with the German reunification on 3 October 1990.

Following the collapse of the Third Reich in 1945 and its defeat in World War II, Germany was stripped of its territorial gains. Beyond that, more than a quarter of its old pre-war territory was annexed by communist Poland and the Soviet Union. The German populations of these areas were expelled to the west. Saarland was a French protectorate from 1947 to 1956 without the recognition of the &quot;Four Powers&quot;, because the Soviet Union opposed it, making it a disputed territory.

At the end of World War II, there were some eight million foreign displaced people in Germany, mainly forced laborers and prisoners. This included around 400,000 survivors of the Nazi concentration camp system, where many times more had died from starvation, harsh conditions, murder, or being worked to death. Between 1944 and 1950, some 12 to 14 million German-speaking refugees and expellees arrived in Western and central Germany from the former eastern territories and other countries in Eastern Europe; an estimated two million of them died on the way there. Some nine million Germans were prisoners of war.

With the beginning of the Cold War, the remaining territory of Germany was divided between the Western Bloc led by the United States, and the Eastern Bloc led by the USSR. Two separate German countries emerged:
* the Federal Republic of Germany, established on 23 May 1949, commonly known as West Germany, was a parliamentary democracy with a social democratic economic system and free churches and labor unions;
* the German Democratic Republic, established on 7 October 1949, commonly known as East Germany, was a Marxist–Leninist socialist republic with its leadership dominated by the Soviet-aligned Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED).

Under Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, West Germany built strong relationships with France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Israel. West Germany also joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Economic Community. East Germany&#x27;s economy, centrally planned in the Soviet style, grew increasingly stagnant; the East German secret police tightly controlled daily life, and the Berlin Wall (1961) ended the steady flow of refugees to the West. The country was reunited on 3 October 1990, following the decline and fall of the SED as the ruling party of East Germany and the Peaceful Revolution there.

==Division of Germany==

===Four military occupied zones===

At the Potsdam Conference (17 July to 2 August 1945), after Germany&#x27;s unconditional surrender on 8 May 1945, the Allies officially divided Germany into the four military occupation zones — France in the southwest, the United Kingdom in the northwest, the United States in the south, and the Soviet Union in the east, bounded on the east by the new Poland-Germany border on the Oder-Neisse line. At Potsdam, these four zones in total were denoted as &#x27;Germany as a whole&#x27;, and the four Allied Powers exercised the sovereign authority they now claimed over Germany in agreeing &#x27;in principle&#x27; to the ceding of territory of the former German Reich east of &#x27;Germany as a whole&#x27; to Poland and the Soviet Union.

In addition, under the Allies&#x27; Berlin Declaration (1945), the territory of the extinguished German Reich was to be treated as the land area within its borders as of 31 December 1937. All land expansion from 1938 to 1945 was hence treated as automatically invalid, including Eupen-Malmedy, Alsace-Lorraine, Austria, Lower Styria, Upper Carniola, Southern Carinthia, Bohemia, Moravia, Czech Silesia, Danzig, Poland, and Memel.

=== Flight and expulsion of ethnic Germans ===
The northern half of East Prussia in the region of Königsberg was administratively assigned by the Potsdam Agreement to the Soviet Union, pending a final Peace Conference (with the commitment of Britain and the United States to support its incorporation into Russia); and was then annexed by the Soviet Union. The Free City of Danzig and the southern half of East Prussia were incorporated into and annexed by Poland; the Allies having assured the Polish government-in-exile of their support for this after the Tehran Conference in 1943. It was also agreed at Potsdam that Poland would receive all German lands East of the Oder-Neisse line, although the exact delimitation of the boundary was left to be resolved at an eventual Peace Conference. Under the wartime alliances of the United Kingdom with the Czechoslovak and Polish governments-in-exile, the British had agreed in July 1942 to support &quot;the General Principle of the transfer to Germany of German minorities in Central and South Eastern Europe after the war in cases where this seems necessary and desirable&quot;. In 1944 roughly 12.4 million ethnic Germans were living in territory that became part of post-war Poland and Soviet Union. Approximately 6 million fled or were evacuated before the Red Army occupied the area. Of the remainder, around 2 million died during the war or in its aftermath (1.4 million as military casualties; 600,000 as civilian deaths), 3.6 million were expelled by the Poles, one million declared themselves to be Poles, and 300,000 remained in Poland as Germans. The Sudetenland territories, surrendered to Germany by the Munich Agreement, were returned to Czechoslovakia; these territories containing a further 3 million ethnic Germans. &#x27;Wild&#x27; expulsions from Czechoslovakia began immediately after the German surrender.

The Potsdam Conference subsequently sanctioned the &quot;orderly and humane&quot; transfer to Germany of individuals regarded as &quot;ethnic Germans&quot; by authorities in Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Hungary. The Potsdam Agreement recognized that these expulsions were already underway and were putting a burden on authorities in the German Occupation Zones, including the re-defined Soviet Occupation Zone. Most of the Germans who were being expelled were from Czechoslovakia and Poland, which included most of the territory to the east of the Oder-Neisse Line. The Potsdam Declaration stated:

Many of the ethnic Germans, who were primarily women and children, and especially those under the control of Polish and Czechoslovakian authorities, were severely mistreated before they were ultimately deported to Germany. Thousands died in forced labor camps such as Lambinowice, Zgoda labour camp, Central Labour Camp Potulice, Central Labour Camp Jaworzno, Glaz, Milecin, Gronowo, and Sikawa. Others starved, died of disease, or froze to death while being expelled in slow and ill-equipped trains; or in transit camps.
Altogether, around 8 million ethnic German refugees and expellees from across Europe eventually settled in West Germany, with a further 3 million in East Germany. In West Germany these represented a major voting block; maintaining a strong culture of grievance and victimhood against Soviet Power, pressing for a continued commitment to full German reunification, claiming compensation, pursuing the right of return to lost property in the East, and opposing any recognition of the postwar extension of Poland and the Soviet Union into former German lands. Owing to the Cold War rhetoric and successful political machinations of Konrad Adenauer, this block eventually became substantially aligned with the Christian Democratic Union of Germany; although in practice &#x27;westward-looking&#x27; CDU policies favouring the Atlantic Alliance and the European Union worked against the possibility of achieving the objectives of the expellee population from the east through negotiation with the Soviet Union. But for Adenauer, fostering and encouraging unrealistic demands and uncompromising expectations amongst the expellees would serve his &quot;Policy of Strength&quot; by which West Germany contrived to inhibit consideration of unification or a final Peace Treaty until the West was strong enough to face the Soviets on equal terms. Consequently, the Federal Republic in the 1950s adopted much of the symbolism of expellee groups; especially in appropriating and subverting the terminology and imagery of the Holocaust; applying this to post-war German experience instead. Eventually in 1990, following the Treaty on the Final Settlement With Respect to Germany, the unified Germany indeed confirmed in treaties with Poland and the Soviet Union that the transfer of sovereignty over the former German eastern territories in 1945 had been permanent and irreversible; Germany now undertaking never again to make territorial claims in respect of these lands.

The intended governing body of Germany was called the Allied Control Council, consisting of the commanders-in-chief in Germany of the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union; who exercised supreme authority in their respective zones, while supposedly acting in concert on questions affecting the whole country. In actuality however, the French consistently blocked any progress towards re-establishing all-German governing institutions; substantially in pursuit of French aspirations for a dismembered Germany, but also as a response to the exclusion of France from the Yalta and Potsdam conferences. Berlin, which lay in the Soviet (eastern) sector, was also divided into four sectors with the Western sectors later becoming West Berlin and the Soviet sector becoming East Berlin.

== Elimination of war potential and reparations==
=== Denazification ===

A key item in the occupiers&#x27; agenda was denazification. The swastika and other outward symbols of the Nazi regime were banned, and a Provisional Civil Ensign was established as a temporary German flag. It remained the official flag of the country (necessary for reasons of international law) until East Germany and West Germany (see below) were independently established in 1949.

The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union had agreed at Potsdam to a broad program of decentralization, treating Germany as a single economic unit with some central administrative departments. These plans never materialized, initially because France blocked any establishment of central administrative or political structures for Germany; and also as both the Soviet Union and France were intent on extracting as much material benefit as possible from their occupation zones in order to make good in part the enormous destruction caused by the German Wehrmacht; and the policy broke down completely in 1948 when the Russians blockaded West Berlin and the Cold War began. It was agreed at Potsdam that the leading members of the Nazi regime who had been captured should be put on trial accused of crimes against humanity, and this was one of the few points on which the four powers were able to agree. In order to secure the presence of the western allies in Berlin, the United States agreed to withdraw from Thuringia and Saxony in exchange for the division of Berlin into four sectors.

Future President and General Dwight D. Eisenhower and the US War Department initially implemented a strict non-fraternization policy between the US troops and German citizens. The State Department and individual US congressmen pressured to have this policy lifted. In June 1945 the prohibition against speaking with German children was loosened. In July troops were permitted to speak to German adults in certain circumstances. In September 1945 the entire policy was dropped. Only the ban on marriage between Americans and German or Austrian civilians remained in place until 11 December 1946 and 2 January 1946 respectively.

=== Industrial disarmament in West Germany ===

The initial proposal for the post-surrender policy of the Western powers, the so-called Morgenthau Plan proposed by Henry Morgenthau Jr., was one of &quot;pastoralization&quot;. The Morgenthau Plan, though subsequently ostensibly shelved due to public opposition, influenced occupation policy; most notably through the U.S. punitive occupation directive JCS 1067 and the industrial plans for Germany.

The &quot;Level of Industry plans for Germany&quot; were the plans to lower German industrial potential after World War II. At the Potsdam Conference, with the U.S. operating under influence of the Morgenthau plan, the victorious Allies decided to abolish the German armed forces as well as all munitions factories and civilian industries that could support them. This included the destruction of all ship and aircraft manufacturing capability. Further, it was decided that civilian industries which might have a military potential, which in the modern era of &quot;total war&quot; included virtually all, were to be severely restricted. The restriction of the latter was set to Germany&#x27;s &quot;approved peacetime needs&quot;, which were defined to be set on the average European standard. In order to achieve this, each type of industry was subsequently reviewed to see how many factories Germany required under these minimum level of industry requirements.

The first plan, from 29 March 1946, stated that German heavy industry was to be lowered to 50% of its 1938 levels by the destruction of 1,500 listed manufacturing plants. In January 1946 the Allied Control Council set the foundation of the future German economy by putting a cap on German steel production—the maximum allowed was set at about 5,800,000 tons of steel a year, equivalent to 25% of the pre-war production level. The UK, in whose occupation zone most of the steel production was located, had argued for a more limited capacity reduction by placing the production ceiling at 12 million tons of steel per year, but had to submit to the will of the U.S., France and the Soviet Union (which had argued for a 3 million ton limit). Germany was to be reduced to the standard of life it had known at the height of the Great Depression (1932). Car production was set to 10% of pre-war levels, etc.

By 1950, after the virtual completion of the by then much watered-down plans, equipment had been removed from 706 factories in the west and steel production capacity had been reduced by 6,700,000 tons.

Timber exports from the U.S. occupation zone were particularly heavy. Sources in the U.S. government stated that the purpose of this was the &quot;ultimate destruction of the war potential of German forests&quot;.

With the beginning of the Cold War, the Western policies changed as it became evident that a return to operation of the West German industry was needed not only for the restoration of the whole European economy but also for the rearmament of West Germany as an ally against the Soviet Union. On 6 September 1946 United States Secretary of State, James F. Byrnes made the famous speech Restatement of Policy on Germany, also known as the Stuttgart speech, where he amongst other things repudiated the Morgenthau plan-influenced policies and gave the West Germans hope for the future. Reports such as The President&#x27;s Economic Mission to Germany and Austria helped to show the U.S. public how bad the situation in Germany really was.

The next improvement came in July 1947, when after lobbying by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Generals Clay and Marshall, the Truman administration decided that economic recovery in Europe could not go forward without the reconstruction of the German industrial base on which it had previously been dependent. In July 1947, President Harry S. Truman rescinded on &quot;national security grounds&quot; the punitive occupation directive JCS 1067, which had directed the U.S. forces in Germany to &quot;take no steps looking toward the economic rehabilitation of Germany.&quot; It was replaced by JCS 1779, which instead stressed that &quot;[a]n orderly, prosperous Europe requires the economic contributions of a stable and productive Germany.&quot;

The dismantling did however continue, and in 1949 West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer wrote to the Allies requesting that it end, citing the inherent contradiction between encouraging industrial growth and removing factories and also the unpopularity of the policy. Support for dismantling was by this time coming predominantly from the French, and the Petersberg Agreement of November 1949 reduced the levels vastly, though dismantling of minor factories continued until 1951. The final limitations on German industrial levels were lifted after the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, though arms manufacture remained prohibited.

===Relations with France===
Germany&#x27;s second largest center of mining and industry, Upper Silesia, had been handed over by the Allies to Poland at the Potsdam Conference and the German population was being forcibly expelled. The International Authority for the Ruhr (IAR) was created as part of the agreement negotiated at the London Six-Power conference in June 1948 to establish the Federal Republic of Germany. French support to internationalize the Ruhr through the IAR was abandoned in 1951 with the West German agreement to pool its coal and steel markets within European Coal and Steel Community.

In the speech Restatement of Policy on Germany, held in Stuttgart on 6 September 1946, the United States Secretary of State James F. Byrnes stated the U.S. motive in detaching the Saar from Germany as &quot;The United States does not feel that it can deny to France, which has been invaded three times by Germany in 70 years, its claim to the Saar territory&quot;. The Saar came under French administration in 1946 as the Saar Protectorate, but did return to Germany in January 1957 (following a referendum), with economic reintegration with Germany occurring a few years later.

In August 1954 the French parliament voted down the treaty that would have established the European Defense Community, a treaty they themselves had proposed. Germany was eventually allowed to rearm under the auspices of the Western European Union, and later NATO.

===Dismantling in East Germany===

The Soviet Union engaged in a massive industrial dismantling campaign in its occupation zone, much more intensive than that carried out by the Western powers. While the Soviet powers soon realized that their actions alienated the German workforce from the Communist cause, they decided that the desperate economic situation within the Soviet Union took priority over alliance building. The allied leaders had agreed on paper to economic and political cooperation but the issue of reparations dealt an early blow to the prospect of a united Germany in 1945. The figure of $20 Billion had been floated by Stalin as an adequate recompense but as the United States refused to consider this a basis for negotiation The Soviet Union was left only with the opportunity of extracting its own reparations, at a heavy cost to the East Germans. This was the beginning of the formal split of Germany.

===Marshall Plan and currency reform===

With the Western Allies eventually becoming concerned about the deteriorating economic situation in their &quot;Trizone&quot;, the American Marshall Plan of economic aid was extended to Western Germany in 1948 and a currency reform, which had been prohibited under the previous occupation directive JCS 1067, introduced the Deutsche Mark and halted rampant inflation. Though the Marshall Plan is regarded as playing a key psychological role in the West German recovery, other factors were also significant.

The Soviets had not agreed to the currency reform; in March 1948 they withdrew from the four-power governing bodies, and in June 1948 they initiated the Berlin Blockade, blocking all ground transport routes between Western Germany and West Berlin. The Western Allies replied with a continuous airlift of supplies to the western half of the city. The Soviets ended the blockade after 11 months.

===Reparations to the U.S.===

The Allies confiscated intellectual property of great value, all German patents, both in Germany and abroad, and used them to strengthen their own industrial competitiveness by licensing them to Allied companies. Beginning immediately after the German surrender and continuing for the next two years, the U.S. pursued a vigorous program to harvest all technological and scientific know-how as well as all patents in Germany. John Gimbel comes to the conclusion, in his book &quot;Science Technology and Reparations: Exploitation and Plunder in Postwar Germany&quot;, that the &quot;intellectual reparations&quot; taken by the U.S. and the UK amounted to close to $10 billion. During the more than two years that this policy was in place, no industrial research in Germany could take place, as any results would have been automatically available to overseas competitors who were encouraged by the occupation authorities to access all records and facilities. Meanwhile, thousands of the best German scientists were being put to work in the U.S. (see also Operation Paperclip)

===Nutritional levels===
During the war, Germans seized food supplies from occupied countries and forced millions of foreigners to work on German farms and factories, in addition to food shipped from farms in eastern Germany. When this ended in 1945, the German rationing system (which stayed in place) had much lower supplies of food. The U.S. Army sent in large shipments of food to feed some 7.7 million prisoners of war—far more than they had expected—as well as the general population. For several years following the surrender, German nutritional levels were low. The Germans were not high on the priority list for international aid, which went to the victims of the Nazis. It was directed that all relief went to non-German displaced persons, liberated Allied POWs, and concentration camp inmates. During 1945 it was estimated that the average German civilian in the U.S. and UK occupation zones received 1200 kilocalories a day in official rations, not counting food they grew themselves or purchased on the large-scale black market. In early October 1945 the UK government privately acknowledged in a cabinet meeting that German civilian adult death rates had risen to 4 times the pre-war levels and death rates amongst the German children had risen by 10 times the pre-war levels. The German Red Cross was dissolved, and the International Red Cross and the few other allowed international relief agencies were kept from helping Germans through strict controls on supplies and on travel. The few agencies permitted to help Germans, such as the indigenous Caritasverband, were not allowed to use imported supplies. When the Vatican attempted to transmit food supplies from Chile to German infants, the U.S. State Department forbade it. The German food situation became worse during the very cold winter of 1946–1947 when German calorie intake ranged from 1,000–1,500 kilocalories per day, a situation made worse by severe lack of fuel for heating.

=== Forced labour reparations===

As agreed by the Allies at the Yalta Conference Germans were used as forced labor as part of the reparations to be extracted. German prisoners were for example forced to clear minefields in France and the Low Countries. By December 1945 it was estimated by French authorities that 2,000 German prisoners were being killed or injured each month in accidents. In Norway the last available casualty record, from 29 August 1945, shows that by that time a total of 275 German soldiers died while clearing mines, while 392 had been injured.

=== Mass rape ===

Norman Naimark writes in &quot;The Russians in Germany: A History of the Soviet Zone of Occupation, 1945–1949&quot; that although the exact number of women and girls who were raped by members of the Red Army in the months preceding and years following the capitulation will never be known, their numbers are likely in the hundreds of thousands, quite possibly as high as the 2,000,000 victims estimate made by Barbara Johr, in &quot;Befreier und Befreite&quot;. Many of these victims were raped repeatedly. Naimark states that not only had each victim to carry the trauma with her for the rest of her days, it inflicted a massive collective trauma on the East German nation (the German Democratic Republic). Naimark concludes &quot;The social psychology of women and men in the Soviet zone of occupation was marked by the crime of rape from the first days of occupation, through the founding of the GDR in the fall of 1949, until—one could argue—the present.&quot; Some of the victims had been raped as many as 60 to 70 times. According to German historian Miriam Gebhardt, as many as 190,000 women were raped by U.S. soldiers in Germany.

===States in Germany===

On 17 December 1947, the Saar Protectorate had been established under French control, in the area corresponding to the current German state of Saarland. It was not allowed to join its fellow German neighbors until a plebiscite in 1955 rejected the proposed autonomy. This paved the way for the accession of the Saarland to the Federal Republic of Germany as its 12th state, which went into effect on 1 January 1957.

On 23 May 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG, &quot;Bundesrepublik Deutschland&quot;) was established on the territory of the Western occupied zones, with Bonn as its &quot;provisional&quot; capital. It comprised the area of 11 newly formed states (replacing the pre-war states), with present-day Baden-Württemberg being split into three states until 1952. The Federal Republic was declared to have &quot;the full authority of a sovereign state&quot; on 5 May 1955.
On 7 October 1949 the German Democratic Republic (GDR, &quot;Deutsche Demokratische Republik (DDR)&quot;), with East Berlin as its capital, was established in the Soviet Zone.

The 1952 Stalin Note proposed German reunification and superpower disengagement from Central Europe but Britain, France, and the United States rejected the offer as insincere. Also, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer preferred &quot;Westintegration&quot;, rejecting &quot;experiments&quot;.

In English, the two larger states were known informally as &quot;West Germany&quot; and &quot;East Germany&quot; respectively. In both cases, the former occupying troops remained permanently stationed there. The former German capital, Berlin, was a special case, being divided into East Berlin and West Berlin, with West Berlin completely surrounded by East German territory. Though the German inhabitants of West Berlin were citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany, West Berlin was not legally incorporated into West Germany; it remained under the formal occupation of the western allies until 1990, although most day-to-day administration was conducted by an elected West Berlin government.

West Germany was allied with the United States, the United Kingdom, and France. A western democratic country with a &quot;social market economy&quot;, the country would from the 1950s onwards come to enjoy prolonged economic growth (Wirtschaftswunder) following the Marshall Plan help from the Allies, the currency reform of June 1948 and helped by the fact that the Korean War (1950–53) led to a worldwide increased demand for goods, where the resulting shortage helped overcome lingering resistance to the purchase of German products.

East Germany was at first occupied by and later (May 1955) allied with the Soviet Union.

==West Germany (Federal Republic of Germany)==


The Western Allies turned over increasing authority to West German officials and moved to establish a nucleus for a future German government by creating a central Economic Council for their zones. The program later provided for a West German constituent assembly, an occupation statute governing relations between the Allies and the German authorities, and the political and economic merger of the French with the British and American zones. On 23 May 1949, the &quot;Grundgesetz&quot; (Basic Law), the constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany, was promulgated. Following elections in August, the first federal government was formed on 20 September 1949, by Konrad Adenauer (CDU). Adenauer&#x27;s government was a coalition of the CDU, the CSU and the Free Democrats. The next day, the occupation statute came into force, granting powers of self-government with certain exceptions.

In 1949 the new &quot;provisional&quot; capital of the Federal Republic of Germany was established in Bonn, after Chancellor Konrad Adenauer intervened emphatically for Bonn (which was only fifteen kilometers away from his hometown). Most of the members of the German constitutional assembly (as well as the U.S. Supreme Command) had favored Frankfurt am Main where the Hessian administration had already started the construction of an assembly hall. The Parlamentarischer Rat (interim parliament) proposed a new location for the capital, as Berlin was then a special administrative region controlled directly by the allies and surrounded by the Soviet zone of occupation. The former Reichstag building in Berlin was occasionally used as a venue for sittings of the Bundestag and its committees and the Bundesversammlung, the body which elects the German Federal President. However, the Soviets disrupted the use of the Reichstag building by flying very noisy supersonic jets near the building. A number of cities were proposed to host the federal government, and Kassel (among others) was eliminated in the first round. Other politicians opposed the choice of Frankfurt out of concern that, as one of the largest German cities and a former centre of the Holy Roman Empire, it would be accepted as a &quot;permanent&quot; capital of Germany, thereby weakening the West German population&#x27;s support for reunification and the eventual return of the Government to Berlin.

After the Petersberg agreement West Germany quickly progressed toward fuller sovereignty and association with its European neighbors and the Atlantic community. The London and Paris agreements of 1954 restored most of the state&#x27;s sovereignty (with some exceptions) in May 1955 and opened the way for German membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). In April 1951, West Germany joined with France, Italy and the Benelux countries in the European Coal and Steel Community (forerunner of the European Union).

The outbreak of the Korean War (June 1950) led to Washington calling for the rearmament of West Germany in order to defend western Europe from the Soviet threat. But the memory of German aggression led other European states to seek tight control over the West German military. Germany&#x27;s partners in the Coal and Steel Community decided to establish a European Defence Community (EDC), with an integrated army, navy and air force, composed of the armed forces of its member states. The West German military would be subject to complete EDC control, but the other EDC member states (Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands) would cooperate in the EDC while maintaining independent control of their own armed forces.

Though the EDC treaty was signed (May 1952), it never entered into force. France&#x27;s Gaullists rejected it on the grounds that it threatened national sovereignty, and when the French National Assembly refused to ratify it (August 1954), the treaty died. The French had killed their own proposal. Other means had to be found to allow West German rearmament. In response, the Brussels Treaty was modified to include West Germany, and to form the Western European Union (WEU). West Germany was to be permitted to rearm, and have full sovereign control of its military; the WEU would, however, regulate the size of the armed forces permitted to each of its member states. Fears of a return to Nazism, however, soon receded, and as a consequence, these provisions of the WEU treaty have little effect today.
Between 1949 and 1960, the West German economy grew at an unparalleled rate. Low rates of inflation, modest wage increases and a quickly rising export quota made it possible to restore the economy and brought a modest prosperity. According to the official statistics the German gross national product grew in average by about 7% annually between 1950 and 1960.

The initial demand for housing, the growing demand for machine tools, chemicals, and automobiles and a rapidly increasing agricultural production were the initial triggers to this &#x27;Wirtschaftswunder&#x27; (economic miracle) as it was known, although there was nothing miraculous about it. The era became closely linked with the name of Ludwig Erhard, who led the Ministry of Economics during the decade. Unemployment at the start of the decade stood at 10.3%, but by 1960 it had dropped to 1.2%, practically speaking full employment. In fact, there was a growing demand for labor in many industries as the workforce grew by 3% per annum, the reserves of labor were virtually used up.
The millions of displaced persons and the refugees from the eastern provinces had all been integrated into the workforce. At the end of the decade, thousands of younger East Germans were packing their bags and migrating westwards, posing an ever-growing problem for the GDR nomenclature. With the construction of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 they hoped to end the loss of labor and in doing so they posed the West German government with a new problem—how to satisfy the apparently insatiable demand for labor. The answer was to recruit unskilled workers from Southern European countries; the era of the &quot;Gastarbeiter&quot; (foreign laborers) began.
In October 1961 an initial agreement was signed with the Turkish government and the first Gastarbeiter began to arrive. By 1966, some 1,300,000 foreign workers had been recruited mainly from Italy, Turkey, Spain, and Greece. By 1971, the number had reached 2.6 million workers. The initial plan was that single workers would come to Germany, would work for a limited number of years and then return home. The significant differences between wages in their home countries and in Germany led many workers to bring their families and to settle—at least until retirement—in Germany. That the German authorities took little notice of the radical changes that these shifts of population structure meant was the cause of considerable debate in later years.

In the 1950s Federal Republic, restitution laws for compensation for those who had suffered under the Nazis was limited to only those who had suffered from &quot;racial, religious or political reasons&quot;, which were defined in such a way as to sharply limit the number of people entitled to collect compensation. According to the 1953 law on compensation for suffering during the National Socialist era, only those with a territorial connection with Germany could receive compensation for their suffering, which had the effect of excluding the millions of people, mostly from Central and Eastern Europe, who had been taken to Germany to work as slave labor during World War II. In the same vein, to be eligible for compensation they would have to prove that they were part of the &quot;realm of German language and culture&quot;, a requirement that excluded most of the surviving slave laborers who did not know German or at least enough German to be considered part of the &quot;realm of German language and culture&quot;. Likewise, the law excluded homosexuals, Gypsies, Communists, &quot;Asoziale&quot; (&quot;Asocials&quot; – people considered by the National Socialist state to be anti-social, a broad category comprising anyone from petty criminals to people who were merely eccentric and non-conformist), and homeless people for their suffering in the concentration camps under the grounds that all these people were &quot;criminals&quot; whom the state was protecting German society from by sending them to concentration camps, and in essence these victims of the National Socialist state got what they deserved, making them unworthy of compensation. In this regard it is significant that the 1935 version of Paragraph 175 was not repealed until 1969. As a result, German homosexuals – in many cases survivors of the concentration camps – between 1949 and 1969 continued to be convicted under the same law that had been used to convict them between 1935 and 1945, though in the period 1949–69 they were sent to prison rather than to a concentration camp.

A study done in 1953 showed that of the 42,000 people who had survived the Buchenwald concentration camp, only 700 were entitled to compensation under the 1953 law. The German historian Alf Lüdtke wrote that the decision to deny that the Roma and the Sinti had been victims of National Socialist racism and to exclude the Roma and Sinti from compensation under the grounds that they were all &quot;criminals&quot; reflected the same anti-Gypsy racism that made them the target of persecution and genocide during the National Socialist era. The cause of the Roma and Sinti excited so little public interest that it was not until 1979 that a group was founded to lobby for compensation for the Roma and the Sinti survivors. Communist concentration camp survivors were excluded from compensation under the grounds that in 1933 the KPD had been seeking &quot;violent domination&quot; by working for a Communist revolution, and thus the banning of the KPD and the subsequent repression of the Communists were justified. In 1956, the law was amended to allow Communist concentration camp survivors to collect compensation provided that they had not been associated with Communist causes after 1945, but as almost all the surviving Communists belonged to the Union of Persecutees of the Nazi Regime, which had been banned in 1951 by the Hamburg government as a Communist front organisation, the new law did not help many of the KPD survivors. Compensation started to be paid to most Communist survivors regardless if they had belonged to the VVN or not following a 1967 court ruling, through the same court ruling had excluded those Communists who had &quot;actively&quot; fought the constitutional order after the banning of the KPD again in 1956. Only in the 1980s were demands made mostly from members of the SPD, FDP and above all the Green parties that the Federal Republic pay compensation to the Roma, Sinti, gay, homeless and &quot;Asoziale&quot; survivors of the concentration camps.
In regards to the memory of the Nazi period in the 1950s Federal Republic, there was a marked tendency to argue that everyone regardless of what side they had been on in World War II were all equally victims of the war. In the same way, the Nazi regime tended to be portrayed in the 1950s as a small clique of criminals entirely unrepresentative of German society who were sharply demarcated from the rest of German society or as the German historian Alf Ludtke argued in popular memory that it was a case of &quot;us&quot; (i.e ordinary people) ruled over by &quot;them&quot; (i.e. the Nazis). Though the Nazi regime itself was rarely glorified in popular memory, in the 1950s World War II and the Wehrmacht were intensely gloried and celebrated by the public. In countless memoirs, novels, histories, newspaper articles, films, magazines, and &quot;Landserheft&quot; (a type of comic book in Germany glorifying war), the Wehrmacht was celebrated as an awesome, heroic fighting force that had fought a &quot;clean war&quot; unlike the SS and which would have won the war as the Wehrmacht was always portrayed as superior to the Allied forces had not been for mistakes on the part of Hitler or workings of &quot;fate&quot;. The Second World War was usually portrayed in heavily romantic aura in various works that celebrated the comradeship and heroism of ordinary soldiers under danger with the war itself being shown as &quot;a great adventure for idealists and daredevils&quot; who for the most part had a thoroughly fun time. The tendency in the 1950s to glorify war by depicting World War II as a fun-filled, grand adventure for the men who served in Hitler&#x27;s war machine meant the horrors and hardship of the war were often downplayed. In his 2004 essay &quot;Celluloid Soldiers&quot; about post-war German films, the Israeli historian Omer Bartov wrote that German films of the 1950s always showed the average German soldier as a heroic victim: noble, tough, brave, honourable and patriotic, while fighting hard in a senseless war for a regime that he did not care for. Commendations of the victims of the Nazis tended to center around honoring those involved in the July 20 &quot;putsch&quot; attempt of 1944, which meant annual ceremonies attended by all the leading politicians at the Bendlerblock and Plötzensee Prison to honor those executed for their involvement in the 20 July &quot;putsch&quot;. By contrast, almost no ceremonies were held in the 1950s at the ruins of the concentration camps like Bergen-Belsen or Dachau, which were ignored and neglected by the &quot;Länder&quot; governments in charge of their care. Not until 1966 did the &quot;Land&quot; of Lower Saxony opened Bergen-Belsen to the public by founding a small &quot;house of documentation&quot;, and even then it was in response to criticism that the Lower Saxon government was intentionally neglecting the ruins of Bergen-Belsen. Though it was usually claimed at the time that everybody in the Second World War was a victim, Ludtke commented that the disparity between the millions of Deutsche Marks spent in the 1950s in turning the Benderblock and Plötzensee prison into sites of remembrance honoring those conservatives executed after the 20 July &quot;putsch&quot; versus the neglect of the former concentration camps suggested that in both official and popular memory that some victims of the Nazis were considered more worthy of remembrance than others. It was against this context where popular memory was focused on glorifying the heroic deeds of the Wehrmacht while treating the genocide by the National Socialist regime as almost a footnote that in the autumn of 1959 that the philosopher Theodor W. Adorno gave a much-publicized speech on TV that called for &quot;Vergangenheitsbewältigung&quot; (&quot;coming to terms with the past&quot;). Adorno stated that most people were engaged in a process of &quot;willful forgetting&quot; about the Nazi period and used euphemistic language to avoid confronting the period such as the use of the term &quot;Kristallnacht&quot; (Crystal Night) for the pogrom of November 1938. Adorno called for promoting a critical &quot;consciousness&quot; that would allow people to &quot;come to terms with the past&quot;.

West German authorities made great efforts to end the denazification process that had been started by the occupying powers and to liberate war criminals from prison, including those that had been convicted at the Nuremberg trials, while demarcating the sphere of legitimate political activity against blatant attempts at a political rehabilitation of the Nazi regime.

Until the end of occupation in 1990, the three Western Allies retained occupation powers in Berlin and certain responsibilities for Germany as a whole. Under the new arrangements, the Allies stationed troops within West Germany for NATO defense, pursuant to stationing and status-of-forces agreements. With the exception of 45,000 French troops, Allied forces were under NATO&#x27;s joint defense command. (France withdrew from the collective military command structure of NATO in 1966.)

Political life in West Germany was remarkably stable and orderly. The Adenauer era (1949–63) was followed by a brief period under Ludwig Erhard (1963–66) who, in turn, was replaced by Kurt Georg Kiesinger (1966–69). All governments between 1949 and 1966 were formed by coalitions of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and Christian Social Union (CSU), either alone or in coalition with the smaller Free Democratic Party (FDP).

===1960s: a time for reform===
The grand old man of German postwar politics had to be dragged—almost literally—out of office in 1963. In 1959, it was time to elect a new president and Adenauer decided that he would place Erhard in this office. Erhard was not enthusiastic, and to everybody&#x27;s surprise, Adenauer decided at the age of 83 that he would take on the position. His aim was apparently to remain in control of German politics for another ten years despite the growing mood for change, but when his advisers informed him just how limited the powers of the president were he quickly lost interest. An alternative candidate was needed and eventually the Minister of Agriculture, Heinrich Lübke took on the task and was duly elected.

In October 1962, the weekly news magazine &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; published an analysis of the West German military defense. The conclusion was that there were several weaknesses in the system. Ten days after publication, the offices of &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; in Hamburg were raided by the police and quantities of documents were seized under the orders of the CSU Defense Minister Franz Josef Strauss. Chancellor Adenauer proclaimed in the &quot;Bundestag&quot; that the article was tantamount to high treason and that the authors would be prosecuted. The editor/owner of the magazine, Rudolf Augstein spent some time in jail before the public outcry over the breaking of laws on freedom of the press became too loud to be ignored. The FDP members of Adenauer&#x27;s cabinet resigned from the government, demanding the resignation of Franz Josef Strauss, Defence Minister, who had decidedly overstepped his competence during the crisis by his heavy-handed attempt to silence &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; for essentially running a story that was unflattering to him (which incidentally was true). The British historian Frederick Taylor argued that the Federal Republic under Adenauer retained many of the characteristics of the authoritarian &quot;deep state&quot; that existed under the Weimar Republic, and that the &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; affair marked an important turning point in German values as ordinary people rejected the old authoritarian values in favor of the more democratic values that are today seen as the bedrock of the Federal Republic. Adenauer&#x27;s own reputation was impaired by Spiegel affair and he announced that he would step down in the autumn of 1963. His successor was to be the Economics Minister Ludwig Erhard, who was the man widely credited as the father of the &quot;economic miracle&quot; of the 1950s.

The proceedings of the War Crimes Tribunal at Nuremberg had been widely publicised in Germany but, a new generation of teachers, educated with the findings of historical studies, could begin to reveal the truth about the war and the crimes committed in the name of the German people. In 1963, a German court ruled that a KGB assassin named Bohdan Stashynsky who had committed several murders in the Federal Republic in the late 1950s was not legally guilty of murder, but was only an accomplice to murder as the responsibility for Stashynsky&#x27;s murders rested only with his superiors in Moscow who had given him his orders. The legal implications of the Stashynsky case, namely that in a totalitarian system only executive decision-makers can be held legally responsible for any murders committed and that anyone else who follows orders and commits murders were just accomplices to murder was to greatly hinder the prosecution of Nazi war criminals in the coming decades, and ensured that even when convicted, that Nazi criminals received the far lighter sentences reserved for accomplices to murders than the harsher sentences given to murderers. The term executive decision-maker who could be found guilty of murder was reserved by the courts only for those at the highest levels of the &quot;Reich&quot; leadership during the Nazi period. The only way that a Nazi criminal could be convicted of murder was to show that they were not following orders at the time and had acted on their initiative when killing someone. One courageous attorney, Fritz Bauer patiently gathered evidence on the guards of the Auschwitz death camp and about twenty were put trial in Frankfurt between 1963–1965 in what came to be known as the Frankfurt Auschwitz Trials. The men on trial in Frankfurt were tried only for murders and other crimes that they committed on their own initiative at Auschwitz and were not tried for anything that they did at Auschwitz when following orders, which was considered by the courts to be the lesser crime of accomplice to murder. Because of this, Bauer could only indict for murder those who killed when not following orders, and those who had killed when following orders were indicted as accomplices to murder. Moreover because of the legal distinction between murderers and accomplices to murder, an SS man who killed thousands while operating the gas chambers at Auschwitz could only be found guilty of being accomplice to murder because he had been following orders, while an SS man who had beaten one inmate to death on his initiative could be convicted of murder because he had not been following orders. Daily newspaper reports and visits by school classes to the proceedings revealed to the German public the nature of the concentration camp system and it became evident that the &quot;Shoah&quot; was of vastly greater dimensions than the German population had believed. (The term &#x27;Holocaust&#x27; for the systematic mass-murder of Jews first came into use in 1943 in a &quot;New York Times&quot; piece that references &quot;the hundreds and thousands of European Jews still surviving the Nazi holocaust&quot;. The term came into widespread use to describe the event following the TV film Holocaust in 1978) The processes set in motion by the Auschwitz trial reverberated decades later.

In the early sixties, the rate of economic growth slowed down significantly. In 1962, the growth rate was 4.7% and the following year, 2.0%. After a brief recovery, the growth rate petered into a recession, with no growth in 1967. The economic showdown forced Erhard&#x27;s resignation in 1966 and he was replaced with Kurt Georg Kiesinger of the CDU. Kiesinger was to attract much controversy because in 1933 he had joined the National Socialist Legal Guild and NSDAP (membership in the former was necessary in order to practice law, but membership in the latter was entirely voluntary).

Kiesinger&#x27;s 1966–69 grand coalition was between West Germany&#x27;s two largest parties, the CDU/CSU and the Social Democratic Party (SPD). This was important for the introduction of new emergency acts—the grand coalition gave the ruling parties the two-thirds majority of votes required for their ratification. These controversial acts allowed basic constitutional rights such as freedom of movement to be limited in case of a state of emergency.
During the time leading up to the passing of the laws, there was fierce opposition to them, above all by the Free Democratic Party, the rising German student movement, a group calling itself &quot;Notstand der Demokratie&quot; (Democracy in Crisis), the Außerparlamentarische Opposition and members of the Campaign against Nuclear Armament. The late 1960s saw the rise of the student movement and university campuses in a constant state of uproar. A key event in the development of open democratic debate occurred in 1967 when the Shah of Iran visited West Berlin. Several thousand demonstrators gathered outside the Opera House where he was to attend a special performance. Supporters of the Shah (later known as &#x27;Jubelperser&#x27;), armed with staves and bricks, attacked the protesters while the police stood by and watched. A demonstration in the center was being forcibly dispersed when a bystander named Benno Ohnesorg was shot in the head and killed by a plain-clothed policeman Karl-Heinz Kurras. (It has now been established that the policeman, Kurras, was a paid spy of the East German Stasi security forces.) Protest demonstrations continued, and calls for more active opposition by some groups of students were made, which was declared by the press, especially the tabloid &quot;Bild-Zeitung&quot; newspaper, to be acts of terrorism. The conservative &quot;Bild-Zeitung&quot; waged a massive campaign against the protesters who were declared to be just hooligans and thugs in the pay of East Germany. The press baron Axel Springer emerged as one of the principal hate figures for the student protesters because of &quot;Bild-Zeitung&quot; often violent attacks on them. Protests against the US intervention in Vietnam, mingled with anger over the vigor with which demonstrations were repressed, led to mounting militancy among the students at the universities of Berlin. One of the most prominent campaigners was a young man from East Germany called Rudi Dutschke who also criticised the forms of capitalism that were to be seen in West Berlin. Just before Easter 1968, a young man tried to kill Dutschke as he bicycled to the student union, seriously injuring him. All over West Germany, thousands demonstrated against the Springer newspapers which were seen as the prime cause of the violence against students. Trucks carrying newspapers were set on fire and windows in office buildings broken. In the wake of these demonstrations, in which the question of America&#x27;s role in Vietnam began to play a bigger role, came a desire among the students to find out more about the role of their parents&#x27; generation in the Nazi era.
In 1968, the &quot;Bundestag&quot; passed a Misdemeanors Bill dealing with traffic misdemeanors, into which a high-ranking civil servant named Dr. Eduard Dreher who had been drafting the bill inserted a prefatory section to the bill under a very misleading heading that declared that henceforth there was a statute of limitations of 15 years from the time of the offense for the crime of being an accomplices to murder which was to apply retroactively, which made it impossible to prosecute war criminals even for being accomplices to murder since the statute of limitations as now defined for the last of the suspects had expired by 1960. The &quot;Bundestag&quot; passed the Misdemeanors Bill without bothering to read the bill in its entirety so its members missed Dreher&#x27;s amendment. It was estimated in 1969 that thanks to Dreher&#x27;s amendment to the Misdemeanors Bill that 90% of all Nazi war criminals now enjoyed total immunity from prosecution. The prosecutor Adalbert Rückerl who headed the Central Bureau for the Prosecution of National Socialist Crimes told an interviewer in 1969 that this amendment had done immense harm to the ability of the Bureau to prosecute those suspected of war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The calling in question of the actions and policies of the government led to a new climate of debate by the late 1960s. The issues of emancipation, colonialism, environmentalism and grass roots democracy were discussed at all levels of society. In 1979, the environmental party, the Greens, reached the 5% limit required to obtain parliamentary seats in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen provincial election. Also of great significance was the steady growth of a feminist movement in which women demonstrated for equal rights. Until 1979, a married woman had to have the permission of her husband if she wanted to take on a job or open a bank account. Parallel to this, a gay movement began to grow in the larger cities, especially in West Berlin, where homosexuality had been widely accepted during the twenties in the Weimar Republic. In 1969, the &quot;Bundestag&quot; repealed the 1935 Nazi amendment to Paragraph 175, which not only made homosexual acts a felony, but had also made any expressions of homosexuality illegal (before 1935 only gay sex had been illegal). However, Paragraph 175 which made homosexual acts illegal remained on the statute books and was not repealed until 1994, although it had been softened in 1973 by making gay sex illegal only with those under the age of 18.
Anger over the treatment of demonstrators following the death of Benno Ohnesorg and the attack on Rudi Dutschke, coupled with growing frustration over the lack of success in achieving their aims, led to growing militancy among students and their supporters. In May 1968, three young people set fire to two department stores in Frankfurt; they were brought to trial and made very clear to the court that they regarded their action as a legitimate act in what they described as the &#x27;struggle against imperialism&#x27;. The student movement began to split into different factions, ranging from the unattached liberals to the Maoists and supporters of direct action in every form—the anarchists. Several groups set as their objective the aim of radicalizing the industrial workers and, taking an example from activities in Italy of the Brigade Rosse, many students went to work in the factories, but with little or no success. The most notorious of the underground groups was the &#x27;Baader-Meinhof Group&#x27;, later known as the Red Army Faction, which began by making bank raids to finance their activities and eventually went underground having killed a number of policemen, several bystanders and eventually two prominent West Germans, whom they had taken captive in order to force the release of prisoners sympathetic to their ideas. The &quot;Baader-Meinhof gang&quot; was committed to the overthrow of the Federal Republic via terrorism in order to achieve the establishment of a Communist state. In the 1990s attacks were still being committed under the name &quot;RAF&quot;. The last action took place in 1993 and the group announced it was giving up its activities in 1998. Evidence that the groups had been infiltrated by German Intelligence undercover agents has since emerged, partly through the insistence of the son of one of their prominent victims, the State Counsel Buback.

===Political developments 1969–1990===


In the 1969 election, the SPD—headed by Willy Brandt—gained enough votes to form a coalition government with the FDP. Although chancellor for only just over four years, Brandt was one of the most popular politicians in the whole period. Brandt was a gifted speaker and the growth of the Social Democrats from there on was in no small part due to his personality. Brandt began a policy of rapprochement with West Germany&#x27;s eastern neighbors known as &quot;Ostpolitik&quot;, a policy opposed by the CDU. The issue of improving relations with Poland, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany made for an increasingly aggressive tone in public debates but it was a huge step forward when Willy Brandt and the Foreign Minister, Walther Scheel (FDP) negotiated agreements with all three countries (Moscow Agreement, August 1970, Warsaw Agreement, December 1970, Four-Power Agreement over the status of West Berlin in 1971 and an agreement on relations between West and East Germany, signed in December 1972). These agreements were the basis for a rapid improvement in the relations between east and west and led, in the long term, to the dismantlement of the Warsaw Treaty and the Soviet Union&#x27;s control over East-Central Europe. During a visit to Warsaw on 7 December 1970, Brandt made the Warschauer Kniefall by kneeling before a monument to those killed in the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, a gesture of humility and penance that no German chancellor had made until that time. Chancellor Brandt was forced to resign in May 1974, after Günter Guillaume, a senior member of his staff, was uncovered as a spy for the East German intelligence service, the Stasi. Brandt&#x27;s contributions to world peace led to his winning the Nobel Peace Prize for 1971.

Finance Minister Helmut Schmidt (SPD) formed a coalition and he served as Chancellor from 1974 to 1982. Hans-Dietrich Genscher, a leading FDP official, became Vice Chancellor and Foreign Minister. Schmidt, a strong supporter of the European Community (EC) and the Atlantic alliance, emphasized his commitment to &quot;the political unification of Europe in partnership with the USA&quot;. Throughout the 1970s, the Red Army Faction had continued its terrorist campaign, assassinating or kidnapping politicians, judges, businessmen, and policemen. The highpoint of the RAF violence came with the German Autumn in autumn 1977. The industrialist Hanns-Martin Schleyer was kidnapped on 5 September 1977 in order to force the government to free the imprisoned leaders of the Baader-Meinhof Gang. A group from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine hijacked Lufthansa Flight 181 to seize further hostages to free the RAF leaders. On 18 October 1977, the Lufthansa jet was stormed in Mogadishu by the GSG 9 commando unit, who were able to free the hostages. The same day, the leaders of the Baader-Meinhof gang, who had been waging a hunger strike, were found dead in their prison cells with gunshot wounds, which led to Schleyer being executed by his captors. The deaths were controversially ruled suicides. The Red Army Faction was to continue its terrorist campaign into the 1990s, but the German Autumn of 1977 was the highpoint of its campaign. That the Federal Republic had faced a crisis caused by a terrorist campaign from the radical left without succumbing to dictatorship as many feared that it would, was seen as vindication of the strength of German democracy.

In January 1979, the American mini-series &quot;Holocaust&quot; aired in West Germany. The series, which was watched by 20 million people or 50% of West Germans, first brought the matter of the genocide in World War II to widespread public attention in a way that it had never been before. After each part of &quot;Holocaust&quot; was aired, there was a companion show where a panel of historians could answer questions from people phoning in. The historians&#x27; panels were literally overwhelmed with thousands of phone calls from shocked and outraged Germans, a great many of whom stated that they were born after 1945 and that was the first time that they learned that their country had practiced genocide in World War II. By the late 1970s, an initially small number of young people had started to demand that the &quot;Länder&quot; governments stop neglecting the sites of the concentration camps, and start turning them into proper museums and sites of remembrance, turning them into &quot;locations of learning&quot; meant to jar visitors into thinking critically about the Nazi period.

In 1980, the CDU/CSU ran Strauss as their joint candidate in the elections, and he was crushingly defeated by Schmidt. In October 1982, the SPD-FDP coalition fell apart when the FDP joined forces with the CDU/CSU to elect CDU chairman Helmut Kohl as Chancellor in a Constructive Vote of No Confidence. Genscher continued as Foreign Minister in the new Kohl government. Following national elections in March 1983, Kohl emerged in firm control of both the government and the CDU. The CDU/CSU fell just short of an absolute majority, due to the entry into the &quot;Bundestag&quot; of the Greens, who received 5.6% of the vote. In 1983, despite major protests from peace groups, the Kohl government allowed Pershing II missiles to be stationed in the Federal Republic to counter the deployment of the SS-20 cruise missiles by the Soviet Union in East Germany. In 1985, Kohl, who had something of a tin ear when it came to dealing with the Nazi past, caused much controversy when he invited President Ronald Reagan of the United States to visit the war cemetery at Bitburg to mark the 40th anniversary of the end of World War II. The Bitburg cemetery was soon revealed to contain the graves of SS men, which Kohl stated that he did not see as a problem and that to refuse to honor all of the dead of Bitburg including the SS men buried there was an insult to all Germans. Kohl stated that Reagan could come to the Federal Republic to hold a ceremony to honor the dead of Bitburg or not come at all, and that to change the venue of the service to another war cemetery that did not have SS men buried in it was not acceptable to him. Even more controversy was caused by Reagan&#x27;s statement that all of the SS men killed fighting for Hitler in World War II were &quot;just kids&quot; who were just as much the victims of Hitler as those who been murdered by the SS in the Holocaust. Despite the huge controversy caused by honoring the SS men buried at Bitburg, the visit to Bitburg went ahead, and Kohl and Reagan honored the dead of Bitburg. What was intended to promote German-American reconciliation turned out to be a public relations disaster that had the opposite effect. Public opinion polls showed that 72% of West Germans supported the service at Bitburg while American public opinion overwhelming disapproved of Reagan honoring the memory of the SS men who gave their lives for Hitler.

Despite or perhaps because of the Bitburg controversy, in 1985 a campaign had been started to build a memorial to the victims of the Holocaust in Berlin. It was felt by at least some Germans that there was something wrong about the Chancellor and the President of the United States honoring the memory of the SS men buried at Bitburg while there was no memorial to any of the people murdered in the Holocaust. The campaign to build a Holocaust memorial, which Germany until then lacked, was given a major boost in November 1989 by the call by television journalist Lea Rosh to build the memorial at the site for the former Gestapo headquarters. In April 1992, the City of Berlin finally decided that a Holocaust memorial could be built. Along the same lines, in August 1987, protests put a stop to plans by the City of Frankfurt to raze the last remains of the Frankfurt Jewish Ghetto in order to redevelop the land, arguing that the remnants of the Frankfurt ghetto needed to be preserved.

In January 1987, the Kohl-Genscher government was returned to office, but the FDP and the Greens gained at the expense of the larger parties. Kohl&#x27;s CDU and its Bavarian sister party, the CSU, slipped from 48.8% of the vote in 1983 to 44.3%. The SPD fell to 37%; long-time SPD chairman Brandt subsequently resigned in April 1987 and was succeeded by Hans-Jochen Vogel. The FDP&#x27;s share rose from 7% to 9.1%, its best showing since 1980. The Greens&#x27; share rose to 8.3% from their 1983 share of 5.6%. Later in 1987, Kohl had a summit with the East German leader Erich Honecker. Unknown to Kohl, the meeting room had been bugged by the Stasi, and the Stasi tapes of the summit had Kohl saying to Honecker that he did not see any realistic chance of reunification in the foreseeable future.

==East Germany (German Democratic Republic)==
In the Soviet occupation zone, the Social Democratic Party was forced to merge with the Communist Party in April 1946 to form a new party, the Socialist Unity Party (&quot;Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands&quot; or SED). The October 1946 elections resulted in coalition governments in the five &quot;Land&quot; (state) parliaments with the SED as the undisputed leader.

A series of people&#x27;s congresses were called in 1948 and early 1949 by the SED. Under Soviet direction, a constitution was drafted on 30 May 1949, and adopted on 7 October, the day when East Germany was formally proclaimed. The People&#x27;s Chamber &quot;(Volkskammer)&quot;—the lower house of the East German parliament—and an upper house—the States Chamber &quot;(Länderkammer)&quot;—were created. (The &quot;Länderkammer&quot; was abolished again in 1958.) On 11 October 1949, the two houses elected Wilhelm Pieck as President, and an SED government was set up. The Soviet Union and its East European allies immediately recognized East Germany, although it remained largely unrecognized by noncommunist countries until 1972–73. East Germany established the structures of a single-party, centralized, totalitarian communist state. On 23 July 1952, the traditional &quot;Länder&quot; were abolished and, in their place, 14 &quot;Bezirke&quot; (districts) were established. Even though other parties formally existed, effectively, all government control was in the hands of the SED, and almost all important government positions were held by SED members.
The National Front was an umbrella organization nominally consisting of the SED, four other political parties controlled and directed by the SED, and the four principal mass organizations—youth, trade unions, women, and culture. However, control was clearly and solely in the hands of the SED. Balloting in East German elections was not secret. As in other Soviet bloc countries, electoral participation was consistently high, as the following results indicate. In October 1950, a year after the formation of the GDR, 98.53% of the electorate voted. 99.72% of the votes were valid and 99.72% were cast in favor of the &#x27;National Front&#x27;—the title of the &#x27;coalition&#x27; of the Unity Party plus their associates in other conformist groups. In election after election, the votes cast for the Socialist Unity Party were always over 99%, and in 1963, two years after the Berlin Wall was constructed, the support for the S.E.D. was 99.95%. Only 0.05% of the electorate opposed the party according to these results, the veracity of which is disputable.

===Industry and agriculture in East Germany===
With the formation of a separate East German communist state in October 1949, the Socialist Unity Party faced a huge range of problems. Not only were the cities in ruins, much of the productive machinery and equipment had been seized by the Soviet occupation force and transported to The Soviet Union in order to make some kind of reconstruction possible. While West Germany received loans and other financial assistance from the United States, the GDR was in the role of an exporter of goods to the USSR—a role that its people could ill afford but which they could not avoid.

The S.E.D.&#x27;s intention was to transform the GDR into a socialist and later into a communist state. These processes would occur step by step according to the laws of scientific &#x27;Marxism-Leninism&#x27; and economic planning was the key to this process. In July 1952, at a conference of the S.E.D., Walter Ulbricht announced that &quot;the democratic (sic) and economic development, and the consciousness (Bewusstsein) of the working class and the majority of the employed classes must be developed so that the construction of Socialism becomes their most important objective.&quot; This meant that the administration, the armed forces, the planning of industry and agriculture would be under the sole authority of the S.E.D. and its planning committee. Industries would be nationalized and collectivization introduced in the farm industry. When the first Five-Year Plan was announced, the flow of refugees out of East Germany began to grow. As a consequence, production fell, food became short and protests occurred in a number of factories. On 14 May 1952, the S.E.D. ordered that the production quotas (the output per man per shift) were to be increased by 10%, but wages to be kept at the former level. This decision was not popular with the new leaders in the Kremlin. Stalin had died in March 1953 and the new leadership was still evolving. The imposition of new production quotas contradicted the new direction of Soviet policies for their satellites.

On 5 June 1953, the S.E.D. announced a &#x27;new course&#x27; in which farmers, craftsmen, and factory owners would benefit from a relaxation of controls. The new production quotas remained; the East German workers protested and up to sixty strikes occurred the following day. One of the window-dressing projects in the ruins of East Berlin was the construction of Stalin Allee, on which the most &#x27;class-conscious&#x27; workers (in S.E.D. propaganda terms) were involved. At a meeting, strikers declared &quot;You give the capitalists (the factory owners) presents, and we are exploited!&quot; A delegation of building workers marched to the headquarters of the S.E.D. demanding that the production quotas be rescinded. The crowd grew, demands were made for the removal of Ulbricht from office and a general strike called for the following day.

On 17 June 1953 strikes and demonstrations occurred in 250 towns and cities in the GDR. Between 300,000 and 400,000 workers took part in the strikes, which were specifically directed towards the rescinding of the production quotas and were not an attempt to overthrow the government. The strikers were for the most part convinced that the transformation of the GDR into a socialist state was the proper course to take but that the S.E.D. had taken a wrong turn.
The S.E.D. responded with all of the force at its command and also with the help of the Soviet Occupation force. Thousands were arrested, sentenced to jail and many hundreds were forced to leave for West Germany. The S.E.D. later moderated its course but the damage had been done. The real face of the East German regime was revealed. The S.E.D. claimed that the strikes had been instigated by West German agents, but there is no evidence for this. Over 250 strikers were killed, around 100 policemen and some 18 Soviet soldiers died in the uprising; 17 June was declared a national day of remembrance in West Germany.

==Berlin==
Shortly after World War II, Berlin became the seat of the Allied Control Council (ACC) i.e. the &quot;Four Powers&quot;, which was to have governed Germany as a whole until the conclusion of a peace settlement. In 1948, however, the Soviet Union refused to participate any longer in the quadripartite administration of Germany. They also refused to continue the joint administration of Berlin and drove the government elected by the people of Berlin out of its seat in the Soviet sector and installed a communist regime in East Berlin. From then until unification, the Western Allies continued to exercise supreme authority—effective only in their sectors—through the Allied Kommandatura. To the degree compatible with the city&#x27;s special status, however, they turned over control and management of city affairs to the West Berlin Senate and the House of Representatives, governing bodies established by constitutional process and chosen by free elections. The Allies and German authorities in West Germany and West Berlin never recognized the communist city regime in East Berlin or East German authority there.

During the years of West Berlin&#x27;s isolation—176 kilometers (110 mi.) inside East Germany—the Western Allies encouraged a close relationship between the Government of West Berlin and that of West Germany. Representatives of the city participated as non-voting members in the West German Parliament; appropriate West German agencies, such as the supreme administrative court, had their permanent seats in the city; and the governing mayor of West Berlin took his turn as President of the Bundesrat. In addition, the Allies carefully consulted with the West German and West Berlin Governments on foreign policy questions involving unification and the status of Berlin.

Between 1948 and 1990, major events such as fairs and festivals were sponsored in West Berlin, and investment in commerce and industry was encouraged by special concessionary tax legislation. The results of such efforts, combined with effective city administration and the West Berliners&#x27; energy and spirit, were encouraging. West Berlin&#x27;s morale was sustained, and its industrial production considerably surpassed the pre-war level.

The Final Settlement Treaty ended Berlin&#x27;s special status as a separate area under Four Power control. Under the terms of the treaty between West and East Germany, Berlin became the capital of a unified Germany. The Bundestag voted in June 1991 to make Berlin the seat of government. The Government of Germany asked the Allies to maintain a military presence in Berlin until the complete withdrawal of the Western Group of Forces (ex-Soviet) from the territory of the former East Germany. The Russian withdrawal was completed 31 August 1994. Ceremonies were held on 8 September 1994, to mark the final departure of Western Allied troops from Berlin.

Government offices have been moving progressively to Berlin, and it became the formal seat of the federal government in 1999. Berlin also is one of the Federal Republic&#x27;s 16 &quot;Länder&quot;.

==Relations between East Germany and West Germany==
Under Chancellor Adenauer, West Germany declared its right to speak for the entire German nation with an exclusive mandate. The Hallstein Doctrine involved non-recognition of East Germany and restricted (or often ceased) diplomatic relations with countries that gave East Germany the status of a sovereign state.

The constant stream of East Germans fleeing across the Inner German border to West Germany placed great strains on East German-West German relations in the 1950s. East Germany sealed the borders to West Germany in 1952, but people continued to flee from East Berlin to West Berlin. On 13 August 1961, East Germany began building the Berlin Wall around West Berlin to slow the flood of refugees to a trickle, effectively cutting the city in half and making West Berlin an enclave of the Western world in communist territory. The Wall became the symbol of the Cold War and the division of Europe. Shortly afterward, the main border between the two German states was fortified.

In 1969, Chancellor Willy Brandt announced that West Germany would remain firmly rooted in the Atlantic alliance, but would intensify efforts to improve relations with the Eastern Bloc, especially East Germany. West Germany commenced this &quot;Ostpolitik&quot;, initially under fierce opposition from the conservatives, by negotiating nonaggression treaties with the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and Hungary.

West Germany&#x27;s relations with East Germany posed particularly difficult questions. Though anxious to relieve serious hardships for divided families and to reduce friction, West Germany under Brandt&#x27;s &quot;Ostpolitik&quot; was intent on holding to its concept of &quot;two German states in one German nation&quot;. Relations gradually improved. In the early 1970s, the &quot;Ostpolitik&quot; led to a form of mutual recognition between East and West Germany. The Treaty of Moscow (August 1970), the Treaty of Warsaw (December 1970), the Four Power Agreement on Berlin (September 1971), the Transit Agreement (May 1972), and the Basic Treaty (December 1972) helped to normalise relations between East and West Germany and led to both states joining the United Nations in September 1973. The two German states exchanged permanent representatives in 1974, and, in 1987, East German head of state Erich Honecker paid an official visit to West Germany.

===Aftermath===

To this day, there remain vast differences between the former East Germany and West Germany (for example, in lifestyle, wealth, and political beliefs) and thus it is still common to speak of eastern and western Germany distinctly. The eastern German economy has struggled since unification, and large subsidies are still transferred from west to east.

==Notes==
==References==
Works cited
* Fulbrook, Mary. &quot;The Two Germanies, 1945–90&quot; (ch. 7) and &quot;The Federal Republic of Germany Since 1990&quot; (ch. 8) in &quot;A Concise History of Germany&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004): 203–249; 249–257.
* Jean Edward Smith, &quot;Germany Beyond The Wall: People, Politics, and Prosperity&quot;, Boston: Little, Brown, &amp; Company, 1969.
* Jean Edward Smith, &quot;Lucius D. Clay: An American Life&quot;, New York: Henry, Holt, &amp; Company, 1990.
* Jean Edward Smith, &quot;The Defense of Berlin&quot;, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1963.
* Jean Edward Smith, &quot;The Papers of Lucius D. Clay&quot;, 2 Vols., Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1974.
* David H Childs, Germany in the Twentieth Century, (From pre-1918 to the restoration of German unity), Batsford, Third edition, 1991. 
* David H Childs and Jeffrey Johnson, West Germany: Politics And Society, Croom Helm, 1982. 
* David H Childs, The Two Red Flags: European Social Democracy &amp; Soviet Communism Since 1945, Routledge, 2000.

==Further reading==
* Ahonen, Pertti. &quot;Germany and the Aftermath of the Second World War&quot;. &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 89#2 (2017): 355–387.
* Bark, Dennis L., and David R. Gress. &quot;A History of West Germany Vol 1: From Shadow to Substance, 1945–1963&quot; (1992); ; vol 2: &quot;Democracy and Its Discontents 1963–1988&quot; (1992) 
* Berghahn, Volker Rolf. &quot;Modern Germany: society, economy, and politics in the twentieth century&quot; (1987) ACLS E-book online
* Bernhard, Michael. &quot;Democratization in Germany: A Reappraisal&quot;. &quot;Comparative Politics&quot; 33#4 (2001): 379–400. 
* Bessel, Richard. &quot;Germany 1945: From War to Peace&quot; (Harper Collins Publishers, 2009) 
* Davis, Franklin M. Jr. &quot;Come as Conqueror: The United States Army’s Occupation of Germany, 1945–49&quot; (Macmillan, 1967).
* Gray, William Glenn. &quot;Trading Power: West Germany’s Rise to Global Influence, 1963–1975&quot; Cambridge University Press, 2023. 
* Hanrieder, Wolfram F. &quot;Germany, America, Europe: Forty Years of German Foreign Policy&quot; (1989) 
* Jähner, Harald. &quot;Aftermath: Life in the Fallout of the Third Reich, 1945–1955&quot; (2022)
* Jarausch, Konrad H. &quot;After Hitler: Recivilizing Germans, 1945–1995&quot; (2008)
* Junker, Detlef, ed. &quot;The United States and Germany in the Era of the Cold War&quot; (2 vol 2004), 150 short essays by scholars covering 1945–1990 excerpt and text search vol 1; excerpt and text search vol 2
* Merritt, Anna J., and Richard L. Merritt. &quot;Public opinion in occupied Germany: the OMGUS surveys, 1945-1949&quot; (University of Illinois Press, 1970), OMGUS polls.
*Naqvi, Fatima. &quot;The Insulted Landscape: Post-War German Culture 1960–1995&quot; Königshausen &amp; Neumann (2021)
* Schwarz, Hans-Peter. &quot;Konrad Adenauer: A German Politician and Statesman in a Period of War, Revolution and Reconstruction&quot; (2 vol 1995) excerpt and text search vol 2 
* Smith, Jean Edward. &quot;Lucius D. Clay: An American Life&quot; (1990), a major scholarly biography
* Smith, Gordon, ed, &quot; Developments in German Politics&quot; (1992) , broad survey of reunified nation
* Weber, Jurgen. &quot;Germany, 1945–1990&quot; (Central European University Press, 2004) 
* , the official Army history

===GDR===
* Fulbrook, Mary. &quot;Anatomy of a Dictatorship: Inside the GDR, 1949–1989&quot; (1998)
* Jarausch, Konrad H. and Eve Duffy. &quot;Dictatorship As Experience: Towards a Socio-Cultural History of the GDR&quot; (1999)
* Jarausch, Konrad H., and Volker Gransow, eds. &quot;Uniting Germany: Documents and Debates, 1944–1993&quot; (1994), primary sources on reunification
* Pritchard, Gareth. &quot;The Making of the GDR, 1945–53&quot; (2004)
* Ross, Corey. &quot;The East German Dictatorship: Problems and Perspectives in the Interpretation of the GDR&quot; (2002)
* Steiner, André. &quot;The Plans That Failed: An Economic History of East Germany, 1945–1989&quot; (2010)
* Windsor, Philip. &quot;The Berlin Crises&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (June 1962) Vol. 6, p375-384, summarizes the series of crises 1946 to 1961; online.

==External links==

* Germany at the onset of the Cold War
* James F. Byrnes, Speaking Frankly (The division of Germany)
* The President&#x27;s Economic Mission to Germany and Austria, Report No. 1 (1947) 
* The President&#x27;s Economic Mission to Germany and Austria, Report 3 (1947) 
* The Struggle for Germany and the Origins of the Cold War by Melvyn P. Leffler
* Contemporary History maintained by the &quot;Institute for Contemporary Historical Research in Potsdam&quot; 
* Special German series 2. The Committee on Dismemberment of Germany Allied discussions on the dismemberment of Germany into separate states, 29 March 1945.
* East Berlin, Past and Present
* Germany Under Reconstruction is a digital collection that provides a varied selection of publications in both English and German from the period immediately following World War II. Many are publications of the U.S. occupying forces, including reports and descriptions of efforts to introduce U.S.-style democracy to Germany. Some of the other books and documents describe conditions in a country devastated by years of war, efforts at political, economic and cultural development, and the differing perspectives coming from the U.S. and British zones and the Russian zone of occupation.
* For representation of the German Partition in literature, one can consult the Raiganj University – Professor Pinaki Roy&#x27;s &quot;&quot;Das Bewusstsein für die Wand&quot;: A Very Brief Review of German Partition Literature&quot;, in &quot;The Atlantic Critical Review Quarterly&quot; (ISSN 0972-6373; ) 11 (2), April–June 2012: 157–68. In his &quot;&quot;Patriots in Fremden Landern&quot;: 1939–45 German Émigré Literature&quot;, collected in &quot;Writing Difference: Nationalism, Identity, and Literature&quot;, edited by G.N. Ray, J. Sarkar, and A. Bhattacharyya, and published by the New Delhi-based Atlantic Publishers and Distributors in 2014 (; pages-367-90), Roy examines the attitudes and ideologies of those anti-Nazi German litterateurs who were forced to relocate due to their opposition to National Socialism and hence suffered from a sort of identity-crisis. 
* Post-World War II Posters from Germany, 1945–1947 From the Collections at the Library of Congress
* Chronology of the East-West-German division </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1204290" start="4" end="40" title="History of Germany (1945–1990)" label="history of Germany from 1945 to 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="72" end="84" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q821509" start="112" end="130" title="Berlin Declaration (1945)" label="Berlin Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="161" end="173" title="Nazi Germany" label="German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="178" end="211" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Allied-occupied period in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="247" end="267" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="302" end="329" title="collapse of the Third Reich" label="collapse of the Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="342" end="368" title="Defeat of Nazi Germany" label="its defeat in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q700842" start="430" end="478" title="Former eastern territories of Germany" label="more than a quarter of its old pre-war territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q974251" start="494" end="510" title="History of Poland (1945–1989)" label="communist Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="519" end="531" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="571" end="584" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q69829" start="613" end="619" title="French Fourth Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q310293" start="620" end="632" title="Saar Protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="688" end="699" title="Allied Control Council" label="Four Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="756" end="774" title="disputed territory" label="disputed territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="835" end="859" title="Forced displacement" label="foreign displaced people"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="956" end="986" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camp system"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1270" end="1284" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="1373" end="1389" title="POWs in World War II" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1418" end="1426" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="1487" end="1499" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1534" end="1546" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1609" end="1636" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="1704" end="1727" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="1735" end="1752" title="Social democracy" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1811" end="1837" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="1908" end="1924" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="1996" end="2028" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="Socialist Unity Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="2054" end="2069" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2204" end="2238" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="2247" end="2274" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="2376" end="2401" title="Stasi" label="East German secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="2441" end="2452" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q695699" start="2477" end="2505" title="Republikflucht" label="flow of refugees to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q682258" start="2637" end="2656" title="Peaceful Revolution" label="Peaceful Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="2733" end="2751" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q813919" start="2801" end="2824" title="unconditional surrender" label="unconditional surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204290" start="2887" end="2891" title="Partitions of Germany" label="four"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="2901" end="2917" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="occupation zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15214996" start="3079" end="3100" title="Poland-Germany border" label="Poland-Germany border"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="3108" end="3124" title="Oder-Neisse line" label="Oder-Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="3129" end="3136" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206012" start="3381" end="3393" title="German Reich" label="German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q821509" start="3502" end="3527" title="Berlin Declaration (1945)" label="Berlin Declaration (1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514886" start="3745" end="3758" title="Eupen-Malmedy" label="Eupen-Malmedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="3760" end="3775" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="3777" end="3784" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="3786" end="3798" title="Lower Styria" label="Lower Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q909928" start="3800" end="3814" title="Upper Carniola" label="Upper Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q909894" start="3816" end="3834" title="Carinthia (Slovenia)" label="Southern Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="3836" end="3843" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="3845" end="3852" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45551" start="3854" end="3867" title="Czech Silesia" label="Czech Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="3869" end="3875" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="3877" end="3883" title="Nazi-occupied Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161334" start="3889" end="3894" title="Klaipėda Region" label="Memel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="3995" end="4005" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="4258" end="4277" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="4455" end="4472" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="4567" end="4583" title="Oder-Neisse line" label="Oder-Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="5206" end="5214" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="5507" end="5518" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="5562" end="5578" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q542945" start="5678" end="5725" title="Expulsion of Germans from Czechoslovakia" label="&amp;#x27;Wild&amp;#x27; expulsions from Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="5777" end="5795" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q345210" start="6639" end="6650" title="Lambinowice" label="Lambinowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926242" start="6652" end="6669" title="Zgoda labour camp" label="Zgoda labour camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190415" start="6671" end="6699" title="Central Labour Camp Potulice" label="Central Labour Camp Potulice"/>
<link wikidata="Q190410" start="6701" end="6729" title="Central Labour Camp Jaworzno" label="Central Labour Camp Jaworzno"/>
<link wikidata="Q707844" start="7098" end="7110" title="All-German Bloc/League of Expellees and Deprived of Rights" label="voting block"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="7522" end="7537" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q819657" start="7568" end="7589" title="Federation of Expellees" label="substantially aligned"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="7599" end="7636" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7715" end="7732" title="NATO" label="Atlantic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7741" end="7755" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="8405" end="8414" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q159644" start="8503" end="8557" title="Treaty on the Final Settlement With Respect to Germany" label="Treaty on the Final Settlement With Respect to Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="8907" end="8929" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="9477" end="9483" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="9602" end="9613" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="9645" end="9656" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="9778" end="9792" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="9798" end="9806" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="9840" end="9844" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48160" start="9871" end="9895" title="Flag of Germany" label="Provisional Civil Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="10011" end="10028" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="10193" end="10200" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="10792" end="10800" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="11254" end="11274" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q661995" start="11989" end="12004" title="Morgenthau Plan" label="Morgenthau Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q450751" start="12017" end="12037" title="Henry Morgenthau Jr." label="Henry Morgenthau Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q661995" start="12255" end="12263" title="JCS 1067" label="JCS 1067"/>
<link wikidata="Q896234" start="12268" end="12300" title="Allied plans for German industry after World War II" label="the industrial plans for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12413" end="12425" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="12434" end="12452" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="13417" end="13436" title="manufacturing plant" label="manufacturing plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="14091" end="14107" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="14901" end="14933" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q432726" start="14935" end="14950" title="James F. Byrnes" label="James F. Byrnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q560148" start="14974" end="15006" title="Restatement of Policy on Germany" label="Restatement of Policy on Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758073" start="15188" end="15248" title="The President&amp;#x27;s Economic Mission to Germany and Austria" label="The President&amp;#x27;s Economic Mission to Germany and Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="15393" end="15414" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q369360" start="15429" end="15433" title="Lucius D. Clay" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="15438" end="15446" title="George Marshall" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="15660" end="15675" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q661995" start="15761" end="15769" title="JCS 1067" label="JCS 1067"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="16148" end="16163" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q315186" start="16431" end="16451" title="Petersberg Agreement" label="Petersberg Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="16649" end="16682" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="16833" end="16840" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="16894" end="16912" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q464194" start="16972" end="17008" title="International Authority for the Ruhr" label="International Authority for the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q316368" start="17070" end="17097" title="London Six-Power Conference" label="London Six-Power conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="17128" end="17155" title="West Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="17312" end="17345" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q560148" start="17362" end="17394" title="Restatement of Policy on Germany" label="Restatement of Policy on Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="17439" end="17471" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q432726" start="17472" end="17487" title="James F. Byrnes" label="James F. Byrnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310293" start="17770" end="17787" title="Saar Protectorate" label="Saar Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q689450" start="18019" end="18045" title="European Defense Community" label="European Defense Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="18152" end="18174" title="Western European Union" label="Western European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="18186" end="18190" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q693911" start="19271" end="19278" title="Trizone" label="Trizone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="19299" end="19312" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="19483" end="19496" title="Deutsche Mark" label="Deutsche Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="19701" end="19709" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="19820" end="19835" title="Berlin Blockade" label="Berlin Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="19882" end="19897" title="West Germany" label="Western Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="19902" end="19913" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="19960" end="19967" title="Berlin Airlift" label="airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="20116" end="20137" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q16021" start="20760" end="20767" title="1000000000 (number)" label="billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q444698" start="21146" end="21165" title="Operation Paperclip" label="Operation Paperclip"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="21899" end="21915" title="displaced person" label="displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="21935" end="21938" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="21945" end="21963" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="22196" end="22208" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="22470" end="22479" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="22800" end="22807" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="22883" end="22899" title="State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="23190" end="23206" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="23228" end="23240" title="forced labor" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q550881" start="23714" end="23728" title="Norman Naimark" label="Norman Naimark"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="23913" end="23921" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030017" start="24344" end="24361" title="collective trauma" label="collective trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="24393" end="24419" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938128" start="24771" end="24786" title="Miriam Gebhardt" label="Miriam Gebhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="24827" end="24851" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="U.S. soldiers in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q310293" start="24904" end="24921" title="Saar Protectorate" label="Saar Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201" start="25022" end="25030" title="Saarland" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="25459" end="25463" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="25601" end="25618" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="25733" end="25742" title="sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q517319" start="25956" end="25967" title="Stalin Note" label="Stalin Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="25977" end="25997" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="26002" end="26012" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="26013" end="26026" title="Disengagement (Cold War)" label="disengagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="26032" end="26046" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="26541" end="26552" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="27063" end="27084" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="27174" end="27191" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="27207" end="27220" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="27308" end="27318" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27554" end="27566" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="27860" end="27880" title="Constituent Assembly" label="constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="28080" end="28103" title="Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="&amp;quot;Grundgesetz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="28121" end="28133" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="28283" end="28298" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="28300" end="28303" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q512451" start="28411" end="28429" title="occupation statute" label="occupation statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="28633" end="28648" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="28776" end="28799" title="constitutional assembly" label="constitutional assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="28850" end="28867" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q566326" start="28963" end="28984" title="Parlamentarischer Rat" label="Parlamentarischer Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q151897" start="29192" end="29210" title="Reichstag building" label="Reichstag building"/>
<link wikidata="Q168343" start="29311" end="29328" title="Bundesversammlung (Germany)" label="Bundesversammlung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="29572" end="29578" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="29669" end="29678" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="29763" end="29780" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="29914" end="29927" title="German reunification" label="reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q315186" start="29992" end="30012" title="Petersberg agreement" label="Petersberg agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q450503" start="30147" end="30174" title="London and Paris Conferences" label="London and Paris agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="30312" end="30346" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="30417" end="30424" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="30442" end="30475" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q689450" start="30869" end="30895" title="European Defence Community" label="European Defence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q845737" start="31625" end="31640" title="Brussels Treaty" label="Brussels Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="31695" end="31717" title="Western European Union" label="Western European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496" start="32757" end="32770" title="Ludwig Erhard" label="Ludwig Erhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="33422" end="33433" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005930" start="34543" end="34559" title="German Restitution Laws" label="restitution laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q249348" start="36232" end="36245" title="Paragraph 175" label="Paragraph 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="36654" end="36683" title="Buchenwald concentration camp" label="Buchenwald concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q97125" start="36765" end="36775" title="Alf Lüdtke" label="Alf Lüdtke"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="37407" end="37410" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="KPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q315292" start="37831" end="37870" title="Union of Persecutees of the Nazi Regime" label="Union of Persecutees of the Nazi Regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q97125" start="39016" end="39026" title="Alf Ludtke" label="Alf Ludtke"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="39264" end="39273" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q929282" start="40412" end="40423" title="Omer Bartov" label="Omer Bartov"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="40744" end="40770" title="20 July plot" label="July 20 &amp;quot;putsch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q695840" start="40865" end="40877" title="Bendlerblock" label="Bendlerblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q693653" start="40882" end="40899" title="Plötzensee Prison" label="Plötzensee Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332" start="41083" end="41096" title="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp" label="Bergen-Belsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="41100" end="41106" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="42255" end="42272" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Theodor W. Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q679615" start="42331" end="42356" title="Vergangenheitsbewältigung" label="Vergangenheitsbewältigung"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="42617" end="42630" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="42874" end="42888" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="42959" end="42972" title="war criminals" label="war criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="43033" end="43049" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496" start="43808" end="43821" title="Ludwig Erhard" label="Ludwig Erhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512" start="43862" end="43882" title="Kurt Georg Kiesinger" label="Kurt Georg Kiesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q49763" start="44002" end="44024" title="Christian Social Union in Bavaria" label="Christian Social Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="44078" end="44099" title="Free Democratic Party of Germany" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582" start="44798" end="44812" title="Heinrich Lübke" label="Heinrich Lübke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="44901" end="44912" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44620" start="45236" end="45255" title="Franz Josef Strauss" label="Franz Josef Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q62414" start="45441" end="45456" title="Rudolf Augstein" label="Rudolf Augstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q44620" start="45689" end="45708" title="Franz Josef Strauss" label="Franz Josef Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q773760" start="45968" end="45984" title="Frederick Taylor (historian)" label="Frederick Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q650313" start="46452" end="46466" title="Spiegel scandal" label="Spiegel affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496" start="46578" end="46591" title="Ludwig Erhard" label="Ludwig Erhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q655038" start="47030" end="47047" title="Bohdan Stashynsky" label="Bohdan Stashynsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q215981" start="48240" end="48251" title="Fritz Bauer" label="Fritz Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q510395" start="48417" end="48443" title="Frankfurt Auschwitz Trials" label="Frankfurt Auschwitz Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512" start="50334" end="50354" title="Kurt Georg Kiesinger" label="Kurt Georg Kiesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="50478" end="50483" title="Nazi Party" label="NSDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184704" start="50630" end="50645" title="grand coalition" label="grand coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="50719" end="50742" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q314537" start="50797" end="50811" title="German Emergency Acts" label="emergency acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="50991" end="51010" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="51167" end="51188" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q445571" start="51201" end="51224" title="German student movement" label="German student movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q531996" start="51312" end="51344" title="Außerparlamentarische Opposition" label="Außerparlamentarische Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q445571" start="51434" end="51450" title="German student movement" label="student movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q57489" start="51973" end="51987" title="Benno Ohnesorg" label="Benno Ohnesorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q69069" start="52049" end="52066" title="Karl-Heinz Kurras" label="Karl-Heinz Kurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="52159" end="52164" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="52340" end="52347" title="Tabloid journalism" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q156203" start="52354" end="52366" title="Bild-Zeitung" label="Bild-Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q216183" start="52592" end="52605" title="Axel Springer" label="Axel Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57218" start="53025" end="53038" title="Rudi Dutschke" label="Rudi Dutschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="54017" end="54039" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209" start="55313" end="55342" title="Bremen (state)" label="Free Hanseatic City of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q249348" start="55863" end="55876" title="Paragraph 175" label="Paragraph 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q102734" start="57284" end="57300" title="Red Army Faction" label="Red Army Faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="58228" end="58240" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q169505" start="58648" end="58658" title="Ostpolitik" label="Ostpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q641309" start="58977" end="58993" title="Treaty of Moscow (1970)" label="Moscow Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q658048" start="59008" end="59024" title="Treaty of Warsaw (1970)" label="Warsaw Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q519875" start="59041" end="59061" title="Four Power Agreement on Berlin" label="Four-Power Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q672112" start="59108" end="59160" title="Basic Treaty, 1972" label="agreement on relations between West and East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q703911" start="59475" end="59494" title="Warschauer Kniefall" label="Warschauer Kniefall"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="59548" end="59570" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q60454" start="59716" end="59732" title="Günter Guillaume" label="Günter Guillaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="59833" end="59838" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516" start="59952" end="59966" title="Helmut Schmidt" label="Helmut Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106235" start="60039" end="60061" title="Hans-Dietrich Genscher" label="Hans-Dietrich Genscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q703378" start="60530" end="60543" title="German Autumn" label="German Autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q58758" start="60578" end="60599" title="Hanns-Martin Schleyer" label="Hanns-Martin Schleyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212884" start="60743" end="60788" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q326241" start="60798" end="60818" title="Lufthansa Flight 181" label="Lufthansa Flight 181"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="60923" end="60932" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q158431" start="60940" end="60945" title="GSG 9" label="GSG 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q702858" start="61662" end="61671" title="Holocaust (TV miniseries)" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="62946" end="62957" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872987" start="62977" end="63011" title="Constructive Vote of No Confidence" label="Constructive Vote of No Confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q702022" start="63090" end="63122" title="1983 West German federal election" label="national elections in March 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="63297" end="63303" title="German Green Party" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="63415" end="63426" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q54287" start="63509" end="63514" title="RSD-10 Pioneer" label="SS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q15788823" start="63670" end="63681" title="Bitburg controversy" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="63708" end="63721" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q258974" start="63772" end="63779" title="Bitburg" label="Bitburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q88956" start="65670" end="65678" title="Lea Rosh" label="Lea Rosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q552483" start="66452" end="66469" title="Hans-Jochen Vogel" label="Hans-Jochen Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="66671" end="66685" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="67088" end="67109" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="Socialist Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q168396" start="67586" end="67597" title="Volkskammer" label="Volkskammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65917" start="67833" end="67846" title="Wilhelm Pieck" label="Wilhelm Pieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q704655" start="68489" end="68503" title="National Front (East Germany)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156831" start="68511" end="68532" title="umbrella organization" label="umbrella organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="73597" end="73609" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="73641" end="73663" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="73816" end="73828" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q377226" start="74251" end="74270" title="Allied Kommandatura" label="Allied Kommandatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q540130" start="74406" end="74424" title="Senate of Berlin" label="West Berlin Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q640859" start="74433" end="74457" title="Abgeordnetenhaus von Berlin" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="74872" end="74883" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q146138" start="75192" end="75201" title="Bundesrat of Germany" label="Bundesrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q159644" start="75822" end="75845" title="Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany" label="Final Settlement Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="76659" end="76665" title="States of Germany" label="Länder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="76732" end="76751" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Chancellor Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="76753" end="76765" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648299" start="76831" end="76848" title="exclusive mandate" label="exclusive mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q167197" start="76854" end="76872" title="Hallstein Doctrine" label="Hallstein Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700754" start="77095" end="77114" title="Inner German border" label="Inner German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="77309" end="77320" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="77373" end="77384" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="77736" end="77748" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q169505" start="77961" end="77971" title="Ostpolitik" label="Ostpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q641309" start="78619" end="78635" title="Treaty of Moscow (1970)" label="Treaty of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q658048" start="78655" end="78671" title="Treaty of Warsaw (1970)" label="Treaty of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q519875" start="78693" end="78723" title="Four Power Agreement on Berlin" label="Four Power Agreement on Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q895975" start="78746" end="78763" title="Transit Agreement (1972)" label="Transit Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q672112" start="78784" end="78796" title="Basic Treaty (1972)" label="Basic Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="78908" end="78922" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q873267" start="78974" end="78999" title="Permanent Missions of Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic" label="permanent representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="79049" end="79063" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20822560" start="79072" end="79086" title="Erich Honecker&amp;#x27;s 1987 visit to West Germany" label="official visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="79201" end="79213" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170610" start="79755" end="79772" title="Jean Edward Smith" label="Jean Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170610" start="79891" end="79908" title="Jean Edward Smith" label="Jean Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170610" start="80002" end="80019" title="Jean Edward Smith" label="Jean Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170610" start="80096" end="80113" title="Jean Edward Smith" label="Jean Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232339" start="80222" end="80236" title="David H Childs" label="David H Childs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027346" start="81192" end="81207" title="Bessel, Richard" label="Bessel, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q95210396" start="82234" end="82247" title="Fatima Naqvi" label="Naqvi, Fatima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283818" start="85043" end="85061" title="Raiganj University" label="Raiganj University"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="85064" end="85073" title="Professor" label="Professor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85074" end="85084" title="Pinaki Roy" label="Pinaki Roy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85207" end="85245" title="The Atlantic Critical Review Quarterly" label="The Atlantic Critical Review Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="85556" end="85565" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="85691" end="85695" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="85696" end="85702" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="85771" end="85789" title="National Socialism" label="National Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="85922" end="85941" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261683" wikidata="Q1781637" url="?curid=261683" title="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League">
<text>The Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL) is a black nationalist fraternal organization founded by Marcus Garvey, a Jamaican immigrant to the United States, and his then-wife Amy Ashwood Garvey. The African Nationalist organization enjoyed its greatest strength in the 1920s, and was influential prior to Garvey&#x27;s deportation to Jamaica in 1927. After that its prestige and influence declined, but it had a strong influence on African-American history and development. The UNIA was said to be &quot;unquestionably, the most influential anticolonial organization in Jamaica prior to 1938,&quot; according to Honor Ford-Smith.

The organization was founded to work for the advancement of people of African ancestry around the world. Its motto is &quot;One God! One Aim! One Destiny!&quot; and its slogan is &quot;Africa for the Africans, at home and abroad!&quot; The broad mission of the UNIA-ACL led to the establishment of numerous auxiliary components, among them the African Legion (a paramilitary group), the African Black Cross Nurses, plus businesses such as the Black Star Steamship Line and the Negro Factories Corporation.

==Name==
In an article entitled &quot;The Negro&#x27;s Greatest Enemy&quot;, published in &quot;Current History&quot; (September 1923), Garvey explained the origin of the organization&#x27;s name:

Where did the name of the organization come from? It was while speaking to a West Indian Negro who was a passenger with me from Southampton, who was returning home to the West Indies from Basutoland with his Basuto wife, I further learned of the horrors of native life in Africa. He related to me in conversation such horrible and pitiable tales that my heart bled within me. Retiring from the conversation to my cabin, all day and the following night I pondered over the subject matter of that conversation, and at midnight, lying flat on my back, the vision and thought came to me that I should name the organization the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities (Imperial) League. Such a name I thought would embrace the purpose of all black humanity. Thus to the world a name was born, a movement created, and a man became known.

==Early history==

Originally from Saint Ann&#x27;s Bay, Jamaica, Marcus Garvey left at 23 and traveled throughout Central America and moved for a time to England. During his travels he became convinced that uniting Blacks was the only way to improve their condition. Towards that end, he departed England on June 14, 1914, aboard the SS &quot;Trent&quot;, returning to Jamaica on July 15, 1914. He founded the UNIA in Kingston later that month, intending to unite all of Africa and its diaspora into the organization. After traveling through the United States beginning in March 1916, Garvey inaugurated the New York Division of the UNIA in 1918 with 13 members.

&quot;The Negro World&quot; was founded on August 17, 1918, as a weekly newspaper to express the ideas of the organization. Garvey contributed a front-page editorial each week in which he developed the organization&#x27;s position on different issues related to people of African ancestry around the world, in general, and the UNIA, in particular. Eventually claiming a circulation of 500,000, the newspaper was printed in several languages. It contained a page specifically for women readers, documented international events related to people of African ancestry, and was distributed throughout the African diaspora until publication ceased in 1933.

In 1919, the UNIA purchased the first of what would be numerous Liberty Halls. Located at 114 West 138th Street, in Harlem, New York City, the building had a seating capacity of 6,000. The single-level hall with low ceilings had previously been home to the Metropolitan Baptist Tabernacle. It was dedicated on July 27, 1919. On Sunday evenings, it was the site of the weekly UNIA meeting; it also housed a restaurant. Later that year the Association organized the first of its two steamship companies and a separate business corporation.

Incorporated in Delaware as a domestic corporation on June 27, 1919, the Black Star Line, Inc. (BSL) was capitalized at 10 million dollars. It sold shares individually valued at five dollars to both UNIA members and non-members alike. Proceeds from stock sales were used to purchase first the SS &quot;Yarmouth&quot; and then the SS &quot;Shady Side&quot;. The &quot;Shady Side&quot; was used by the association for summer outings and excursions, as well as rented out on charter to other organizations. The BSL later purchased the &quot;Kanawha&quot; as its third vessel. This small yacht was intended for inter-island transportation in the West Indies and was rechristened the SS &quot;Antonio Maceo&quot;.

Also established in 1919 was the Negro Factories Corporation, with a capitalization of one million dollars. It generated income and provided around 700 jobs by its numerous enterprises: three grocery stores, two restaurants, a laundry, a tailor shop, a dressmaking shop, a millinery store, a printing company, and doll factory. However, most went out of business by 1922.

With the growth of its membership from 1918 through 1924, as well as income from its various economic enterprises, UNIA purchased additional Liberty Halls in the US, Canada, Costa Rica, Belize, Panama, Java, and other countries. UNIA also purchased farms in Ohio and other states. It purchased land in Claremont, Virginia with the intention of founding Liberty University.

==First international convention==

By 1920 the association had over 1,900 divisions in more than 40 countries. Most of the divisions were located in the United States, which had become the UNIA&#x27;s base of operations. There were, however, offices in several Caribbean countries, with Cuba having the most. Divisions also existed in Central and South America: Panama, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Ecuador, and Venezuela; in Africa: Gold Coast (now Ghana), Sierra Leone, Liberia, Nigeria, South West Africa (now Namibia), and the Union of South Africa; and in India and Australia.

For the entire month of August 1920, the UNIA-ACL held its first international convention at Madison Square Garden in New York City. The 20,000 attending members promulgated &quot;The Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World&quot; on August 13, 1920, and elected the leaders of the UNIA as &quot;leaders for the Negro people of the world&quot;.
The organization put forth a program based on this declaration, marking the evolution of the movement as one promoting black nationalism. It sought the uplift of the black race and encouraged self-reliance and nationhood. Among the declarations was one proclaiming the red, black and green flag as the official banner of the African race. (Beginning in the 1960s, black nationalists and Pan-Africanists adopted the same flag as the Black Liberation Flag.) UNIA-ACL officially designated the song &quot;Ethiopia, Thou Land of Our Fathers&quot; as the official anthem of &quot;Africa and the Africans, at home and Abroad&quot;.

Under the provisions of the UNIA constitution, Gabriel Johnson was elected Supreme Potentate; G. O. Marke, Supreme Deputy Potentate; J. W. [H]. Eason, leader of the fifteen million &quot;Negroes&quot; of the United States of America; and Henrietta Vinton Davis, International Organizer. Garvey was elected &quot;Provisional President of Africa&quot;, a mostly ceremonial title. George Alexander McGuire, an Episcopal priest, was elected as the first chaplain-general of the UNIA.

McGuire wrote two important documents for the organization: &quot;Universal Negro Ritual&quot; and &quot;Universal Negro Catechism&quot;. For these he drew from his interest and knowledge of religion and race history. In Philadelphia, where he had earlier been the rector of St. Thomas Episcopal Church, McGuire had been an early member of the American Negro Historical Society.

The opening parade was one of the most striking features of the 1920 convention. It began outside the UNIA headquarters on West 135th Street, went uptown as far as 145th and downtown as far as 125th Street, taking it beyond the boundaries of black residence into white areas. Four mounted policemen, and the heads of Black Star Line and Negro Factories Corporation, led the parade, followed by cars carrying Garvey and Mayor of Monrovia, capital of Liberia, and other UNIA officials, then the Black Star Line Choir, on foot, and contingents from throughout US and Caribbean, Canada, Nigeria, carrying banners, and including 12 bands, with about 500 cars bringing up the rear. Similar dramatic parades were featured in the 1922 and 1924 conventions. Many photographs survive of the 1924 Convention Parade, as Garvey employed noted photographer James Van Der Zee to record the event.

Even after Garvey had left Harlem (he was imprisoned in 1925 and deported to Jamaica in 1927), the UNIA paraded each August throughout the 1920s, with the place of honour given to portraits of their absent leader. The crowds were transfixed by the spectacle of uniformed UNIA members, particularly the African Legion and Black Cross Nurses.

According to the preamble of the 1929 constitution as amended, the UNIA is a

social, friendly, humanitarian, charitable, educational, institutional, constructive and expansive society, and is founded by persons desiring to do the utmost to work for the general uplift of the people of African ancestry of the world. And the members pledge themselves to do all in their power to conserve the rights of their noble race and to respect the rights of all mankind, believing always in the Brotherhood of Man and the Fatherhood of God. The motto of the organization is &#x27;One God! One Aim! One Destiny!&#x27; Therefore, let justice be done to all mankind, realizing that if the strong oppresses the weak, confusion and discontent will ever mark the path of man but with love, faith and charity towards all the reign of peace and plenty will be heralded into the world and the generations of men shall be called Blessed.

==Liberian program==
Although UNIA was not solely a &quot;Back to Africa&quot; movement, the organization did work to arrange for emigration for African Americans who wanted to go there. In late 1923, an official UNIA delegation that included Robert Lincoln Poston and Henrietta Vinton Davis traveled to Liberia to survey potential land sites for possible purchase. They also assessed the general condition of the country from the standpoint of UNIA members interested in living in Africa.

By 1924 the Chief Justice J. J. Dossen of Liberia wrote to UNIA conveying the government&#x27;s support:

The President directs me to say in reply to your letter of June 8 setting forth the objects and purposes of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, that the Government of Liberia, appreciating as they do the aims of your organization as outlined by you, have no hesitancy in assuring you that they will afford the Association every facility legally possible in effectuating in Liberia its industrial, agricultural and business projects.

About two months later, however, the Liberian President unexpectedly ordered all Liberian ports to refuse entry to any member of the &quot;Garvey Movement&quot;. This action closely followed the Firestone Rubber Company&#x27;s agreement with Liberia for a 99-year lease of one million acres (4,000 km2) of land. It was extracting and processing rubber for the world market. This land deal had been assisted by American and European governments. Originally Liberia had intended to lease the land to UNIA at an unprecedented dollar an acre ($247/km2). The commercial agreement with Firestone Tire dealt a severe blow to the UNIA&#x27;s African repatriation program and inspired speculation that the actions were linked.

==Post-Garvey era==
After Garvey&#x27;s conviction and imprisonment on mail fraud charges in 1925 and deportation to Jamaica in 1927, the organization began to take on a different character. In 1926, George Weston succeeded Garvey in a UNIA Convention Election, becoming the second elected President-General of the UNIA, Inc. Many Garvey supporters were angered, and split off into rival entities such as the &quot;Garvey Clubs&quot; and other organizations, based on members&#x27; differing interpretation of the original aims and objects of the UNIA.

But the UNIA continued to be officially recognized as the &quot;Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League&quot;. A rival &quot;UNIA-ACL August 1929 of the World&quot; emerged, headed by Marcus Garvey after his deportation to Jamaica.

Garvey appointed Maymie de Mena as his official representative to head the American field after his ouster to Jamaica. She was a fiery orator and spoke both Spanish and English, helping with the spread of the organization through Latin America and the Caribbean.

===The UNIA Inc===

The UNIA, Inc., after Garvey&#x27;s departure, continued to operate out of New York until 1941. After Weston&#x27;s 1926 election to President-General, he was succeeded by Frederick Augustus Toote (1929), Clifford Bourne (1930), Lionel Antonio Francis (1931–34), Henrietta Vinton Davis (1934–40), Lionel Antonio Francis (1940–61), Captain A. L. King (1961–81) and Milton Kelly, Jr. (1981–2007).

In a historic 1939 British Supreme Court decision, President-General Francis was recognized as the rightful administrative heir to the huge Sir Isaiah Emmanuel Morter (DSOE) Estate in Belize. The organization&#x27;s administrative headquarters were shifted to Belize in 1941 when the President-General relocated there from New York.

Upon Francis&#x27;s death in 1961 during Hurricane Hattie, the presidency shifted back to New York under the leadership of Captain A. L. King, formerly president of the Central Division of the UNIA in New York. After his death in the early 1980s, longtime Garveyite organizer Milton Kelly, Jr. assumed the administrative reins and continued to head the association until 2007.

===The UNIA-ACL 1929 of the World===

The UNIA 1929 headed by Garvey continued operating in Jamaica until he moved to England in 1935. There he set up office for the parent body of the UNIA 1929 and maintained contact with all its divisions. UNIA 1929 conventions were held in Canada in 1936, 1937, and 1938. The 1937 sessions were highlighted by the introduction of the first course of African philosophy conducted by Garvey.

Garvey became ill in January 1940, and died on June 10, 1940. UNIA members worldwide participated in eulogies, memorial services and processions in his honor. Secretary-General Ethel Collins briefly managed the affairs of the UNIA from New York until a successor to Garvey could be formally installed to complete his term as President-General.

During an emergency commissioners&#x27; conference in June 1940, James R. Stewart, a commissioner from Ohio and graduate of the course of African philosophy, was named the successor. In the months to follow, the Parent Body of the UNIA was moved from its temporary headquarters in New York to Cleveland. In October 1940 the &quot;New Negro World&quot; started publishing out of Cleveland. After the 1942 International Convention in Cleveland, a rehabilitating committee of disgruntled members was held in New York during September.

===Parent Body in Monrovia===
Stewart moved to Monrovia, Liberia, in 1949. He took Liberian citizenship and moved the Parent Body of the UNIA there. He continued to lead the Association as President-General until his death in 1964. Stewart and his entire family relocated deeper into the interior of the country, establishing themselves in Gbandela, Bong County, Liberia. There they established a hospital, school and farm.

When Stewart died from cancer in 1964, the Parent Body was moved from Monrovia to Youngstown, Ohio, where James A. Bennett took the reins. In 1968 Bennett was succeeded by Vernon Wilson.

After President-General Wilson&#x27;s death in 1975, Mason Harvgrave became next President General. Hargrave testified during United States congressional hearings in August 1987 in relation to the proposed exoneration of Marcus Garvey on charges of mail fraud. The findings of the Judiciary Committee were: Garvey was innocent of the charges against him. Although the Committee determined he had been found guilty earlier due to the social climate of America at the time, they had no legal basis upon which to exonerate a person who had died.

After President General Hargrave died in 1988, all his papers and other Parent Body material were turned over to the Western Reserve Historical Society in Cleveland, Ohio, for safe-keeping. From 1988 until the 2024, Cleo Miller, Jr. has held the title of President General. Per the 2024 UNIA Convention in Washington, D.C., the Honorable Mwariama Kamau is now currently President-General of the UNIA.

==Notable members of the UNIA==
*Dusé Mohamed Ali
*Amy Ashwood Garvey
*John Edward Bruce
*Eliezer Cadet
*Henrietta Vinton Davis
*William H. Ferris
*Arnold Josiah Ford
*Timothy Thomas Fortune
*Amy Jacques Garvey
*Marcus Garvey
*St. William Grant
*Hubert Henry Harrison
*Thomas Watson Harvey
*Samuel Alfred Haynes
*Hubert Julian
*Louise Little
*Maymie de Mena
*George Alexander McGuire
*Isaiah Emmanuel Morter
*Solomon Plaatje
*Robert Lincoln Poston
*Alice S. Presto
*Thomas Vincent Ramos
*James Robert Stewart
*Eric D. Walrond
==See also==
==References==
== Further reading ==

* Cronon, E. David. &quot;Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association&quot; (1969) online

* Martin, Tony. &quot;Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Struggles of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association&quot; (Greenwood, 1976) online

*&quot;Defending the Master Race: Conservation, Eugenics, and the Legacy of Madison Grant&quot; by Jonathan P; Spiro, University of Vermont Press (2009), 
*Van Leeuwen, David. &quot;Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association&quot;, &quot;Divining America: Religion in American History&quot;, National Humanities Center, 2000.
===Primary sources===
* Hill, Robert A., ed. &quot;The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers. Vols. 1–7&quot; (University of California Press, 1984).

== External links ==
* Official UNIA-ACL website
* Encyclopedia of Cleveland History:UNIVERSAL NEGRO IMPROVEMENT ASSN. (UNIA)
* The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers Project
* Marcus Garvey: The Official Site
*Gale Group guide to UNIA
*American Series Sample Documents —Volume I: 1826 – August 1919
* 1918 UNIA Constitution 
* Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library, Emory University: Universal Negro Improvement Association records, 1916, 1921-1989
*United Fruit Company letters about Garvey&#x27;s activities in Panama &amp; Costa Rica at University of Toronto Mississauga Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="4" end="74" title="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League" label="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="76" end="84" title="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League" label="UNIA-ACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="91" end="108" title="black nationalist" label="black nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="109" end="131" title="fraternal organization" label="fraternal organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="143" end="156" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127469" start="160" end="168" title="Jamaicans" label="Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="186" end="199" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749079" start="219" end="237" title="Amy Ashwood Garvey" label="Amy Ashwood Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874021" start="243" end="262" title="African nationalism" label="African Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="476" end="492" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896794" start="656" end="672" title="Honor Ford-Smith" label="Honor Ford-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="1037" end="1049" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035095" start="1070" end="1088" title="Black Cross Nurses" label="Black Cross Nurses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921905" start="1118" end="1143" title="Black Star Steamship Line" label="Black Star Steamship Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987591" start="1152" end="1179" title="Negro Factories Corporation" label="Negro Factories Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195051" start="1278" end="1293" title="Current History" label="Current History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050339" start="1457" end="1474" title="Afro-Caribbeans" label="West Indian Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="1508" end="1519" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="1551" end="1562" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340665" start="1568" end="1578" title="Basutoland" label="Basutoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q577576" start="1588" end="1594" title="Basuto" label="Basuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q630692" start="2272" end="2292" title="Saint Ann&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="Saint Ann&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526023" start="2294" end="2301" title="Colony of Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2392" end="2399" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022319" start="2572" end="2592" title="SS Trent" label="SS &amp;quot;Trent&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874273" start="2908" end="2923" title="Negro World" label="The Negro World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3618" end="3631" title="Liberty Hall (Harlem)" label="Liberty Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="3670" end="3676" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3678" end="3691" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="4109" end="4117" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921905" start="4166" end="4187" title="Black Star Line" label="Black Star Line, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q56274133" start="4386" end="4409" title="SS Yarmouth" label="SS &amp;quot;Yarmouth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460952" start="4423" end="4448" title="Shady Side (steamboat)" label="SS &amp;quot;Shady Side&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6360796" start="4631" end="4638" title="Kanawha (1899)" label="Kanawha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987591" start="4836" end="4863" title="Negro Factories Corporation" label="Negro Factories Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373680" start="5478" end="5497" title="Claremont, Virginia" label="Claremont, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="5838" end="5842" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="5913" end="5919" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="5921" end="5931" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="5933" end="5942" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="5944" end="5951" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="5957" end="5966" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="5979" end="5989" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="5995" end="6000" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="6003" end="6015" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="6017" end="6024" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046345" start="6026" end="6033" title="Colonial Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="6035" end="6052" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="6058" end="6065" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="6076" end="6097" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="6106" end="6111" title="British India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6116" end="6125" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="6169" end="6177" title="UNIA-ACL" label="UNIA-ACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q9026714" start="6221" end="6242" title="Madison Square Garden (1890)" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6246" end="6259" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249467" start="6302" end="6373" title="The Declaration of the Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World" label="&amp;quot;The Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029729" start="6757" end="6782" title="Pan-African flag" label="red, black and green flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="6852" end="6870" title="black nationalism" label="black nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="6875" end="6886" title="Pan-African" label="Pan-African"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="6990" end="6998" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489332" start="7162" end="7177" title="Gabriel Johnson" label="Gabriel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716052" start="7353" end="7375" title="Henrietta Vinton Davis" label="Henrietta Vinton Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536158" start="7493" end="7517" title="George Alexander McGuire" label="George Alexander McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="7817" end="7829" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689762" start="7871" end="7898" title="African Episcopal Church of St. Thomas" label="St. Thomas Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161458" start="8819" end="8836" title="James Van Der Zee" label="James Van Der Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q345367" start="9279" end="9285" title="social" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q775858" start="9297" end="9309" title="humanitarian" label="humanitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="9336" end="9349" title="institutional" label="institutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="9378" end="9385" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="9487" end="9493" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="9495" end="9503" title="ancestry" label="ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="10265" end="10282" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346901" start="10363" end="10384" title="Robert Lincoln Poston" label="Robert Lincoln Poston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716052" start="10389" end="10411" title="Henrietta Vinton Davis" label="Henrietta Vinton Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="10424" end="10431" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="10602" end="10608" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680633" start="10637" end="10649" title="J. J. Dossen" label="J. J. Dossen"/>
<link wikidata="Q420837" start="11355" end="11364" title="Firestone Tire and Rubber Company" label="Firestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28777076" start="12714" end="12728" title="Maymie de Mena" label="Maymie de Mena"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="12927" end="12940" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="12949" end="12958" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716052" start="13244" end="13266" title="Henrietta Vinton Davis" label="Henrietta Vinton Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13278" end="13300" title="Lionel Antonio Francis" label="Lionel Antonio Francis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13320" end="13330" title="A. L. King" label="A. L. King"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13345" end="13362" title="Milton Kelly, Jr." label="Milton Kelly, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="13396" end="13417" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="British Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078502" start="13521" end="13543" title="Isaiah Emmanuel Morter" label="Isaiah Emmanuel Morter"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="13561" end="13567" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638597" start="13752" end="13768" title="Hurricane Hattie" label="Hurricane Hattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="14207" end="14214" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="14366" end="14372" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022288" start="14927" end="14943" title="James R. Stewart" label="James R. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="14965" end="14969" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="15155" end="15164" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="15442" end="15450" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15735" end="15743" title="Gbandela" label="Gbandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q877578" start="15745" end="15756" title="Bong County" label="Bong County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="15758" end="15765" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216820" start="15902" end="15912" title="Youngstown, Ohio" label="Youngstown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16061" end="16076" title="Mason Harvgrave" label="Mason Harvgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988241" start="16669" end="16703" title="Western Reserve Historical Society" label="Western Reserve Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131640" start="16768" end="16779" title="Cleo Miller" label="Cleo Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q49265" start="16987" end="17003" title="Dusé Mohamed Ali" label="Dusé Mohamed Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749079" start="17005" end="17023" title="Amy Ashwood Garvey" label="Amy Ashwood Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231267" start="17025" end="17042" title="John Edward Bruce" label="John Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360749" start="17044" end="17057" title="Eliezer Cadet" label="Eliezer Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716052" start="17059" end="17081" title="Henrietta Vinton Davis" label="Henrietta Vinton Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010398" start="17083" end="17100" title="William H. Ferris" label="William H. Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795119" start="17102" end="17120" title="Arnold Josiah Ford" label="Arnold Josiah Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807563" start="17122" end="17144" title="Timothy Thomas Fortune" label="Timothy Thomas Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q481874" start="17146" end="17164" title="Amy Jacques Garvey" label="Amy Jacques Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="17166" end="17179" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592160" start="17181" end="17198" title="St. William Grant" label="St. William Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682630" start="17200" end="17221" title="Hubert Henry Harrison" label="Hubert Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794750" start="17223" end="17243" title="Thomas Watson Harvey" label="Thomas Watson Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410748" start="17245" end="17265" title="Samuel Alfred Haynes" label="Samuel Alfred Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q135296" start="17267" end="17280" title="Hubert Julian" label="Hubert Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621330" start="17282" end="17295" title="Louise Little" label="Louise Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q28777076" start="17297" end="17311" title="Maymie de Mena" label="Maymie de Mena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536158" start="17313" end="17337" title="George Alexander McGuire" label="George Alexander McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078502" start="17339" end="17361" title="Isaiah Emmanuel Morter" label="Isaiah Emmanuel Morter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143151" start="17363" end="17378" title="Solomon Plaatje" label="Solomon Plaatje"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346901" start="17380" end="17401" title="Robert Lincoln Poston" label="Robert Lincoln Poston"/>
<link wikidata="Q66691260" start="17403" end="17418" title="Alice S. Presto" label="Alice S. Presto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794711" start="17420" end="17440" title="Thomas Vincent Ramos" label="Thomas Vincent Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022288" start="17442" end="17462" title="James R. Stewart" label="James Robert Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386342" start="17464" end="17479" title="Eric D. Walrond" label="Eric D. Walrond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261690" wikidata="Q216823" url="?curid=261690" title="Air mass">
<text>In meteorology, an air mass is a volume of air defined by its temperature and humidity. Air masses cover many hundreds or thousands of square miles, and adapt to the characteristics of the surface below them. They are classified according to latitude and their continental or maritime source regions. Colder air masses are termed polar or arctic, while warmer air masses are deemed tropical. Continental and superior air masses are dry, while maritime and monsoon air masses are moist. Weather fronts separate air masses with different density (temperature or moisture) characteristics. Once an air mass moves away from its source region, underlying vegetation and water bodies can quickly modify its character. Classification schemes tackle an air mass&#x27;s characteristics, as well as modification.

==Classification and notation==

The Bergeron classification is the most widely accepted form of air mass classification, though others have produced more refined versions of this scheme over different regions of the globe. Air mass classification involves three letters. The first letter describes its moisture properties – &quot;c&quot; represents continental air masses (dry), and &quot;m&quot; represents maritime air masses (moist). Its source region follows: &quot;T&quot; stands for Tropical, &quot;P&quot; stands for Polar, &quot;A&quot; stands for Arctic or Antarctic, &quot;M&quot; stands for monsoon, &quot;E&quot; stands for Equatorial, and &quot;S&quot; stands for adiabatically drying and warming air formed by significant downward motion in the atmosphere. For instance, an air mass originating over the desert southwest of the United States in summer may be designated &quot;cT&quot;. An air mass originating over northern Siberia in winter may be indicated as &quot;cA&quot;.

The stability of an air mass may be shown using a third letter, either &quot;k&quot; (air mass colder than the surface below it) or &quot;w&quot; (air mass warmer than the surface below it). An example of this might be a polar air mass blowing over the Gulf Stream, denoted as &quot;cPk&quot;. Occasionally, one may also encounter the use of an apostrophe or &quot;degree tick&quot; denoting that a given air mass having the same notation as another it is replacing is colder than the replaced air mass (usually for polar air masses). For example, a series of fronts over the Pacific might show an air mass denoted mPk followed by another denoted mPk&#x27;.

Another convention utilizing these symbols is the indication of modification or transformation of one type to another. For instance, an Arctic air mass blowing out over the Gulf of Alaska may be shown as &quot;cA-mPk&quot;. Yet another convention indicates the layering of air masses in certain situations. For instance, the overrunning of a polar air mass by an air mass from the Gulf of Mexico over the Central United States might be shown with the notation &quot;mT/cP&quot; (sometimes using a horizontal line as in fraction notation).

==Characteristics==
Tropical and equatorial air masses are hot as they develop over lower latitudes. Tropical air masses have lower pressure because hot air rises and cold air sinks. Those that develop over land (continental) are drier and hotter than those that develop over oceans, and travel poleward on the southern periphery of the subtropical ridge. Maritime tropical air masses are sometimes referred to as trade air masses. Maritime tropical air masses that affect the United States originate in the Caribbean Sea, southern Gulf of Mexico, and tropical Atlantic east of Florida through the Bahamas. Monsoon air masses are moist and unstable. Superior air masses are dry, and rarely reach the ground. They normally reside over maritime tropical air masses, forming a warmer and drier layer over the more moderate moist air mass below, forming what is known as a trade wind inversion over the maritime tropical air mass.

Continental Polar air masses (cP) are air masses that are cold and dry due to their continental source region. Continental polar air masses that affect North America form over interior Canada. Continental Tropical air masses (cT) are a type of tropical air produced by the subtropical ridge over large areas of land and typically originate from low-latitude deserts such as the Sahara Desert in northern Africa, which is the major source of these air masses. Other less important sources producing cT air masses are the Arabian Peninsula, the central arid/semi-arid part of Australia and deserts lying in the Southwestern United States. Continental tropical air masses are extremely hot and dry. Arctic, Antarctic, and polar air masses are cold. The qualities of arctic air are developed over ice and snow-covered ground. Arctic air is deeply cold, colder than polar air masses. Arctic air can be shallow in the summer, and rapidly modify as it moves equatorward. Polar air masses develop over higher latitudes over the land or ocean, are very stable, and generally shallower than arctic air. Polar air over the ocean (maritime) loses its stability as it gains moisture over warmer ocean waters.

==Movement and fronts==
A weather front is a boundary separating two masses of air of different densities, and is the principal cause of meteorological phenomena. In surface weather analyses, fronts are depicted using various colored lines and symbols, depending on the type of front. The air masses separated by a front usually differ in temperature and humidity.
Cold fronts may feature narrow bands of thunderstorms and severe weather, and may on occasion be preceded by squall lines or dry lines. Warm fronts are usually preceded by stratiform precipitation and fog. The weather usually clears quickly after a front&#x27;s passage. Some fronts produce no precipitation and little cloudiness, although there is invariably a wind shift.

Cold fronts and occluded fronts generally move from west to east, while warm fronts move poleward. Because of the greater density of air in their wake, cold fronts and cold occlusions move faster than warm fronts and warm occlusions. Mountains and warm bodies of water can slow the movement of fronts. When a front becomes stationary, and the density contrast across the frontal boundary vanishes, the front can degenerate into a line which separates regions of differing wind velocity, known as a shearline. This is most common over the open ocean.

==Modification==
Air masses can be modified in a variety of ways. Surface flux from underlying vegetation, such as forest, acts to moisten the overlying air mass. Heat from underlying warmer waters can significantly modify an air mass over distances as short as to . For example, southwest of extratropical cyclones, curved cyclonic flow bringing cold air across the relatively warm water bodies can lead to narrow lake-effect snow bands. Those bands bring strong localized precipitation since large water bodies such as lakes efficiently store heat that results in significant temperature differences (larger than 13 °C or 23 °F) between the water surface and the air above. Because of this temperature difference, warmth and moisture are transported upward, condensing into vertically oriented clouds (see satellite picture) which produce snow showers. The temperature decrease with height and cloud depth are directly affected by both the water temperature and the large-scale environment. The stronger the temperature decrease with height, the deeper the clouds get, and the greater the precipitation rate becomes.

== See also ==
* Solar irradiance 
* Spatial Synoptic Classification system

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="3" end="14" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q216823" start="19" end="27" title="Air mass" label="air mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="33" end="39" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="43" end="46" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="62" end="73" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="78" end="86" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q232291" start="135" end="146" title="square mile" label="square mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="242" end="250" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="456" end="463" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217651" start="560" end="568" title="moisture" label="moisture"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="650" end="660" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15324" start="665" end="677" title="body of water" label="water bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q949231" start="841" end="849" title="Tor Bergeron" label="Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1154" end="1182" title="continental air mass" label="continental air masses (dry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1294" end="1302" title="Tropics" label="Tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q60670" start="1329" end="1334" title="Polar region" label="Polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="1361" end="1367" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="1371" end="1380" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="1407" end="1414" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="1441" end="1448" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q182453" start="1482" end="1491" title="adiabatic" label="adiabatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="1623" end="1639" title="desert southwest" label="desert southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="1743" end="1750" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="2051" end="2062" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2374" end="2381" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="2630" end="2644" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="2838" end="2852" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140343" start="2862" end="2883" title="Central United States" label="Central United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q972926" start="3334" end="3351" title="subtropical ridge" label="subtropical ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="3505" end="3518" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="3575" end="3582" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="3595" end="3602" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="3866" end="3876" title="trade wind" label="trade wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="4303" end="4316" title="Sahara Desert" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="4445" end="4462" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4499" end="4508" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="4534" end="4560" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="5218" end="5227" title="density" label="densities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329451" start="5259" end="5283" title="meteorological phenomenon" label="meteorological phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q11157129" start="5288" end="5312" title="surface weather analysis" label="surface weather analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="5461" end="5472" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="5477" end="5485" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="5487" end="5497" title="Cold front" label="Cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="5527" end="5539" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q741507" start="5545" end="5559" title="severe weather" label="severe weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q841225" start="5596" end="5607" title="squall line" label="squall line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742789" start="5612" end="5620" title="dry line" label="dry line"/>
<link wikidata="Q537536" start="5623" end="5633" title="Warm front" label="Warm front"/>
<link wikidata="Q40526" start="5659" end="5669" title="Stratus cloud" label="stratiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="5670" end="5683" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="5688" end="5691" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q747330" start="5878" end="5892" title="occluded front" label="occluded front"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="5951" end="5959" title="Geographical pole" label="poleward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362362" start="6008" end="6012" title="Wake (physics)" label="wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="6096" end="6104" title="Mountain" label="Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194255" start="6185" end="6195" title="stationary front" label="stationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11157129" start="6360" end="6369" title="Shear line (meteorology)" label="shearline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063457" start="6706" end="6727" title="extratropical cyclone" label="extratropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969483" start="6828" end="6844" title="lake-effect snow" label="lake-effect snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="7550" end="7566" title="Solar irradiance" label="Solar irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574047" start="7570" end="7608" title="Spatial Synoptic Classification system" label="Spatial Synoptic Classification system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261695" wikidata="Q149451" url="?curid=261695" title="Lew Rockwell">
<text>Llewellyn Harrison Rockwell Jr. (born July 1, 1944) is an American author, editor, and political consultant. A libertarian and a self-professed anarcho-capitalist, he founded and is the chairman of the Mises Institute, a non-profit promoting the Austrian School of economics.

After graduating from university, Rockwell had jobs at the conservative Arlington House Publishers, the radical-right John Birch Society, and the traditionalist Hillsdale College. Reading the works of Murray Rothbard, who became his mentor, led Rockwell to become an ardent believer in Austrian economics and what he calls &quot;libertarian anarchism&quot;. Rockwell was chief of staff to Congressman Ron Paul from 1978 to 1982, and was a founding officer and former vice president at Ron Paul &amp; Associates, which published political and investment-oriented newsletters bearing Paul&#x27;s name. Racist and homophobic content in those newsletters became a controversy in Paul&#x27;s later campaigns; Rockwell denied ghostwriting it but acknowledged a role in the promotion. Rockwell partnered with Rothbard in 1982 to found the Mises Institute in Alabama, where , Rockwell still serves as chairman.

Rockwell&#x27;s website, LewRockwell.com, was launched in 1999. The website features articles about political philosophy, economics, and contemporary politics. The website&#x27;s motto is &quot;anti-war, anti-state, pro-market&quot;. Rockwell, his website and the Mises Institute have promoted neo-Confederate views.

==Life and career==
Rockwell was born in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1944. After college, Rockwell worked at Arlington House publishers and became acquainted with the works of Ludwig von Mises.

A former lifetime member of the radical-right John Birch Society, Rockwell worked in its Member&#x27;s Monthly Message Department before resigning amid disputes with the society&#x27;s leaders. In the mid-1970s, Rockwell worked at the traditionalist Hillsdale College in fundraising and public relations. 

Rockwell met the anarcho-capitalist Murray Rothbard in 1975 and credits Rothbard with convincing him to abandon minarchism and reject the state completely. In 1985, Rockwell was named a contributing editor to &quot;Conservative Digest&quot;. Rockwell also served as Vice President of the Center for Libertarian Studies in Burlingame, California, which published the &quot;Rothbard-Rockwell Report&quot;. Rockwell was closely associated with Rothbard until Rothbard&#x27;s death in 1995. 

=== Work for Ron Paul (1978–) ===

Rockwell was Ron Paul&#x27;s congressional chief of staff from 1978 to 1982 and was a consultant to Paul&#x27;s 1988 Libertarian Party campaign for President of the United States. He was vice-chair of the exploratory committee for Paul&#x27;s run for the 1992 Republican Party nomination for president.

===Ron Paul newsletters===
Rockwell was a founding officer and former vice president at Ron Paul &amp; Associates, which was one of the publishers of a variety of political and investment-oriented newsletters bearing Paul&#x27;s name. 

In January 2008, during Ron Paul&#x27;s 2008 presidential campaign, James Kirchick of &quot;The New Republic&quot; uncovered a collection of Ron Paul newsletters that contained &quot;decades worth of obsession with conspiracies, sympathy for the right-wing militia movement, and deeply held bigotry against blacks, Jews, and gays.&quot; For instance, one issue approved of the slogan &quot;Sodomy = Death&quot; and said homosexuals suffering from HIV/AIDS &quot;enjoy the pity and attention that comes with being sick&quot;.

Most of the articles contained no bylines. Numerous sources alleged that Rockwell had ghostwritten the controversial newsletters; Rockwell is listed as &quot;contributing editor&quot; on physical copies of some newsletters and listed as sole Editor of the May 1988 &quot;Ron Paul investment Newsletter&quot;. &quot;Reason&quot; magazine reported that &quot;a half-dozen longtime libertarian activists – including some still close to Paul&quot; had identified Rockwell as the &quot;chief ghostwriter&quot; of the newsletters, as did former Ron Paul Chief of Staff (1981–1985) John W. Robbins.

Rockwell admitted to Kirchick that he was &quot;involved in the promotion&quot; of the newsletters and wrote the subscription letters but denied ghostwriting the articles. He said there were &quot;seven or eight freelancers involved at various stages&quot; of the newsletter&#x27;s history and indicated another individual who had &quot;left in unfortunate circumstances&quot; and &quot;is now long gone&quot;, but whom he did not identify, was in charge of editing and publishing the newsletters. Rockwell has described discussion of the newsletters scandal as &quot;hysterical smears aimed at political enemies.&quot; Ron Paul himself repudiated the newsletters&#x27; content and said he was not involved in the daily operations of the newsletters or saw much of their content until years later. In 2011, Paul&#x27;s spokesperson Jesse Benton said that Paul had &quot;taken moral responsibility because they appeared under his name and slipped through under his watch&quot;.

=== Mises Institute (1982–) ===

In 1982, Rockwell founded the Ludwig von Mises Institute in Auburn, Alabama, and is chairman of the board.

The Mises Institute published Rockwell&#x27;s &quot;Speaking of Liberty&quot;, an anthology of editorials which were originally published on his website, along with transcripts from some of his speaking engagements. The institute hosted conferences on secession; Rockwell wrote before a 1995 conference, &quot;We&#x27;ll explore what causes [secession] and how to promote it.&quot;

===Paleolibertarianism (1980s–2000s)===

Rothbard, Rockwell and others described their views as paleolibertarian to describe their cultural conservatism fused with their otherwise anti-statist beliefs. They forged a &quot;paleo alliance&quot; between paleolibertarians and paleoconservatives in the form of the John Randolph Club in 1989, which allied the Mises Institute and the paleoconservative Rockford Institute.

In a 2007 interview, Rockwell revealed he no longer considered himself a &quot;paleolibertarian&quot; and was &quot;happy with the term libertarian.&quot; He explained &quot;the term paleolibertarian became confused because of its association with paleoconservative, so it came to mean some sort of socially conservative libertarian, which wasn&#x27;t the point at all...&quot;

===LewRockwell.com (1999–)===
Rockwell&#x27;s website, LewRockwell.com, formed in 1999, features articles and blog entries by various columnists and writers. Its motto is &quot;anti-war, anti-state, pro-market&quot;. There also is a weekly podcast called &quot;The Lew Rockwell Show&quot;. , it was in the top 10,000 websites in the United States. LewRockwell.com publishes articles questioning United States participation in World War II, opposing &quot;economic fascism&quot; and supporting Austrian economics and secessionism. The website is primarily home to right-libertarian authors, although left-wing anti-war writers have been featured. The academic Tanni Haas wrote in his 2011 book on political bloggers that of the 20 figures he interviewed, &quot;none have more radical views&quot; than Rockwell, whose avowed goal was to &quot;do everything he can to undermine the state&quot;.

Brian Doherty of &quot;Reason&quot; wrote that the site&#x27;s &quot;Mises Institute-associated writers&quot; tend to emphasize the domestic and international fallout from government action. Conservative writer Jonah Goldberg of &quot;National Review&quot; wrote that the site regularly hosts invective against icons of American mainstream conservatism, including &quot;National Review&quot;, &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot;, neoconservatives, and William F. Buckley Jr. A writer in &quot;The American Conservative&quot; described the site as paleolibertarian and &quot;an indispensable source&quot; of news on Ron Paul. The site published &quot;InfoWars&quot; articles by the conspiracy theorist Paul Joseph Watson from 2011 to 2016. The site has been criticized for presenting articles which advocate HIV/AIDS denialism, the view that HIV does not cause AIDS, and the view that vaccines cause autism.

===Other activities and views===

Rockwell&#x27;s paleolibertarian ideology, like Rothbard&#x27;s in his later years, combines a right-libertarian theory of anarcho-capitalism based on natural rights with the cultural conservative values and concerns of paleoconservatism, and he identifies strongly with the modern Rothbardian tradition of Austrian economics. In politics, he advocates federalist or Anti-Federalist policies as means to achieve increasing degrees of freedom from central government and secession for the same political decentralist reasons. Rockwell has called environmentalism &quot;an ideology as pitiless and Messianic as Marxism.&quot;

Rockwell is Catholic.

== Books ==

===Author===
* &quot;Speaking of Liberty&quot; (2003; online e-book) 
* &quot;The Left, The Right, and The State&quot; (2008; online e-book) 
* &quot;Against the State: An Anarcho-Capitalist Manifesto&quot; (2014) 
* &quot;Fascism vs. Capitalism&quot; (2013) 
* &quot;Against The Left: A Rothbardian Libertarianism&quot; (2019) 

===Editor===
* &quot;Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard&quot; (with Walter Block) (1986; online e-book) 
* &quot;The Free Market Reader&quot; (1988; online e-book)
* &quot;The Economics of Liberty&quot; (1990; online e-book) 
* &quot;The Gold Standard: Perspectives in the Austrian School&quot; (1992; online e-book), 
* &quot;Murray N. Rothbard: In Memoriam&quot; (1995; online e-book) 
* &quot;The Irrepressible Rothbard&quot; (2000; online e-book – Rockwell&#x27;s introduction) 

==Further reading==
* Goldberg, Jonah. &quot;Farewell, Lew Rockwell: The final word.&quot; &quot;National Review Online&quot;. March 7, 2001.

== See also ==

* Anarcho-capitalism
* Hans-Hermann Hoppe
* Libertarianism in the United States
* Ludwig von Mises
* Milton Friedman
* Mises Institute
* Ron Paul
* Thomas Sowell
* Tom Woods

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q149451" start="0" end="31" title="Lew Rockwell" label="Llewellyn Harrison Rockwell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="111" end="122" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="144" end="162" title="anarcho-capitalist" label="anarcho-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457448" start="202" end="217" title="Mises Institute" label="Mises Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="246" end="261" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792356" start="349" end="375" title="Arlington House Publishers" label="Arlington House Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="395" end="413" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763774" start="438" end="455" title="Hillsdale College" label="Hillsdale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="478" end="493" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="678" end="686" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364239" start="910" end="927" title="Ron Paul newsletters" label="those newsletters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991715" start="1475" end="1490" title="Neo-Confederates" label="neo-Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1540" end="1546" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1548" end="1561" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792356" start="1606" end="1632" title="Arlington House Publishers" label="Arlington House publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="1673" end="1689" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Ludwig von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="1738" end="1756" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763774" start="1942" end="1959" title="Hillsdale College" label="Hillsdale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="2035" end="2050" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444611" start="2111" end="2121" title="minarchism" label="minarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059749" start="2287" end="2317" title="Center for Libertarian Studies" label="Center for Libertarian Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q986867" start="2321" end="2343" title="Burlingame, California" label="Burlingame, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="2640" end="2657" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472370" start="2728" end="2749" title="exploratory committee" label="exploratory committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364246" start="3088" end="3130" title="Ron Paul presidential campaign, 2008" label="Ron Paul&amp;#x27;s 2008 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137381" start="3132" end="3146" title="James Kirchick" label="James Kirchick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="3156" end="3172" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79728" start="5254" end="5269" title="Auburn, Alabama" label="Auburn, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="5554" end="5563" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q580171" start="5781" end="5797" title="Paleolibertarianism" label="paleolibertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168082" start="5816" end="5837" title="cultural conservatism" label="cultural conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074954" start="5958" end="5976" title="Paleoconservatism" label="paleoconservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q58235146" start="5996" end="6014" title="John Randolph Club" label="John Randolph Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q58235146" start="6083" end="6101" title="Rockford Institute" label="Rockford Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6909" end="6921" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="6999" end="7008" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="7046" end="7063" title="right-libertarian" label="right-libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="7082" end="7091" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765651" start="7376" end="7389" title="Brian Doherty (journalist)" label="Brian Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454090" start="7399" end="7405" title="Reason (magazine)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="7567" end="7579" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686927" start="7587" end="7601" title="Jonah Goldberg" label="Jonah Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="7611" end="7626" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790889" start="7775" end="7794" title="The Weekly Standard" label="The Weekly Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="7802" end="7818" title="neoconservatives" label="neoconservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q378098" start="7824" end="7846" title="William F. Buckley Jr." label="William F. Buckley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q159664" start="7865" end="7890" title="The American Conservative" label="The American Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q46997916" start="8022" end="8030" title="InfoWars" label="InfoWars"/>
<link wikidata="Q28911590" start="8073" end="8091" title="Paul Joseph Watson" label="Paul Joseph Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333233" start="8179" end="8197" title="HIV/AIDS denialism" label="HIV/AIDS denialism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8246" end="8277" title="Vaccine controversy#Vaccine overload" label="view that vaccines cause autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q580171" start="8330" end="8346" title="paleolibertarian" label="paleolibertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="8409" end="8426" title="right-libertarian" label="right-libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="8465" end="8479" title="natural rights" label="natural rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168082" start="8489" end="8510" title="cultural conservative" label="cultural conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074954" start="8534" end="8551" title="paleoconservatism" label="paleoconservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440576" start="8667" end="8677" title="federalist" label="federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="8681" end="8696" title="Anti-Federalist" label="Anti-Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="8784" end="8793" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="8817" end="8829" title="decentralist" label="decentralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="8859" end="8875" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="8923" end="8930" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8951" end="8959" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27718" start="9403" end="9415" title="Walter Block" label="Walter Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="9916" end="9938" title="National Review Online" label="National Review Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="9980" end="9998" title="Anarcho-capitalism" label="Anarcho-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76688" start="10001" end="10019" title="Hans-Hermann Hoppe" label="Hans-Hermann Hoppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="10022" end="10057" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="Libertarianism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="10060" end="10076" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Ludwig von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="10079" end="10094" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457448" start="10097" end="10112" title="Mises Institute" label="Mises Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="10115" end="10123" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q553449" start="10126" end="10139" title="Thomas Sowell" label="Thomas Sowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608419" start="10142" end="10151" title="Tom Woods" label="Tom Woods"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261701" wikidata="Q371103" url="?curid=261701" title="Loma Prieta">
<text>Loma Prieta (from Spanish &quot;loma&quot; -hill, &quot;prieta&quot; -dark) is the highest peak in the Santa Cruz Mountains in Northern California, measuring in height.

Although the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake was named for this mountain, the actual epicenter was five miles southwest of the peak, across the San Andreas Fault, in The Forest of Nisene Marks State Park.

In the 19th century, the peak was called Mount Bache, a name given in honor of Alexander Dallas Bache; the name is no longer in use.

From 1955 to 2005, the mountain was the longtime site for the transmitter tower of San Jose television station KNTV. In September 2005, it moved its transmitter northwest to San Bruno Mountain after it became the Bay Area&#x27;s NBC affiliate.

== Geology ==
Loma Prieta is the tallest peak in the Santa Cruz Mountains and it is common to see snow on the mountain during the winter.

Loma Prieta and other nearby mountain peaks are pushed upward by local collision forces associated with a left bend in the San Andreas Fault. Starting near Uvas Canyon, the fault stops trending northwest but instead bends west-northwest for about eight miles before continuing its northwest direction. This left bend is renowned among geologists as an archetypal restraining bend which acts to oppose strike-slip motion along the fault. From the perspective of Loma Prieta and other mountains atop the Sierra Azul block, the Pacific Plate is trying to shear them off the North American Plate but can&#x27;t break them off. Rather, the resulting transpression force pushes up the local terrain and helps explain why these are the highest peaks in the Santa Cruz Mountains.

== Astronomy ==
From 1976 through 1990 amateur astronomer Donald Machholz set up his telescope an average of 120 times a year on the south slope of this mountain to search for comets. From this site he discovered three new comets that bear his name, including Periodic Comet Machholz 1 96P/Machholz on May 12, 1986.

The first official West Coast Messier marathon was conducted from this site in March 1979.

== See also ==
* List of summits of the San Francisco Bay Area

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q371103" start="0" end="11" title="Loma Prieta" label="Loma Prieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669849" start="103" end="123" title="Santa Cruz Mountains" label="Santa Cruz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="127" end="146" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053476" start="183" end="210" title="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake" label="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="310" end="327" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734791" start="332" end="369" title="The Forest of Nisene Marks State Park" label="The Forest of Nisene Marks State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q709790" start="451" end="473" title="Alexander Dallas Bache" label="Alexander Dallas Bache"/>
<link wikidata="Q721688" start="617" end="621" title="KNTV" label="KNTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413486" start="680" end="698" title="San Bruno Mountain" label="San Bruno Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="735" end="738" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669849" start="804" end="824" title="Santa Cruz Mountains" label="Santa Cruz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="1013" end="1030" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903662" start="1046" end="1057" title="Uvas Canyon" label="Uvas Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835340" start="1253" end="1269" title="restraining bend" label="restraining bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="1291" end="1302" title="strike-slip" label="strike-slip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1392" end="1409" title="Sierra Azul block" label="Sierra Azul block"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="1415" end="1428" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="1461" end="1481" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835340" start="1535" end="1548" title="transpression" label="transpression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669849" start="1640" end="1660" title="Santa Cruz Mountains" label="Santa Cruz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q932779" start="1721" end="1736" title="Donald Machholz" label="Donald Machholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q980094" start="1949" end="1961" title="96P/Machholz" label="96P/Machholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344124" start="2010" end="2026" title="Messier marathon" label="Messier marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641765" start="2089" end="2134" title="List of summits of the San Francisco Bay Area" label="List of summits of the San Francisco Bay Area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261703" wikidata="Q751892" url="?curid=261703" title="Caucus">
<text>A caucus is a group or meeting of supporters or members of a specific political party or movement. The exact definition varies between different countries and political cultures.

The term originated in the United States, where it can refer to a meeting of members of a political party to nominate candidates, plan policy, etc., in the United States Congress, or other similar representative organs of government. It has spread to certain Commonwealth countries, including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa, where it generally refers to a regular meeting of all members of Parliament (MPs) who belong to a parliamentary party: a party caucus may have the ability to elect or dismiss the party&#x27;s parliamentary leader. The term was used historically in the United Kingdom to refer to the Liberal Party&#x27;s internal system of management and control.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;caucus&quot; came into use in the British colonies of North America to describe clubs or private meetings at which political matters were discussed. It is first found in reference to the Caucus Club of Boston, which was established in 1719, although the name is not documented until 1760. There are three main theories for the word&#x27;s origins:

;Native American
:James Hammond Trumbull suggested to the American Philological Association that the word comes from an Algonquian word for &quot;counsel&quot;, &quot;cau´-cau-as´u&quot;. It might also derive from the Algonquian &quot;cawaassough&quot;, meaning an advisor, talker, or orator. This explanation was favored by Charles Dudley Warner. 

;Drinking associations
:The &quot;American Heritage Dictionary&quot; suggests that the word possibly derives from medieval Latin &quot;caucus&quot;, meaning &quot;drinking vessel&quot;, such as might have been used for the flip drunk at the Caucus Club (see John Adams quotation below). The appearance of the term coincides with the spreading in England – and therefore also in America – of the inns called &quot;cocues&quot; because they were places to drink the new cheap liquor called &quot;gin&quot; or &quot;cuckoo liquor&quot;, since it was obtained from the distillation of so-called &quot;cuckoo barley&quot;; namely, barley sown very late in the spring and therefore unsuitable for the brewing of beer. That caucuses were places where people drank abundantly is attested by Obadiah Benjamin Franklin Bloomfield in his autobiography: &quot;Richard had set out hospitably [...] A caucus had been accordingly held by these worthies, and it was resolved nem. con. that they should first make a drunkard of him, and then pluck him, aye, even of the last feather.&quot;

;Shipbuilding
:A third theory is that the word is a corruption of &quot;caulkers&quot; (i.e., persons who apply caulk), in the sense of shipbuilders. This derivation was suggested by John Pickering in 1816 in &quot;A Vocabulary; or, Collection of Words and Phrases Which Have Been Supposed to Be Peculiar to the U.S. of America&quot;. It was later adopted by Noah Webster and also appears in an article of 1896 on the origins of the caucus – in all cases citing the 1788 passage by William Gordon quoted below (though Gordon does not in fact draw a direct connection between shipbuilding and the caucus). It likewise appears in &quot;Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia of American Biography&quot; (1888), where it is suggested that the term&#x27;s roots lay in what is here called the &quot;caulkers&#x27; club&quot; of Boston, formed by Samuel Adams Sr. and a group of &quot;sea-captains, shipwrights, and persons otherwise connected with the shipping interest&quot;. This entry also discusses Samuel Adams Jr.&#x27;s fondness for quoting Greek and Latin &quot;after the pedantic fashion of the time&quot;, which might provide a context for a coinage with a Latin suffix.

===Early usage===
The &quot;Boston Gazette&quot; of May 5, 1760, includes an essay commenting:

The writer goes on to argue that this body&#x27;s underhand attempts to influence voters are in opposition to the more laudable activities of &quot;the old and true Corcas&quot;.

A February 1763 entry in the diary of John Adams demonstrates that the word already held its modern connotations of a &quot;smoke-filled room&quot; where candidates for public election were pre-selected in private:
The following month, a writer signing himself &quot;E. J.&quot; and claiming to be &quot;a late Member&quot; of the Boston &quot;Corkass&quot;, explained in greater detail how the inner circle of the &quot;Petty Corkass&quot; manipulated the business of the broader &quot;Grand Corkass&quot;:

William Gordon commented in 1788:
An analogical Latin-type plural &quot;cauci&quot; is occasionally used.

==In the United States==
In United States politics and government, &quot;caucus&quot; has several related but distinct meanings. Members of a political party or subgroup may meet to coordinate members&#x27; actions, choose group policy, or nominate candidates for various offices.

===Caucuses to select election candidates===
There is no provision for the role of political parties in the United States Constitution. In the first two presidential elections, the Electoral College handled nominations and elections in 1789 and 1792 which selected George Washington. After that, Congressional party or a state legislature party caucus selected the party&#x27;s presidential candidates. Nationally, these caucuses were replaced by the party convention starting in 1832 following the lead of the Anti-Masonic Party 1831 convention.

The term &quot;caucus&quot; is frequently used to discuss the procedures used by some states to select presidential nominees such as the Iowa caucuses, the first of the modern primary presidential election cycle, and the Texas caucuses. Since 1980 such caucuses have become, in the aggregate, an important component of the nomination process.

===Congressional caucuses===

Another meaning is a sub grouping of officials with shared affinities or ethnicities who convene, often but not always to advocate, agitate, lobby or to vote collectively, on policy. At the highest level, in Congress and many state legislatures, Democratic and Republican members organize themselves into a caucus (occasionally called a &quot;conference&quot;). There can be smaller caucuses in a legislative body, including those that are multi-partisan or even bicameral. Of the many Congressional caucuses, one of the best-known is the Congressional Black Caucus, a group of African-American members of Congress. Another prominent example is the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, whose members voice and advance issues affecting Hispanics in the United States, including Puerto Rico. In a different vein, the Congressional Internet Caucus is a bipartisan group of Members who wish to promote the growth and advancement of the Internet. Other congressional caucuses such as the Out of Iraq Caucus, are openly organized tendencies or political factions (within the House Democratic Caucus, in this case), and strive to achieve political goals, similar to a European &quot;platform&quot;, but generally organized around a single issue.

==In Commonwealth nations==
===Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa===
The term is also used in certain Commonwealth nations, including Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa. When used in these countries, &quot;caucus&quot; is more usually a collective term for all members of a party sitting in Parliament, otherwise called a parliamentary group, rather than a word for a regular meeting of these members of Parliament. Thus, the Australian Federal Parliamentary Labor Party is commonly called &quot;the Labor Caucus&quot;.

The word was used in New Zealand from at least the 1890s, when organized political parties began to emerge: the largest of them, the Liberal Party, used it to refer to its parliamentary members.

In New Zealand, the term is now used by all political parties, but in Australia, it continues to be used only by the Labor Party. For the Australian Liberal, National and Green parties, the usual equivalent term is &quot;party room&quot;. In South Africa all parties use the term &quot;caucus&quot;. In Canada, &quot;caucus&quot; refers to all members of a particular party in Parliament, including senators, or a provincial legislature. These members elect among themselves a caucus chair who presides over their meetings. This person is an important figure when the party is in opposition, and is an important link between cabinet and the backbench when the party is in government.

In such contexts, a party caucus can be quite powerful, as it can elect or dismiss the party&#x27;s parliamentary leader. The caucus system is a departure from the Westminster tradition in giving members of the upper house a say in the election of the party leader, who may become head of government. The caucus also determines some matters of policy, parliamentary tactics, and disciplinary measures against disobedient MPs. In some parties, the caucus also has the power to elect MPs to Cabinet when the party is in government. For example, this is traditionally so in the Australian Labor Party and the New Zealand Labour Party.

===United Kingdom===

====Historic usage====

The word &quot;caucus&quot; had a wide currency in the United Kingdom in the late 19th century, meaning a highly structured system of management and control within a political party, equivalent to a &quot;party machine&quot; in the United States. It was used with specific reference to the structure of the Liberal Party. Originally a pejorative term, used by detractors of the system with overtones of corrupt American practices, the name was soon adopted by the Liberals themselves.

The system had originated at a local level in Birmingham in preparation for the 1868 general election, when, under the 1867 Reform Act, the city had been allocated three parliamentary seats, but each elector had only two votes. In order to spread votes evenly, the secretary of the Birmingham Liberal Association, William Harris (later dubbed the &quot;father of the Caucus&quot;) devised a four-tier organizational structure (of ward committees, general committee, executive committee, and management committee) through which Liberal voters in different wards could be instructed in the precise combinations in which to cast their votes. In 1877 the newly formed National Liberal Federation was given a similar structure, on the initiative of Joseph Chamberlain, and again worked out in detail by Harris.

Shortly afterwards the term &quot;caucus&quot; was applied to this system by &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper, which referred to &quot;the &#x27;caucus&#x27; with all its evils&quot;, and by the Conservative prime minister, Benjamin Disraeli. In 1880 Queen Victoria, following a meeting with Disraeli, wrote disapprovingly in a private note of &quot;that American system called caucus&quot;. The Liberal Caucus was also vilified by socialists and trade unionists, who (prior to the establishment of the Independent Labour Party) sought a route to parliamentary representation through the Liberal Party via the Labour Representation League and the Labour Electoral Association, but found their way barred by the party&#x27;s management structures.

Moisey Ostrogorsky devoted some nine chapters of his &quot;Democracy and the Organization of Political Parties&quot; (1902) to discussion of the development and operation of the &quot;Caucus&quot; in this sense.

====Contemporary usage====

The word &quot;caucus&quot; is only occasionally encountered in contemporary politics in the British Isles. In contrast to other Anglosphere nations, it is never used for all members of a party in Parliament: the usual term for that concept, both in the UK and Ireland, is &quot;parliamentary party&quot;.

When the term is used, it generally refers to a subgroup, faction or pressure group within a political party. For example, in 2019 the One Nation Conservatives and Blue Collar Conservatives were established as factions within the Conservative Party, both being described as &quot;caucuses&quot;.

== In organizations ==
In conventions, where the membership from different parts of the organization may gather, each separate group within the organization may meet prior to the convention as a caucus. Each caucus may decide how the group would vote on various issues that may come up at the convention. Unless the votes are made binding, however, each delegate is still free to vote in any fashion.

==In alternative dispute resolution==
The term &quot;caucus&quot; is also used in mediation, facilitation and other forms of alternative dispute resolution to describe circumstances wherein, rather than meeting at a common table, the disputants retreat to a more private setting to process information, agree on negotiation strategy, confer privately with counsel or with the mediator, or simply gain &quot;breathing room&quot; after the often emotionally difficult interactions that can occur in the common area where all parties are present. The degree to which caucuses are used can be a key defining element, and often an identifier, of the mediation model being used. For example, &quot;facilitative mediation&quot; tends to discourage the use of caucuses and tries to keep the parties talking at a single table, while &quot;evaluative mediation&quot; may allow parties to separate more often and rely on the mediator to shuttle information and offers back and forth.

==See also== 

* Parliamentary group

==References==
==External links==


*COCaucus.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751892" start="2" end="8" title="Caucus" label="caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="70" end="85" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="207" end="220" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="336" end="358" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="439" end="451" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="473" end="482" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="484" end="490" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="492" end="503" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="509" end="521" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="577" end="598" title="members of Parliament" label="members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="621" end="640" title="parliamentary party" label="parliamentary party"/>
<link wikidata="Q928764" start="715" end="735" title="parliamentary leader" label="parliamentary leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="775" end="789" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="806" end="819" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878160" start="1087" end="1098" title="Boston Caucus" label="Caucus Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1102" end="1108" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135478" start="1267" end="1289" title="James Hammond Trumbull" label="James Hammond Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q466021" start="1307" end="1340" title="American Philological Association" label="American Philological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="1369" end="1379" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q952614" start="1574" end="1595" title="Charles Dudley Warner" label="Charles Dudley Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q464886" start="1633" end="1661" title="American Heritage Dictionary" label="American Heritage Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1722" end="1727" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q500653" start="1822" end="1826" title="Flip (cocktail)" label="flip"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="1857" end="1867" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q959362" start="2093" end="2096" title="gin" label="gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="2164" end="2176" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="2225" end="2231" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="2598" end="2606" title="drunkard" label="drunkard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411795" start="2785" end="2790" title="caulk" label="caulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="2809" end="2820" title="shipbuilder" label="shipbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407334" start="2856" end="2870" title="John Pickering (linguist)" label="John Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q241676" start="3032" end="3044" title="Noah Webster" label="Noah Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12912667" start="3307" end="3355" title="Appletons&amp;#x27; Cyclopædia of American Biography" label="Appletons&amp;#x27; Cyclopædia of American Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q24205848" start="3503" end="3519" title="Samuel Adams Sr." label="Samuel Adams Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q212963" start="3660" end="3676" title="Samuel Adams" label="Samuel Adams Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2066166" start="3737" end="3743" title="pedant" label="pedant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947920" start="3867" end="3881" title="Boston Gazette" label="Boston Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="4153" end="4163" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545806" start="4239" end="4256" title="smoke-filled room" label="smoke-filled room"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205529" start="4661" end="4689" title="Plural form of words ending in -us" label="analogical Latin-type plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="4873" end="4888" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="5121" end="5147" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="5194" end="5211" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="5278" end="5295" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q574701" start="5524" end="5542" title="Anti-Masonic Party" label="Anti-Masonic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380299" start="5664" end="5684" title="presidential nominee" label="presidential nominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="5698" end="5711" title="Iowa caucuses" label="Iowa caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="5737" end="5744" title="Partisan primary" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47566" start="5745" end="5772" title="United States presidential election" label="presidential election cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708237" start="5782" end="5796" title="Texas caucuses" label="Texas caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6143" end="6151" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6181" end="6191" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6196" end="6206" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140620" start="6381" end="6389" title="Partisan (political)" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="6398" end="6407" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943071" start="6421" end="6441" title="Congressional caucus" label="Congressional caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015366" start="6474" end="6500" title="Congressional Black Caucus" label="Congressional Black Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="6513" end="6529" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160937" start="6584" end="6613" title="Congressional Hispanic Caucus" label="Congressional Hispanic Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="6664" end="6673" title="Hispanics" label="Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="6706" end="6717" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098650" start="6912" end="6930" title="Out of Iraq Caucus" label="Out of Iraq Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="6967" end="6984" title="political faction" label="political faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255565" start="6998" end="7021" title="House Democratic Caucus" label="House Democratic Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="7284" end="7296" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="7316" end="7325" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="7327" end="7333" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="7335" end="7346" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="7351" end="7363" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="7517" end="7536" title="parliamentary group" label="parliamentary group"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="7588" end="7609" title="Member of Parliament" label="members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824362" start="7695" end="7707" title="Australian Labor Party Caucus" label="Labor Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793808" start="7849" end="7862" title="New Zealand Liberal Party" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="8029" end="8040" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="8061" end="8068" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="8070" end="8078" title="National Party of Australia" label="National"/>
<link wikidata="Q781486" start="8083" end="8088" title="Australian Greens" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="8154" end="8166" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="8326" end="8336" title="province" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054349" start="8389" end="8401" title="caucus chair" label="caucus chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="8492" end="8502" title="parliamentary opposition" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="8537" end="8544" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="8553" end="8562" title="backbencher" label="backbench"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="8584" end="8594" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="8761" end="8782" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="9172" end="9194" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="9203" end="9227" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="New Zealand Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218690" start="9481" end="9494" title="Political machine" label="party machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="9583" end="9596" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="9808" end="9818" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074525" start="9842" end="9863" title="1868 United Kingdom general election" label="1868 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="9881" end="9896" title="Reform Act 1867" label="1867 Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="9932" end="9951" title="Electoral district" label="parliamentary seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q27835223" start="10076" end="10090" title="William Harris (Birmingham Liberal)" label="William Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="10192" end="10196" title="electoral ward" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974093" start="10426" end="10453" title="National Liberal Federation" label="National Liberal Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="10506" end="10524" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="10652" end="10661" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="10763" end="10775" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="10792" end="10809" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="10819" end="10833" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="11000" end="11010" title="Socialism" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q104591398" start="11015" end="11030" title="Trade unions in the United Kingdom" label="trade unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="11071" end="11095" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467522" start="11178" end="11206" title="Labour Representation League" label="Labour Representation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467409" start="11215" end="11243" title="Labour Electoral Association" label="Labour Electoral Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q330199" start="11316" end="11334" title="Moisey Ostrogorsky" label="Moisey Ostrogorsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="11686" end="11697" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="11818" end="11825" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="11836" end="11855" title="Parliamentary group" label="parliamentary party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="11922" end="11929" title="political faction" label="faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q431603" start="11933" end="11947" title="pressure group" label="pressure group"/>
<link wikidata="Q85790741" start="11999" end="12023" title="One Nation Conservatives (caucus)" label="One Nation Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373712" start="12028" end="12053" title="Blue Collar Conservativism" label="Blue Collar Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="12094" end="12112" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q625994" start="12187" end="12198" title="Convention (meeting)" label="conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q223871" start="12645" end="12654" title="mediation" label="mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150166" start="12656" end="12668" title="facilitator" label="facilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q438484" start="12688" end="12718" title="alternative dispute resolution" label="alternative dispute resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="13554" end="13573" title="Parliamentary group" label="Parliamentary group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261704" wikidata="Q229931" url="?curid=261704" title="Mason">
<text>Mason may refer to:
==Occupations==

* Mason, brick mason, or bricklayer, a craftsman who lays bricks to construct brickwork, or who lays any combination of stones, bricks, cinder blocks, or similar pieces
* Stone mason, a craftsman in the stone-cutting and shaping industry

==Organizations==

* Mason (Freemasonry), a general term for a Freemason
* George Mason University in Virginia, US 
** Its athletic program, the George Mason Patriots

==People==
* Mason (given name)
* Mason (surname), an English, French or Italian surname
* Mason sept of Clan Sinclair
* Mason (musician) (born 1980), Dutch electronic music producer, real name Iason Chronis

==Places==
* Mason, Illinois
* Mason, Grant County, Kentucky
* Mason, Magoffin County, Kentucky
* Masons, Maryland
* Mason, Michigan, in Ingham County
* Mason, Houghton County, Michigan
* Mason, Nevada
* Mason, New Hampshire
* Mason, Ohio
* Mason, Oklahoma
* Mason, South Dakota
* Mason, Tennessee
* Mason, Texas
* Mason, West Virginia
* Mason (town), Wisconsin
** Mason, Wisconsin, village within the town
* Mason City (disambiguation)
* Mason County (disambiguation)
* Mason Township (disambiguation)
* Mason, Veneto

==Science and technology==
* Mason (crater), on the Moon
* MASON (Java), an artificial-life computer simulation development environment
* Mason jar, a molded glass jar used in home canning to preserve food

==Transport and military==
* Mason (streetcar), first streetcar in the U.S.
* Mason Machine Works, Taunton, Massachusetts, known for its locomotives
* Mason Motor Car Company, a brass era car company
* Mason Truck, a subsidiary of Durant Motors of the 1920s
* USS &quot;Mason&quot;, several warships

==Other uses==
* Mason (American band), a rock band from Virginia
* &quot;Masons&quot; (novel), a novel by Alexey Pisemsky
* Mason bee (&quot;Osmia&quot; species), of the family Megachilidae

== See also ==

* Masone, a town in the Alps Region of northern Italy
* Macon (disambiguation)
* Marson (disambiguation)
* Masson (disambiguation)
* Justice Mason (disambiguation)
* Mason-Dixon line
* &quot;William Mason&quot; (locomotive), currently on display at the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229931" start="0" end="5" title="Mason" label="Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q327321" start="62" end="72" title="bricklayer" label="bricklayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="208" end="219" title="Stone mason" label="Stone mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="297" end="316" title="Mason (Freemasonry)" label="Mason (Freemasonry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="351" end="374" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542211" start="421" end="442" title="George Mason Patriots" label="George Mason Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294444" start="457" end="475" title="Mason (given name)" label="Mason (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12664711" start="478" end="493" title="Mason (surname)" label="Mason (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975370" start="549" end="562" title="Clan Sinclair" label="Clan Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q972317" start="565" end="581" title="Mason (musician)" label="Mason (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q575758" start="666" end="681" title="Mason, Illinois" label="Mason, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30621994" start="684" end="713" title="Mason, Grant County, Kentucky" label="Mason, Grant County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q30621995" start="716" end="748" title="Mason, Magoffin County, Kentucky" label="Mason, Magoffin County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692184" start="751" end="767" title="Masons, Maryland" label="Masons, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987548" start="770" end="785" title="Mason, Michigan" label="Mason, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107614" start="806" end="838" title="Mason, Houghton County, Michigan" label="Mason, Houghton County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13550760" start="841" end="854" title="Mason, Nevada" label="Mason, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418283" start="857" end="877" title="Mason, New Hampshire" label="Mason, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q986779" start="880" end="891" title="Mason, Ohio" label="Mason, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783516" start="894" end="909" title="Mason, Oklahoma" label="Mason, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q24061540" start="912" end="931" title="Mason, South Dakota" label="Mason, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289402" start="934" end="950" title="Mason, Tennessee" label="Mason, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q982490" start="953" end="965" title="Mason, Texas" label="Mason, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662757" start="968" end="988" title="Mason, West Virginia" label="Mason, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783531" start="991" end="1014" title="Mason (town), Wisconsin" label="Mason (town), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049851" start="1018" end="1034" title="Mason, Wisconsin" label="Mason, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q349064" start="1062" end="1089" title="Mason City (disambiguation)" label="Mason City (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q230928" start="1092" end="1121" title="Mason County (disambiguation)" label="Mason County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907243" start="1124" end="1155" title="Mason Township (disambiguation)" label="Mason Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46179" start="1158" end="1171" title="Mason Vicentino" label="Mason, Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q745413" start="1202" end="1216" title="Mason (crater)" label="Mason (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714517" start="1232" end="1244" title="MASON (Java)" label="MASON (Java)"/>
<link wikidata="Q289340" start="1311" end="1320" title="Mason jar" label="Mason jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259042" start="1409" end="1426" title="Mason (streetcar)" label="Mason (streetcar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783598" start="1458" end="1477" title="Mason Machine Works" label="Mason Machine Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q114120212" start="1531" end="1554" title="Mason Motor Car Company" label="Mason Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q474861" start="1582" end="1593" title="Mason Truck" label="Mason Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470141" start="1640" end="1661" title="USS Mason" label="USS &amp;quot;Mason&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866731" start="1698" end="1719" title="Mason (American band)" label="Mason (American band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21162242" start="1749" end="1775" title="Masons (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Masons&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q975164" start="1806" end="1815" title="Mason bee" label="Mason bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q265311" start="1891" end="1897" title="Masone" label="Masone"/>
<link wikidata="Q231275" start="1945" end="1967" title="Macon (disambiguation)" label="Macon (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12121499" start="1970" end="1993" title="Marson (disambiguation)" label="Marson (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q414757" start="1996" end="2019" title="Masson (disambiguation)" label="Masson (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29508320" start="2022" end="2052" title="Justice Mason (disambiguation)" label="Justice Mason (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q530472" start="2055" end="2071" title="Mason-Dixon line" label="Mason-Dixon line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470069" start="2074" end="2112" title="William Mason (locomotive)" label="&amp;quot;William Mason&amp;quot; (locomotive)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261705" wikidata="Q5082491" url="?curid=261705" title="Charles Sherwood Noble">
<text>Charles Sherwood Noble (1873 – July 5, 1957) invented a minimum disturbance cultivator called the Noble blade. The Noble blade (or Noble plow) cuts weed roots beneath the soil surface without turning the soil over, thus reducing topsoil loss due to wind erosion. The village of Nobleford, Alberta is named after him.

==Early life==
Noble was born in State Center, Iowa, the eldest of six boys. His mother died when he was very young and Noble left school when he was age 15 to assist his father in supporting the family. In 1896 Noble took out a homestead near Knox, North Dakota.

In 1902 Noble moved to the Claresholm, Alberta area in what was then part of the Northwest Territories. The next year, he married Margaret Naomi Fraser. In the following years Noble purchased large tracts of land southeast of Claresholm. He constructed many of the area&#x27;s first buildings and the hamlet of Noble (later renamed Nobleford) was established in 1909.

By 1922 Noble had accumulated about of land but a series of poor crops, falling prices and too much debt meant he was unable to keep up the payments on the land. In the autumn of that year the Spokane Trust Company to whom he owed $600,000 foreclosed on the Noble estate and he lost all his holdings.

By 1930 he had regained some of his holdings and was farming approximately of land.

== Noble blade ==
The land that Charles Noble farmed in southern Alberta sits in what is known as the dry-belt. During the period of drought known as the &quot;dirty thirties&quot;, farmland within the dry-belt, cultivated with mold-board plow and/or double disc and summer fallowed every other year, was subject to massive soil erosion. In 1935, while on a visit to California, Noble observed a sugar beet farmer using a straight blade tool to cut into the subsoil beneath the beets to loosen them for harvesting. He noticed that the blade was disturbing and killing weeds without burying them. Noble realized if he could apply a similar implement to the dry land back in Alberta thus leaving the crop stubble as &quot;trash&quot; on top to hold the soil and protect it from blowing the problem of soil erosion may be solved. He immediately fabricated a tillage implement patterned after the sugar beet harvesting tool. He called his invention the Noble blade. The next year he carried out all his summer fallow work using his invention. The results were so successful by 1937 he had fabricated 50 of the implements which he sold to friends and neighbors. By 1941 a factory was built within the village of Nobleford. Sales of the Noble blade occurred throughout the dry land farming areas of the world. The Noble blade is touted as one of the most important agricultural inventions of the 20th century. In 1982 the company that Noble had founded was sold to Versatile Manufacturing Ltd.

==Further reading ==

==External links==
*Alberta Online Encyclopedia </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5082491" start="0" end="22" title="Charles Sherwood Noble" label="Charles Sherwood Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273840" start="76" end="86" title="cultivator" label="cultivator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045829" start="278" end="296" title="Nobleford, Alberta" label="Nobleford, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913026" start="351" end="369" title="State Center, Iowa" label="State Center, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169223" start="562" end="580" title="Knox, North Dakota" label="Knox, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746566" start="610" end="629" title="Claresholm, Alberta" label="Claresholm, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="1493" end="1519" title="Dust Bowl" label="&amp;quot;dirty thirties&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637480" start="1606" end="1619" title="summer fallow" label="summer fallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q681004" start="1797" end="1804" title="subsoil" label="subsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010233" start="2798" end="2826" title="Versatile (company)" label="Versatile Manufacturing Ltd."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261706" wikidata="Q365153" url="?curid=261706" title="Maynard">
<text>Maynard may refer to:

==Names==
* Maynard (given name)
* Maynard (surname)

==Places==
===Canada===
* Maynard, Ontario, a village in Augusta Township

===United States===
* Maynard, Arkansas
* Maynard, Iowa
* Maynard, Kentucky
* Maynard, Massachusetts
* Maynard, Minnesota
* Maynard, Ohio

==Other uses==
* &quot;Maynard&quot; (album), by Maynard Ferguson, 1981
* Maynard (software), a shell for Weston competing with the GNOME Shell
* Maynard Electronics, an American company that manufactured tape drives in the 1990s
* The Maynard School, a girls&#x27; school in Exeter, UK
* Maynard tape primer, a system for reloading muskets
* Maynards, a sweets manufacturer in the United Kingdom

==See also==
* Justice Maynard (disambiguation)
* &quot;Maynard v. Cartwright&quot;, a 1988 United States Supreme Court case</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q365153" start="0" end="7" title="Maynard" label="Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16290674" start="35" end="55" title="Maynard (given name)" label="Maynard (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876614" start="58" end="75" title="Maynard (surname)" label="Maynard (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820879" start="103" end="119" title="Maynard, Ontario" label="Maynard, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148225" start="174" end="191" title="Maynard, Arkansas" label="Maynard, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928533" start="194" end="207" title="Maynard, Iowa" label="Maynard, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074995" start="210" end="227" title="Maynard, Kentucky" label="Maynard, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q684535" start="230" end="252" title="Maynard, Massachusetts" label="Maynard, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924911" start="255" end="273" title="Maynard, Minnesota" label="Maynard, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797380" start="276" end="289" title="Maynard, Ohio" label="Maynard, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20813717" start="308" end="335" title="Maynard (album)" label="&amp;quot;Maynard&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14561" start="365" end="383" title="Maynard (software)" label="Maynard (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797396" start="437" end="456" title="Maynard Electronics" label="Maynard Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750731" start="523" end="541" title="The Maynard School" label="The Maynard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797442" start="580" end="599" title="Maynard tape primer" label="Maynard tape primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797447" start="634" end="642" title="Maynards" label="Maynards"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514847" start="704" end="736" title="Justice Maynard (disambiguation)" label="Justice Maynard (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797445" start="745" end="766" title="Maynard v. Cartwright" label="Maynard v. Cartwright"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261708" wikidata="Q1379931" url="?curid=261708" title="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod">
<text>The Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS), also referred to simply as the Wisconsin Synod, is an American Confessional Lutheran denomination of Christianity. Characterized as theologically conservative, it was founded in 1850 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

As of 2022, it had a baptized membership of 340,511 in 1,250 , with churches in 47 US states and 4 provinces of Canada. The WELS also does gospel outreach in 40 countries around the world. It is the third largest Lutheran denomination in the United States. The WELS school system is the fourth largest private school system in the United States.

The WELS is in fellowship with the Evangelical Lutheran Synod (ELS) and is a member of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference (CELC), a worldwide organization of Lutheran church bodies of the same beliefs.

== Belief and practice ==

=== Doctrinal standards ===

The WELS subscribes to the Lutheran Reformation teaching of &quot;Sola scriptura&quot;—&quot;by Scripture alone.&quot; It holds that the Bible is the final authority by which church teachings can be judged. WELS pastors have a &quot;quia&quot; subscription to the 16th century Lutheran Confessions; that is, they teach that the confessions are valid because they are faithful to the Bible. As such, pastors and congregations within the WELS agree to teach in accordance with it.

The WELS also agrees with the doctrine of Biblical inerrancy, the doctrine that the Bible is inspired by God and is without error (2 Timothy 3:16, 2 Peter 1:20-21, 1 Corinthians 2:13, John 17:17, Psalm 12:6, Titus 1:2). For this reason, they reject much of modern liberal theology.

=== Differences from Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod ===
The main facets of doctrinal difference between the WELS and the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS) include:

* &quot;Fellowship&quot; – The WELS teaches that all forms of Christian fellowship require a complete unity in matters of doctrine (Romans 16:17, Ephesians 4:3-6). The LCMS, meanwhile, teaches that there are different levels of fellowship among Christians, so that altar fellowship (sharing in the Eucharist together), pulpit fellowship (exchange of preaching privileges among ministers of various congregations), and other manifestations of Christian fellowship (such as fellowship in prayer), are distinct. Thus, according to LCMS doctrine, members of different church bodies can engage in greater or lesser degrees of fellowship depending on the extent of their doctrinal disagreement.
* &quot;Doctrine of the ministry&quot; – The WELS believes that there are many different forms of one, divinely established Ministry. These forms of the Ministry include pastor, Christian day-school teacher, and others (1 Corinthians 12:28, Ephesians 4:11). The LCMS teaches that only the pastoral office is divinely established, while all other church offices are human institutions.
* &quot;Role of women in the church&quot; – The LCMS and WELS agree that Scriptures reserve the pastoral office for men. In &quot;This We Believe,&quot; published in 1999, WELS states that &quot;women may participate in offices and activities of the public ministry except where that work involves authority over men (1 Timothy 2:11,12). This means that women may not serve as pastors nor participate in assemblies of the church in ways that exercise authority over men (1 Corinthians 11:3; 14:33–35).&quot; WELS does not allow women suffrage in congregational matters that would exercise authority over men. LCMS teaches that women may take on roles of lay authority in the church, such as voting in church elections and serving in &quot;humanly established offices&quot; such as congregation president, reader, or member of church councils, including elected executive roles in the church.

=== Differences from the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America ===
* &quot;Scriptural interpretation&quot; – The WELS confesses that the Bible is the inspired, inerrant and infallible Word of God (2 Timothy 3:16, 2 Peter 1:20-21, 1 Corinthians 2:13, John 17:17, Psalm 12:6, Titus 1:2) and follows a historical-grammatical approach to interpretation. The meaning of a portion of Scripture is discerned by paying careful attention to grammar, syntax, vocabulary and context. In this regard, the historical setting forms part of the context of Scripture, the text itself indicating how important a part. The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA), on the other hand, has been open to historical-critical methods of Biblical interpretation which seek to understand the scriptures with primary reference to historical and social context. Most other specific doctrinal differences between the two churches stem from this overarching disagreement.
* &quot;Creation&quot; – The WELS teaches that the account of creation given in Genesis 1–3 is a factual, historical account, while the ELCA has not enforced an official position, allowing members to embrace positions ranging from strict creationism to theistic evolution.
* &quot;Sexuality&quot; – The WELS teaches that extramarital sex (1 Corinthians 7:2, Hebrews 13:4) and homosexual relations (Romans 1:18-32, 1 Corinthians 6:9-11, 1 Timothy 8-11) are sins, while the ELCA and its predecessor churches are open to multiple viewpoints on these matters.
* &quot;Fellowship&quot; – The WELS teaches that churches must agree on all doctrines of Scripture before they can enjoy any form of fellowship with each other (Romans 16:17, Ephesians 4:3-6), while the ELCA teaches that agreement on all aspects of doctrine is not necessarily required as a prerequisite for fellowship. It thus practices fellowship with a handful of other mainline Protestant denominations.
* &quot;Role of women in the church&quot; – The WELS holds that, according to Scripture, women may not serve as clergy nor vote within their congregations where authority is exercised over men (see above), while the ELCA&#x27;s three predecessor churches began ordaining women into the ministry in the 1970s, according to their interpretation of Scripture.
* &quot;Communion&quot; – The WELS practices closed communion (1 Corinthians 10:16-17, 1 Corinthians 1:10, 1 Corinthians 11:26-32); it holds that the Eucharist is reserved for confirmed members of the WELS, any sister church in fellowship with WELS, and other individuals found upon examination to be in doctrinal agreement with the WELS.

== History ==

=== Beginning ===

The WELS&#x27;s direct predecessor, known as &quot;The German Evangelical Ministerium of Wisconsin&quot; was founded in 1850 by several churches in and around Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Many of the early pastors were educated and trained by mission societies in Germany. The early churches in the Wisconsin Synod had a strong German background; services and church business were conducted in German. Many of the pastors and congregations brought with them a tolerance towards forming joint congregations with the Reformed, similar to the Union Churches they left behind in Germany. In 1864, the &quot;German Evangelical Lutheran synod of Wisconsin&quot; was incorporated by an act of the state legislature.

=== General Council ===
In the 1860s, the Wisconsin Synod became increasingly conservative along the Lutheran viewpoint and against the Reformed. In the synod convention of 1867, the synod joined the General Council, a group of Neo-Lutheran synods that left the General Synod because the latter body sought to compromise Lutheran doctrine in order to join with non-Lutheran American Protestantism. However, some pastors in the Wisconsin Synod agreed with the &quot;open questions&quot; position of the Iowa Synod that some doctrines could be left unresolved and good Lutherans could agree to disagree about them.

The 1868 convention witnessed a meaningful discussion on the topic of pulpit and altar fellowship, one of the Four Points in American Lutheranism. Although there were several dissenting opinions, most of the pastors and lay delegates realized that they could not in good conscience exchange pastors with non-Lutherans or invite them to commune at their altar. They felt that the position the General Council took on this subject was inadequate. They resolved that, unless it changed course, they would withdraw from the General Council.

=== Synodical Conference ===

Following the 1868 convention, representatives of the Wisconsin and Missouri Synods held a meeting in Milwaukee during October 21–22, 1868. They discussed various points of doctrine, writing an agreement recognizing the Missouri and Wisconsin synods as orthodox Lutheran church bodies and that they have fellowship. The agreement noted that in the event a doctrinal error arose in one of the two synods, they would not question each other&#x27;s orthodoxy as long as they both used all Christian means at their disposal to resolve the problem. This agreement was later adopted by each of the synods in convention.

The Ohio Synod invited the Wisconsin Synod, Illinois Synod, Missouri Synod, and Norwegian Synod, to Chicago on January 11–13, 1871. There the synods drew up a document of association for the synods to vote on at their next convention. They also invited the entire membership, both teachers and pastors, of all the synods to attend a general convention the next year. This first meeting of the Evangelical Lutheran Synodical Conference of North America, commonly called the &quot;Synodical Conference&quot;, was held in Milwaukee, Wisconsin on July 10–16, 1872. They wrote the constitution to the Synodical Conference, which arranged the synods together as a federation and did not vest any real authority with the Synodical Conference, either at the convention or board level. The fellowship union included full communion among members, the sharing of educational facilities, joint mission and benevolence work, and open pulpit between pastors of the different synods.

==== Reorganization ====
The first convention of the Synodical Conference also endeavored to reduce the severe competition between synods. The delegates planned to reorganize all Synodical Conference Lutherans into separate state synods, although allowing for separate organization along the lines of the three languages—German, Norwegian, and English. The 1876 and 1877 conventions also took up this cause, and added to it the goal of providing centrally located ministerial and teacher education campuses. The Minnesota Synod favored the approach of organizing state synods, but only if they would be independent of the larger Ohio and Missouri Synods. Likewise, the Wisconsin Synod desired organization along state lines, but only on the condition that they would be prohibited from joining any larger synodical body, that is, the already existing Ohio and Missouri Synods. The Wisconsin Synod also did not think that it could derive any benefit out of a centrally run seminary. In response to this strained relation between the Wisconsin Synod and the other synods, the Synodical Conference elected a committee made up of Wisconsin Synod delegates and other synods&#x27; representatives to repair relations with the Wisconsin Synod in time for the next convention in 1878.

In 1878, the Wisconsin Synod withdrew its demand that the state synods had to be independent of the Missouri or Ohio Synods. The Missouri Synod needed to build a new seminary, since location at its current campus was strained. Although there was considerable plans to build a new joint Synodical Conference seminary near Chicago, because of the hesitance of the Wisconsin Synod on this subject and the inability of any of the other members besides Missouri to contribute financially to the new project, it was tabled, and ultimately never happened.

The 1878 convention voted in favor of establishing state synods. These state synods were to organize into two or three larger synods, one for the east (corresponding to the Ohio Synod), one for the southwest (corresponding to the Missouri Synod), and one for the northwest (which would include all congregations in Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, the Dakotas and all parts west). This formed three larger synods, which solved the longstanding concern that if either the Missouri or Ohio synods were allowed to keep their identity, they would dominate the rest of the Synodical Conference, or, even worse, the Minnesota or Wisconsin Synods would be forced to join one of them. This new organization did not apply to congregations speaking Norwegian, and English speaking congregations were to organize as separate district synods within one of the larger synods.

==== Schism ====
The Synodical Conference split when the Ohio Synod left the Synodical Conference in 1881 over the issue of whether God predestined people according to his foreknowledge of whether they would come to faith. The Ohio Synod had some pastors that allowed for this position, while the Missouri Synod declared it to be false doctrine. This Election Controversy had been introduced by a German professor in the Norwegian Synod, Friedrich A. Schmidt. The Norwegian Synod left the Synodical Conference in 1883, attempting to keep the disunity they experienced within their synod from creeping into the Synodical Conference. Meanwhile, the Wisconsin and Missouri synods stood together in cooperation and harmony during this period of fierce debate.

=== Bennett Law ===
Along with other ethnically German denominations, the Wisconsin Synod successfully spoke out in opposition to the Wisconsin Bennett Law, a compulsory education law that also required certain subjects be taught in English and put public authorities in charge of enforcing compliance in both public and private schools. Wisconsin&#x27;s German-American Lutherans and Catholics saw the law as an attack on their parochial schools and parental rights. They also believed the law was a nativist attack on their German culture. The law was enacted in 1889 and repealed in 1891.

=== Apache mission ===

In 1893, two Wisconsin Synod missionaries began work in Arizona at Peridot and Old San Carlos in the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation among the Apache people. Congregations were soon established. Currently there are nine Wisconsin Synod congregations on the reservation.

=== 1917 merger ===
In 1892, the Wisconsin Synod had federated with the Michigan and Minnesota synods to form the General Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Wisconsin, Minnesota, Michigan and Other States. The Nebraska Synod joined the federation in 1904. In 1917 the synods voted to turn their federation into a formal union, known as the Evangelical Lutheran Joint Synod of Wisconsin and Other States. By 1930, the merger and other factors had pushed the Wisconsin Synod to become a primarily English-speaking synod. The present name was adopted in 1959.

=== Protes&#x27;tant controversy ===

From 1926 to 1929, a small group of persons and congregations were expelled or voluntarily left the WELS in an incident known as the &quot;Protes&#x27;tant Controversy.&quot; They formed the Protes&#x27;tant Conference.

=== Breakup of the Synodical Conference ===
Doctrinal differences among the synods of the Synodical Conference, especially concerning the doctrine and practice of church fellowship, surfaced during the 1940s and &#x27;50s. Problems began when the LCMS began exploratory talks with leaders of the American Lutheran Church (ALC). The ALC differed on its doctrine of Predestination and therefore did not share doctrinal fellowship with the Synodical Conference. Since there had been no recent change on the ALC&#x27;s doctrinal position, the LCMS was then charged by some within the Synodical Conference of changing its position on church fellowship. After years of continued talks, the ELS severed its fellowship relations with the LCMS in 1955 and withdrew from the Synodical Conference. Two years later the WELS publicly recognized the same doctrinal disagreements with the LCMS, but rather than break fellowship, decided to admonish the LCMS to return to its former practice.

Dissatisfaction over this decision led about 70 pastors and a similar number of congregations to leave the WELS, ELS, and LCMS to form the Church of the Lutheran Confession (CLC). Their chief complaint was that the WELS misapplied the principles of Christian fellowship by not breaking immediately with the Synodical Conference and the LCMS after it had publicly recognized doctrinal disagreements. While the WELS broke fellowship with the LCMS in 1961, the CLC and the WELS remain at odds regarding this issue to this day. Recently, the WELS and ELS have been in formal discussions with the CLC over doctrinal issues. The goal of these discussions is to restore fellowship with each other.

=== Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference ===
In 1993, the ELS and WELS, working with a number of other Lutheran synods around the world—some of which had been founded through mission work by both synods—founded a new international fellowship organization which is the theological successor of the Synodical Conference: the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference (CELC).

===Martin Luther College===
Martin Luther College (MLC) was established in 1995 when Northwestern College (NWC) in Watertown, Wisconsin combined with Dr. Martin Luther College (DMLC) in New Ulm, Minnesota at the New Ulm campus. MLC is a private liberal arts college that is owned and operated by the WELS. MLC offers several undergraduate and graduate degree programs, all of which train students for service in the Wisconsin Synod. Men who graduate from the college&#x27;s pre-seminary program may enroll at Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary. Men and women who graduate from its education programs may be assigned by the Wisconsin Synod as teachers and staff ministers to synod churches, schools, and missions.

The Chapel of the Christ was dedicated in 2010 at Martin Luther College to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the WELS.

===New Latin American synod===
In 2021, WELS sister churches in Bolivia, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, and Venezuela came together with the WELS to form a new synod: Iglesia Cristo WELS Internacional.

=== Presidents ===
The following is a list of presidents of the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod from 1850 to the present.

== Organization ==

===Synodical government===
The WELS is headed by a president and is supported by two vice presidents elected during its synod convention for terms of four years. The president oversees the administration of the synod. The current synod president is the Rev. Mark G. Schroeder.

Beneath the president are numerous administrative divisions addressing various areas of ministry. Among these are ministerial education, world missions, home missions, parish services, and fiscal services.

Synod conventions are held biennially in odd-numbered years and consist of elected male lay members from individual congregations from within the synod, ordained pastors and certified male teachers. Half of all delegates are to be lay members while the remaining half is divided between pastors and teachers. Synod conventions elect synodical leaders, and discuss and vote on synodical business. The WELS Synodical Council governs the church when the church is not in convention. The council is made up of twenty-three WELS members including eleven clergy and thirteen laymen. These men &quot;act as a corporate board to plan and direct WELS worldwide ministry&quot;, but their decisions may be overruled by a synod convention.

The WELS is divided into 12 geographical districts in the United States and Canada, each headed by a district president elected in district conventions held during even-numbered years. District presidents serve terms of two years.

===Missions===
WELS Missions consists of all of the mission efforts of the WELS. These missions are made up of Home, World, and Joint Missions. Multi-Language Productions is an arm of WELS World Missions.

“Home Missions supports 126 congregations in the United States, Canada, and English-speaking West Indies, and assists hundreds of other congregations with their campus ministry programs. World Missions conducts gospel outreach in 40 foreign countries and is exploring outreach opportunities in 14 prospective new mission fields. Joint Missions oversees any mission opportunity that is a combination of Home Missions, World Missions, and Ministerial Education.“

WELS Mission Journeys is the official WELS program for short-term mission trips for WELS members. “Through church- or school-based volunteer trips to WELS mission fields at home and abroad, members have the opportunity to engage in Christian service. Pre-trip training led by a Mission Journeys team leader equips volunteers to have significant impact during their trip. While volunteering, the learning and sharing of outreach ideas will allow teams to explore how they can use their God-given abilities to lead an outreach event upon their return home.”

===Education===
The WELS school system is one of the largest private school system in the United States. As of 2021, WELS churches and associations operate 362 early childhood centers, 284 elementary schools, 29 high schools, 2 colleges, and 1 seminary across the nation.

The WELS maintains four schools of ministerial education: two college preparatory schools, Michigan Lutheran Seminary and Luther Preparatory School; a pre-seminary and teacher training college, Martin Luther College in New Ulm, Minnesota; and a seminary for training pastors, Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary, located in Mequon, Wisconsin.

Wisconsin Lutheran College, a liberal arts college in Milwaukee, is affiliated with the WELS and &quot;is owned and operated by a corporation whose members consist of WELS congregations from across the country.&quot;

===Campus ministry===

The WELS has an extensive campus ministry system. The WELS provides financial support for 30 campus ministry programs and assistance for 550 campus ministries in the United States and Canada. The WELS also supports full and part-time campus pastors.

The first campus ministry program started in 1920 at the University of Wisconsin—Madison. Today, Wisconsin Lutheran Chapel is a campus ministry of the WELS that serves students of UW—Madison and other colleges in Madison, WI.

===Christian Aid &amp; Relief===
Christian Aid &amp; Relief (CAR) is a WELS organization that provides disaster relief and humanitarian aid to people and WELS churches and missions in need.

“The mission of Christian Aid and Relief is to reflect Christ’s love and compassion to souls suffering from disasters and hardships. Because of what Christ has freely done for us, we eagerly show we care by offering our time, talents, and treasures to those in need.”

CAR is made up mostly of volunteers who help in various ways. CAR also works with WELS missions and churches for various efforts. CAR also partners with various organizations to help carry out their efforts including Central Africa Medical Mission, Kingdom Workers, WELS Nurses Association, and Christian Family Solutions.

===Discipleship===
The WELS Commission on Discipleship is an organization that “... provides resources, encouragement, and training to assist congregations as they seek to strengthen individuals and families in their connection to Christ and their ongoing walk of faith.” The focus of the WELS Commission on Discipleship is in the following areas:

===Military services===
The WELS Military Services Committee provides spiritual services through full and part-time chaplains to WELS members and other people in the United States Armed Forces. The WELS has a full-time civilian chaplain in Europe and a national civilian chaplain and liaison to the military. The WELS also has 122 pastors who serve as part-time chaplains throughout the United States and around the world.

===Deaf and hard of hearing===
The WELS Mission for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing helps congregations to serve the deaf and hard of hearing. “The Mission for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing offers resources to aid ministry to people who are deaf or have any degree of hearing loss.”

===Visually impaired===
The WELS Mission for the Visually Impaired helps congregations serve those who cannot see or who because of visual impairment or a print impairment cannot read a book or other printed material. The WELS Mission for the Visually Impaired is able to provide a wide variety of Christian resources for free to anyone who qualifies because of copyright law.

“Volunteers at the Mission for the Visually Impaired Workshop in South St Paul, Minn. and across the US produce Christian materials in audio formats, braille and large print. These materials are distributed free of charge throughout the world to WELS and non-WELS people who need them.”

===Evangelism===
The WELS Commission on Evangelism “... assists congregations to seize opportunities the Lord provides to evangelize lost souls by developing and promoting evangelism resources and by promoting evangelism attitudes, structures, and programs consistent with Christian doctrine.”

What About Jesus is “... a website that presents basic belief topics in an easy-to-understand format for those who aren’t familiar with God’s Word.“

The WELS Commission on Evangelism also has made a series of Christian movies to be used as evangelism tools. These movies include &quot;Road to Emmaus&quot;, &quot;Come Follow Me&quot;, &quot;My Son, My Savior&quot;, and &quot;To the Ends of the Earth&quot;.

The WELS Commission on Evangelism also offers the School of Outreach for WELS congregations. “The School of Outreach serves WELS congregations with planning, assistance, and resources for congregational evangelism programming and implementation of outreach strategies.”

The WELS Commission on Evangelism also offers evangelism courses through the Martin Luther College continuing education program.

===Multi-Language Productions===
The WELS Multi-Language Productions (MLP) has made more than 2.9 million audio, video, and print materials. MLP has also made online training resources in over 54 languages. “Through these resources MLP can assist and enhance outreach for all churches, especially in places where WELS does not have resident missionaries. The majority of MLP products are evangelism and Bible Study resources to be used by anyone who sees a need for ministering to others in Christ.”

===Congregational counseling===
The WELS Commission on Congregational Counseling “assists WELS congregations to assess and evaluate ministry, review biblical teachings and principles that impact ministry, develop plans to adjust and expand ministry in appropriate ways, and carry out their plans over a period of time.”

===Publishing===
Northwestern Publishing House (NPH) is the official publishing house for the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Located in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, it produces a wide variety of materials including curriculum, periodicals, books, and worship resources. The publications are mainly for use of churches, schools, pastors, and members of the WELS. Its retail store, NPH Christian Books and Gifts, was also located in Milwaukee, but closed in September 2018. NPH has since moved to the synod&#x27;s headquarters, the WELS Center for Mission and Ministry.

Since June 23, 1891, Northwestern Publishing House has served the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod and its members with a variety of products and programs. The mission of NPH is to publish and provide biblically sound material that communicates, fosters, and supports the Christian faith and life.

Main WELS periodicals include &quot;Forward in Christ: A Lutheran Voice&quot;, the WELS&#x27;s monthly family magazine, and &quot;Wisconsin Lutheran Quarterly&quot;, a quarterly theological magazine.

Most WELS churches use &quot;Christian Worship: A Lutheran Hymnal&quot;, with some using the 1941 &quot;Lutheran Hymnal&quot; or no hymnal at all. In 1911, the Wisconsin Synod published &quot;Church Hymnal for Lutheran Services&quot;. &quot;Christian Worship: Hymnal&quot; is a new hymnal published by Northwestern Publishing House. It was released during the Advent season, 2021.

== Membership ==
The WELS experienced significant growth during much of the twentieth century. In 1925, there were 139,226 members in 662 churches. By 1950 there were over 300,000 members. Membership peaked in the early 1990s at just over 400,000 and has declined slightly since that time. In 2006 the denomination reported 395,497 members in 1,276 congregations. In 2022, the denomination reported 340,511 baptized members. Wisconsin remains the geographic center of the denomination, with over 400 churches and over 200,000 members. Other than Wisconsin, the states with the highest rates of adherents are South Dakota, Minnesota, Michigan, and Nebraska.

Before the late 1960s, the denomination was almost entirely found in the states of the Great Lakes and Great Plains, but with the migration of WELS people to Southern and Western states and the influx of former LCMS conservatives to the WELS, membership outside the region grew strongly in the 1970s and 1980s.

== Church fellowship ==
Fellowship between the WELS and other church groups is established only upon investigation and confirmation that both church groups hold complete unity in doctrine. The WELS is in fellowship with the members of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference, which meets this requirement.

== See also ==
* Christian Family Solutions
* Evangelical Heritage Version

== References ==
== Further reading ==
*Wolf, Edmund Jacob. &quot;The Lutherans in America: A Story of Struggle, Progress, Influence and Marvelous Growth&quot;. New York: J. A. Hill. 1889.

== External links ==

*Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod website
*Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary website
*Northwestern Publishing House website
*Profile of WELS on the Association of Religion Data Archives website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1379931" start="4" end="40" title="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379931" start="42" end="46" title="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="WELS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379931" start="80" end="95" title="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="Wisconsin Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159999" start="112" end="133" title="Confessional Lutheran" label="Confessional Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="150" end="162" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="181" end="194" title="Christian theology" label="theologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="235" end="244" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="246" end="255" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="279" end="287" title="Baptism#Protestant Reformation" label="baptized"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415714" start="640" end="666" title="Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="Evangelical Lutheran Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781399" start="696" end="740" title="Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference" label="Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="905" end="925" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Lutheran Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q310430" start="944" end="958" title="Sola scriptura" label="Sola scriptura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1015" end="1020" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297994" start="1155" end="1175" title="Lutheran Confessions" label="Lutheran Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q158857" start="1400" end="1418" title="Biblical inerrancy" label="Biblical inerrancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="1622" end="1638" title="liberal Christianity" label="liberal theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="1762" end="1792" title="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="2108" end="2117" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333667" start="4077" end="4099" title="Historical-grammatical method" label="historical-grammatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="4383" end="4421" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q508091" start="4466" end="4492" title="Historical-Critical Method" label="historical-critical method"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="4964" end="4975" title="creationism" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q498382" start="4979" end="4997" title="Evolutionary creationism" label="theistic evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="5655" end="5674" title="mainline (Protestant)" label="mainline Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942992" start="6092" end="6108" title="closed communion" label="closed communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="6197" end="6206" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="6929" end="6937" title="Reformed tradition" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q163202" start="6954" end="6968" title="Prussian Union (Evangelical Christian Church)" label="Union Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531809" start="7324" end="7339" title="General Council (Lutheran)" label="General Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q895977" start="7352" end="7364" title="Neo-Lutheran" label="Neo-Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415711" start="7386" end="7399" title="General Synod (Lutheran)" label="General Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321906" start="7589" end="7603" title="open questions" label="open questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022455" start="7626" end="7636" title="Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Iowa" label="Iowa Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531809" start="7848" end="7883" title="Four Points in American Lutheranism" label="Four Points in American Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8117" end="8150" title="General Council (Lutheran)#Origin of the Four Points in American Lutheranism" label="position the General Council took"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877946" start="8559" end="8576" title="Lutheran Orthodoxy" label="orthodox Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022454" start="8925" end="8935" title="Evangelical Lutheran Joint Synod of Ohio" label="Ohio Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611208" start="8965" end="8979" title="Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Illinois" label="Illinois Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022542" start="9001" end="9016" title="Synod of the Norwegian Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Norwegian Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415710" start="9314" end="9372" title="Evangelical Lutheran Synodical Conference of North America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Synodical Conference of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889713" start="13483" end="13494" title="Bennett Law" label="Bennett Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333086" start="14023" end="14030" title="Peridot, Arizona" label="Peridot"/>
<link wikidata="Q125934874" start="14035" end="14049" title="Old San Carlos" label="Old San Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821997" start="14057" end="14093" title="San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation" label="San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="14104" end="14110" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251581" start="15014" end="15041" title="Protes&amp;#x27;tant Conference" label="Protes&amp;#x27;tant Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q18374220" start="15340" end="15364" title="American Lutheran Church (1930)" label="American Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117985" start="16161" end="16200" title="Church of the Lutheran Confession" label="Church of the Lutheran Confession (CLC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781399" start="17045" end="17089" title="Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference" label="Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776047" start="17127" end="17148" title="Martin Luther College" label="Martin Luther College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207479" start="17214" end="17234" title="Watertown, Wisconsin" label="Watertown, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q545119" start="17285" end="17303" title="New Ulm, Minnesota" label="New Ulm, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027230" start="17608" end="17635" title="Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary" label="Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716219" start="21321" end="21347" title="Michigan Lutheran Seminary" label="Michigan Lutheran Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009044" start="21352" end="21377" title="Luther Preparatory School" label="Luther Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776047" start="21424" end="21445" title="Martin Luther College" label="Martin Luther College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027230" start="21506" end="21533" title="Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary" label="Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027229" start="21566" end="21592" title="Wisconsin Lutheran College" label="Wisconsin Lutheran College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="26859" end="26879" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27624" end="27659" title="Forward in Christ: A Lutheran Voice" label="Forward in Christ: A Lutheran Voice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27718" end="27746" title="Wisconsin Lutheran Quarterly" label="Wisconsin Lutheran Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110288" start="27818" end="27854" title="Christian Worship Hymnal" label="Christian Worship: A Lutheran Hymnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749206" start="27893" end="27908" title="The Lutheran Hymnal" label="Lutheran Hymnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="28596" end="28605" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q590232" start="28618" end="28635" title="geographic center" label="geographic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="28779" end="28791" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="28793" end="28802" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="28804" end="28812" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="28818" end="28826" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="28916" end="28927" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="28932" end="28944" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781399" start="29380" end="29424" title="Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference" label="Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027227" start="29474" end="29500" title="Christian Family Solutions" label="Christian Family Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815148" start="29503" end="29531" title="Evangelical Heritage Version" label="Evangelical Heritage Version"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261709" wikidata="Q205759" url="?curid=261709" title="First-past-the-post voting">
<text>First-past-the-post (FPTP)—also called choose-one, first-preference plurality (FPP), or simply plurality—is a single-winner voting rule. Voters mark one candidate as their favorite, or first-preference, and the candidate with the most first-preference marks (a &quot;plurality&quot;) is elected, regardless of whether they have over half of votes (a &quot;majority&quot;).

FPP has been used to elect the British House of Commons since the Middle Ages before spreading throughout the British Empire. Throughout the 20th century, many countries that previously used FPP have abandoned it in favor of other electoral systems, including the former British colonies of Australia and New Zealand. FPP is still officially used in the majority of US states for most elections. However, the combination of partisan primaries and a two-party system in these jurisdictions means that most American elections behave effectively like two-round systems, in which the first round chooses two main contenders (who go on to receive the overwhelming majority of votes).
== Example ==
In FPTP, only the first preferences matter. As such, the votes would be counted as 42% for Memphis, 26% for Nashville, 17% for Knoxville, and 15% for Chattanooga. Since Memphis has the most votes, it would win a FPTP election, even though it is far from the center of the state and a majority of voters would prefer Nashville. Similarly, instant-runoff voting would elect Knoxville, the easternmost city. This makes the election a center squeeze. By contrast, both Condorcet methods and score voting would return Nashville (the capital of Tennessee).

== Properties and effects ==
===Two-party rule===

Perhaps the most striking effect of FPP is the fact that the number of a party&#x27;s seats in a legislature has little to do with its vote count in an election, only in how those votes were geographically distributed. Parties with few votes sometimes take more than few seats; often the most-popular party takes 20 percent more seats than its due share based on portion of the popular vote. This has been cause of criticism of FPP, many arguing that a fundamental requirement of an election system is to accurately represent the views of voters. FPP often creates &quot;false majorities&quot; by over-representing larger parties (giving a majority of the parliamentary/legislative seats to a party that did not receive a majority of the votes) while under-representing smaller ones. 

In Canada, majority governments have been formed often but usually they are made up of a party that received less than a majority of votes in the election. A party forming a majority government and also winning a majority of the votes cast has happened only six times since 1900: 1900; 1904; 1917; 1940, 1958 and 1984. 

In the United Kingdom, 19 of the 24 general elections since 1922 have produced a single-party majority government. In only two of them (1931 and 1935), the leading party took a majority of the votes across the UK.

In some cases, this can lead to a party receiving the plurality or even majority of total votes yet still failing to gain a plurality of legislative seats. This results in a situation called a majority reversal or electoral inversion. Famous examples of the second-place party (in votes nationally) winning a majority of seats include the elections in Ghana in 2012, New Zealand in 1978 and 1981, and the United Kingdom in 1951. Famous examples of the second placed party (in votes nationally) winning a plurality of seats include the elections in Canada in 2019 and 2021 as well as in Japan in 2003. Even when a party wins more than half the votes in an almost purely two-party-competition, it is possible for the runner-up to win a majority of seats. This happened in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in 1966, 1998, and 2020 and in Belize in 1993. Even with only two parties and equally-sized constituencies, winning a majority of seats just requires receiving more than half the vote in more than half the districts—even if the other party receives all the votes cast in the other districts—so just over a quarter of the vote is theoretically enough to win a majority in the legislature. With enough candidates splitting the vote in a district, the total number of votes needed to win can be made arbitrarily small.

=== Two-party systems ===
Under first-past-the-post, a small party may draw votes and seats away from a larger party that it is &quot;more&quot; similar to, and therefore give an advantage to one it is &quot;less&quot; similar to. For example, in the 2000 United States presidential election, the left-leaning Ralph Nader drew more votes from the left-leaning Al Gore, resulting in Nader spoiling the election for the Democrats. According to the political pressure group Make Votes Matter, FPTP creates a powerful electoral incentive for large parties to target similar segments of voters with similar policies. The effect of this reduces political diversity in a country because the larger parties are incentivized to coalesce around similar policies. The ACE Electoral Knowledge Network describes India&#x27;s use of FPTP as a &quot;legacy of British colonialism&quot;.

Duverger&#x27;s law is an idea in political science which says that constituencies that use first-past-the-post methods will lead to two-party systems, given enough time. Economist Jeffrey Sachs explains:
However, most countries with first-past-the-post elections have multiparty legislatures (albeit with two parties larger than the others), the United States being the major exception. There is a counter-argument to Duverger&#x27;s Law, that while on the national level a plurality system may encourage two parties, in the individual constituencies supermajorities may cause the largest party to suffer fracturing.

=== Strongholds, key constituencies and kingmakers ===
The distortions in geographical representation (artificial regionalism) provide incentives for parties to &quot;write off regions&quot; where they are weak and not have much chance of being elected. So they ignore the interests of areas in which they are too weak to stand much chance of gaining representation, leading to governments that do not govern in the national interest. 

Further, during election campaigns the campaigning activity of parties tends to focus on marginal seats held by opponents where there is a prospect of a change in representation. These decisions leave safer areas (safe to one party or the other) excluded from participation in an active campaign. Political parties operate by targeting districts, directing their activists and policy proposals toward those areas considered to be marginal, either possible to be lost or won, where each additional vote is potentially more critical and has more value.

The ability of FPTP to manufacture majority governments has been cited by its supporters as an advantage over proportional representation systems. In the latter, smaller parties may act as &#x27;kingmakers&#x27; in coalitions using their bargaining power and therefore, arguably, their influence on policy is more than proportional to their parliamentary size. This is largely avoided in FPP systems where majorities are generally achieved, even if the party holding power does not have majority of votes.&lt;ref name=&quot;Brams/Kilgour2010&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; FPP often produces governments which have legislative voting majorities, thus providing such governments the legislative power necessary to implement their electoral manifesto commitments during their term in office, if they choose to.

This may be beneficial in a country where the party&#x27;s legislative agenda has broad public support, albeit potentially divided across party lines, or at least benefits society as a whole. However handing a legislative voting majority to a government that lacks popular support can be problematic where said government&#x27;s policies favor only a fraction of the electorate, particularly if the electorate divides on tribal, religious, or urban–rural lines. There is also the perceived issue of unfair coalitions where a smaller party forms a coalition with other smaller parties and form a government, without a clear mandate as was the case in the 2009 Israeli legislative election where the leading party Kadima, was unable to form a coalition so Likud, a smaller party, formed a government without being the largest party. 

The use of proportional representation (PR) may enable smaller parties to become decisive in the country&#x27;s legislature and gain leverage they would not otherwise enjoy, although this can be somewhat mitigated by a large enough electoral threshold. FPP supporters argue that FPP generally reduces this possibility, except where parties have a strong regional basis. A journalist at &quot;Haaretz&quot; reported that Israel&#x27;s highly proportional Knesset &quot;affords great power to relatively small parties, forcing the government to give in to political blackmail and to reach compromises&quot;; Tony Blair, defending FPP, argued that other systems give small parties the balance of power, and influence disproportionate to their votes. 

The concept of kingmaker small parties is similar to Winston Churchill&#x27;s criticism of the alternative vote system as &quot;determined by the most worthless votes given for the most worthless candidates.&quot; meaning that votes for the least supported candidates may change the outcome of the election between the most supported candidates. In this case however, it is an intended feature of the alternative vote, since those votes would have otherwise been wasted. In some sense the cross-party vote transfers make every vote count, as opposed to FPP, where as many as three-quarters or more of the votes may be wasted in a district. Anyway this effect is only possible when no candidate receives a majority of first preference votes. It is related to kingmaker premise in that the lesser-known candidates may encourage their supporters to rank the other candidates a certain way and thus have undue influence.

Supporters of electoral reform generally see the kingmaker ability as a positive development, and claim that cross party ties produced by some alternatives to FPP encourage less negative campaigning and encourage more positive campaigning, as candidates are pushed to appeal to a wider group of people. Opinions are split on whether the alternative vote (better known as instant runoff voting outside the UK) achieves this better than other systems.

=== Extremist parties ===
Supporters and opponents of FPP often argue whether FPP advantages or disadvantages extremist parties,and whether or not it pushes parties to less moderate positions 

FPP suffers from the center squeeze phenomenon, where more moderate candidates are squeezed out by more extreme ones. However, the different types (or the absence of) of party primaries may strengthen or weaken this effect. In general, FPP has no mechanism that would benefit more moderate candidates and many supporters of FPP defend it, even when it elects the largest and most unified (even if more polarizing) minority over a more consensual majority supported candidate. Allowing people into parliament who did not finish first in their district, as can occur in PR systems, was described by David Cameron as creating a &quot;Parliament full of second-choices who no one really wanted but didn&#x27;t really object to either.&quot; But he overlooks how his premise only uses first choice votes, when affection for a voter&#x27;s secondary preference might be almost on par with the affection held for their first choice, and also how under STV and IRV the final elected choices were all - or almost all - high up in popularity on the first count anyway.

Because under FPP only the winner in each district gets representation, voters often engage in strategic voting, a form of self-censorship. This has prevented extreme left- and right-wing parties from gaining parliamentary seats. (Proportional representation generally does give these parties their due share of representation, so there is less push for strategic voting. Thus, strategic voting is applauded by some as it keep extremists from gaining seats. 

But supporters of extremist partis do not always engage in strategic voting, and sometimes do achieve representation under FPP anyway. For one thing, winning a plurality in a district (perhaps 33 percent of votes in a district where likely no more votes are cast than equivalent to total votes/total seats) may take much fewer votes than it does to win a seat under PR, where the effective threshold is seldom much less than total votes/total seats. The need for strategic voting is mostly obviated under preferential voting systems, such as STV or IRV. Voters are allowed to rank other candidates, and if necessary their votes are transferred to where they will be used. Therefore they do not have to (or at least less often have to) strategically compromise on their first choice.

As well, due to the safe seats produced by FPP and the ability of the leading party to take majority of seats with less than majority of votes, extremists may use &quot;burrowing from within&quot; and conspiratorial nomination machinations to take over a professedly big-tent party. The Constitution Society published a report in April 2019 stating that, &quot;[in certain circumstances] FPP can ... abet extreme politics, since should a radical faction gain control of one of the major political parties, FPP works to preserve that party&#x27;s position. ...This is because the psychological effect of the plurality system disincentivises a major party&#x27;s supporters from voting for a minor party in protest at its policies, since to do so would likely only help the major party&#x27;s main rival. Rather than curtailing extreme voices, FPP today empowers the (relatively) extreme voices of the Labour and Conservative party memberships.&quot; For example, the electoral system of Hungary, a mixed system dominated by FPP have seen Fidesz (right-wing, populist party) win 135 seats in the 2022 Hungarian parliamentary election and has remained the largest party in Hungary since 2010 by changing the electoral system to mostly use FPP instead of the previous mixed system using mostly the two-round system. Since 2010, Fidesz has implemented other anti-democratic reforms that now mean the European Parliament no longer qualifies Hungary as a full democracy. Electoral reform campaigners have argued that the use of FPP in South Africa was a contributory factor in the country adopting the apartheid system after the 1948 general election in that country. Leblang and Chan found that a country&#x27;s electoral system is the most important predictor of a country&#x27;s involvement in war, according to three different measures: (1) when a country was the first to enter a war; (2) when it joined a multinational coalition in an ongoing war; and (3) how long it stayed in a war after becoming a party to it. When the people are fairly represented in parliament, more of those groups who may object to any potential war have access to the political power necessary to prevent it. In a proportional democracy, war and other major decisions generally requires the consent of the majority. The British human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell, and others, have argued that Britain entered the Iraq War primarily because of the political effects of FPP and that proportional representation would have prevented Britain&#x27;s involvement in the war.

===Tactical voting===

To a greater extent than many others, the first-past-the-post method encourages &quot;tactical voting&quot;. Voters have an incentive to vote for a candidate who they predict is more likely to win, as opposed to their preferred candidate who may be unlikely to win and for whom a vote could be considered as wasted. FPP wastes fewer votes when it is used in two-party contests. But waste of votes and minority governments are more likely when large groups of voters vote for three, four or more parties as in Canadian elections. Canada uses FPP and only two of the last seven federal Canadian elections (2011 and 2015) produced single-party majority governments. In none of them did the leading party receive a majority of the votes.

The position is sometimes summarized, in an extreme form, as &quot;all votes for anyone other than the runner-up are votes for the winner.&quot; This is because votes for these other candidates deny potential support from the second-placed candidate, who might otherwise have won. Following the extremely close 2000 U.S. presidential election, some supporters of Democratic candidate Al Gore believed one reason he lost to Republican George W. Bush is that a portion of the electorate (2.7%) voted for Ralph Nader of the Green Party, and exit polls indicated that more of them would have preferred Gore (45%) to Bush (27%). The election was ultimately determined by the results from Florida, where Bush prevailed over Gore by a margin of only 537 votes (0.009%), which was far exceeded by the 97488 (1.635%) votes cast for Nader in that state.

In Puerto Rico, there has been a tendency for Independentista voters to support Populares candidates. This phenomenon is responsible for some Popular victories, even though the Estadistas have the most voters on the island, and is so widely recognised that Puerto Ricans sometimes call the Independentistas who vote for the Populares &quot;melons&quot;, because that fruit is green on the outside but red on the inside (in reference to the party colors).

Because voters have to predict who the top two candidates will be, results can be significantly distorted:
* Some voters will vote based on their view of how others will vote as well, changing their originally intended vote;
* Substantial power is given to the media, because some voters will believe its assertions as to who the leading contenders are likely to be. Even voters who distrust the media will know that others &quot;do&quot; believe the media, and therefore those candidates who receive the most media attention will probably be the most popular;
* A new candidate with no track record, who might otherwise be supported by the majority of voters, may be considered unlikely to be one of the top two, and thus lose votes to tactical voting; 
* The method may promote votes &quot;against&quot; as opposed to votes &quot;for&quot;. For example, in the UK (and only in the Great Britain region), entire campaigns have been organised with the aim of voting &quot;against&quot; the Conservative Party by voting Labour, Liberal Democrat in England and Wales, and since 2015 the SNP in Scotland, depending on which is seen as best placed to win in each locality. Such behavior is difficult to measure objectively.

Proponents of other voting methods in single-member districts argue that these would reduce the need for tactical voting and reduce the spoiler effect. Examples include preferential voting systems, such as instant runoff voting, as well as the two-round system of runoffs and less tested methods such as approval voting and Condorcet methods.
Wasted votes are seen as those cast for losing candidates, and for winning candidates in excess of the number required for victory. For example, in the UK general election of 2005, 52% of votes were cast for losing candidates and 18% were excess votes—a total of 70% &quot;wasted&quot; votes. On this basis a large majority of votes may play no part in determining the outcome. This winner-takes-all system may be one of the reasons why &quot;voter participation tends to be lower in countries with FPP than elsewhere.&quot;

===Geography===
The effect of a system based on plurality voting spread over many separate districts is that the larger parties, and parties with more geographically concentrated support, gain a disproportionately large share of seats, while smaller parties with more evenly distributed support gain a disproportionately small share. This is because in doing this they win many seats and do not &#x27;waste&#x27; many votes in other areas. As voting patterns are similar in about two-thirds of the districts, it is more likely that a single party will hold a majority of legislative seats under FPP than happens in a proportional system, and under FPP it is rare to elect a majority government that actually has the support of a majority of voters. Because FPP permits many wasted votes, an election under FPP is more easily gerrymandered. Through gerrymandering, electoral areas are designed deliberately to unfairly increase the number of seats won by one party by redrawing the map such that one party has a small number of districts in which it has an overwhelming majority of votes (whether due to policy, demographics which tend to favor one party, or other reasons), and many districts where it is at a smaller disadvantage.

The British Electoral Reform Society (ERS) says that regional parties benefit from this system. &quot;With a geographical base, parties that are small UK-wide can still do very well&quot;.

On the other hand, minor parties that do not concentrate their vote usually end up getting a much lower proportion of seats than votes, as they lose most of the seats they contest and &#x27;waste&#x27; most of their votes.

The ERS also says that in FPP elections using many separate districts &quot;small parties without a geographical base find it hard to win seats&quot;.

Make Votes Matter said that in the 2017 general election, &quot;the Green Party, Liberal Democrats and UKIP (minor, non-regional parties) received 11% of votes between them, yet they &quot;shared&quot; just 2% of seats&quot;, and in the 2015 general election, &quot;[t]he same three parties received almost a quarter of all the votes cast, yet these parties &quot;shared&quot; just 1.5% of seats.&quot;

According to Make Votes Matter, in the 2015 UK general election UKIP came in third in terms of number of votes (3.9 million/12.6%), but gained only one seat in Parliament, resulting in one seat per 3.9 million votes. The Conservatives on the other hand received one seat per 34,000 votes.

The winner-takes-all nature of FPP leads to distorted patterns of representation, since it exaggerates the correlation between party support and geography.

For example, in the UK the Conservative Party represents most of the rural seats in England, and most of the south of England, while the Labour Party represents most of the English cities and most of the north of England. This pattern hides the large number of votes for the non-dominant party. Parties can find themselves without elected politicians in significant parts of the country, heightening feelings of regionalism. Party supporters (who may nevertheless be a significant minority) in those sections of the country are unrepresented.

In the 2019 Canadian federal election Conservatives won 98% of the seats in Alberta and Saskatchewan with only 68% of the vote. The lack of non-Conservative representation gives the appearance of greater Conservative support than actually exists. Similarly, in Canada&#x27;s 2021 elections, the Conservative Party won 88% of the seats in Alberta with only 55% of the vote, and won 100% of the seats in Saskatchewan with only 59% of the vote.

First-past-the-post within geographical areas tends to deliver (particularly to larger parties) a significant number of safe seats, where a representative is sheltered from any but the most dramatic change in voting behavior. In the UK, the Electoral Reform Society estimates that more than half the seats can be considered as safe. It has been claimed that members involved in the 2009 expenses scandal were significantly more likely to hold a safe seat.

==History==
The House of Commons of England originated in the Middle Ages as an assembly representing the gentry of the counties and cities of the Kingdom, each of which elected either one or two members of parliament (MPs) by block plurality voting. Starting in the 19th century, electoral reform advocates pushed to replace these multi-member constituencies with single-member districts. Elections to the Canadian House of Commons have always been conducted with FPP.

The United States broke away from British rule in the late 18th century, and its constitution provides for an electoral college to elect its president. Despite original intentions to the contrary, by the mid-19th century this college had transformed into a &quot;de facto&quot; use of FPP for each state&#x27;s presidential election. This further morphed through the introduction of the party primary, which made American elections into a two-round system in practice.

===Criticism and replacement===

Non-plurality voting systems have been devised since at least 1299, when Ramon Llull came up with both the Condorcet and Borda count methods, which were respectively reinvented in the 18th century by the Marquis de Condorcet and Jean-Charles de Borda. More serious investigation into electoral systems came in the late 18th century, when several thinkers independently proposed systems of proportional representation to elect legislatures. The single transferable vote in particular was invented in 1819 by Thomas Wright Hill, and first used in a public election in 1840 by his son Rowland for the Adelaide City Council in Australia. STV saw its first national use in Denmark in 1855, and was reinvented several times in the 19th century.

The Proportional Representation Society was founded in England in 1884 and began campaigning. STV was used to elect the British House of Commons&#x27;s university constituencies between 1918 and their abolition in 1950.

Many countries which use first-past-the-post voting have active campaigns to switch to proportional representation (e.g. UK and Canada). Most modern democracies use some form of proportional representation.

=== Naming ===
The name &quot;first-past-the-post&quot; is a reference to a kind of gambling in horse races. In a first-past-the-post wager, bettors would choose the single horse they thought would be the first one to make it past the finishing post. In academic contexts, the rule is typically called &quot;first-preference plurality&quot; (FPP), which describes the rule&#x27;s behavior more precisely, or simply &quot;plurality&quot;.

== Countries using FPP ==

=== Legislatures elected exclusively by single-member plurality ===
The following is a list of countries currently following the first-past-the-post voting system for their national legislatures.

* Antigua and Barbuda
* Azerbaijan
* Bahamas
* Bangladesh
* Barbados
* Belarus
* Belize
* Botswana
* Dominica
* Eritrea
* Eswatini
* Ethiopia
* The Gambia
* Ghana
* Grenada 
* Jamaica
* Kenya
* North Korea
* Liberia
* Malaysia
* Malawi
* Maldives
* Mauritius
* Federated States of Micronesia
* Myanmar
* Nigeria
* Qatar
* Saint Kitts and Nevis
* Saint Lucia
* Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
* Samoa
* Solomon Islands
* &quot;Transnistria&quot;
* Trinidad and Tobago
* Turkmenistan
* Uganda
* Yemen
* Zambia
==== Upper house only ====

* Bhutan
* Dominican Republic
* Poland
==== Lower house only ====

* Canada
* India
* Palau
* United Kingdom
==== Varies by state ====

* United States (both houses)
==== Subnational legislatures ====

* Cook Islands (New Zealand)
* US Virgin Islands
* Bermuda
* Cayman Islands
=== Use of single-member plurality in mixed systems for electing legislatures ===
The following countries use single-member plurality to elect part of their national legislature, in different types of mixed systems.

Alongside block voting (fully majoritarian/plurality systems) or as part of mixed-member majoritarian systems (semi-proportional representation)

* Brazil – in the Federal Senate, alongside plurality block voting (alternating elections)
* Hungary – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting with partial compensation)
* Ivory Coast – in single-member electoral districts, alongside party block voting
* Iran – in single-member electoral districts for Khobregan, alongside plurality block voting
* Japan – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting)
* Marshall Islands – in single-member electoral districts, alongside plurality block voting
* Mexico – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting)
* Nepal – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting)
* Oman – in single-member electoral districts, alongside plurality block voting
* Pakistan – alongside seats distributed proportional to seats already won
* Philippines – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting)
* Singapore – in single-member electoral districts, alongside party block voting
* South Korea – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting)
* Republic of China (Taiwan) – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting)
* Tanzania – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting)
* Thailand – as part of a mixed system (parallel voting)
As part of mixed-member proportional (MMP) or additional member systems (AMS)
* Bolivia
* Lesotho
* New Zealand
Subnational legislatures
* Scotland (United Kingdom)

=== Heads of state elected by FPP ===

* Angola (Double simultaneous vote for the presidential and legislative elections)
* Bosnia and Herzegovina (one for each main ethnic group)
* Cameroon
* Democratic Republic of the Congo
* Equatorial Guinea
* The Gambia
* Guyana (Double simultaneous vote for the presidential and legislative elections)
* Honduras
* Iceland
* Kiribati
* Malawi
* Mexico
* Nicaragua
* Nigeria
* Palestine
* Panama
* Paraguay
* Philippines
* Rwanda
* Singapore
* South Korea
* Taiwan (from 1996 constitutional amendment)
* Tanzania
* Venezuela

===Former use===
* Argentina (The Chamber of Deputies uses party list PR. Only twice used FPTP, first between 1902 and 1905 used only in the , and the second time between 1951 and 1957 used only in the elections of 1951 and 1954.)
* Australia (replaced by IRV in 1918 for both the House of Representatives and the Senate, with STV being introduced to the Senate in 1948)
* Belgium (adopted in 1831, replaced by party list PR in 1899)— the Member of the European Parliament for the German-speaking electoral college is still elected by FPTP
* Cyprus (replaced by proportional representation in 1981)
* Denmark (replaced by proportional representation in 1920)
* Hong Kong (adopted in 1995, replaced by party list PR in 1998)
* Italy (used between 1860 and 1882, and between 1892 and 1919)
* Lebanon (replaced by proportional representation in June 2017)
* Lesotho (replaced by MMP Party list in 2002)
* Malta (replaced by STV in 1921)
* Netherlands (replaced by party list PR in 1917)
* New Zealand (replaced by MMP in 1996)
* Papua New Guinea (replaced by IRV in 2002)
* Portugal (replaced by party list PR)
* Serbia (adopted in 1990, replaced by party list PR in 1992)
*South Africa (replaced by party list PR in 1994)

==See also==

* Cube rule
* Deviation from proportionality
* Plurality-at-large voting
* Approval voting
* Single non-transferable vote
* Single transferable vote

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* A handbook of Electoral System Design from International IDEA
* ACE Project: What is the electoral system for Chamber1 of the national legislature?
* ACE Project: First Past The Post—detailed explanation of first-past-the-post voting
* ACE Project: Electing a President using FPTP
* The Citizens&#x27; Assembly on Electoral Reform says the new proportional electoral system it proposes for British Columbia will improve the practice of democracy in the province.
* Vote No to Proportional Representation BC
* Fact Sheets on Electoral Systems provided to members of the Citizens&#x27; Assembly on Electoral Reform, British Columbia.
* The Problem With First-Past-The-Post Electing (data from UK general election 2005)
* The fatal flaws of First-past-the-post electoral systems</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="0" end="19" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="First-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="21" end="25" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="FPTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="39" end="49" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="choose-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="51" end="77" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="first-preference plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="79" end="82" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="FPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="95" end="104" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="110" end="123" title="single-winner" label="single-winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052408" start="185" end="201" title="First-preference votes" label="first-preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="261" end="282" title="Plurality (voting)" label="&amp;quot;plurality&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="356" end="364" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="405" end="429" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="440" end="451" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="484" end="498" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="665" end="674" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="679" end="690" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="705" end="715" title="De jure" label="officially"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="740" end="749" title="U.S. state" label="US states"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="798" end="816" title="Partisan primary" label="partisan primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="823" end="839" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="922" end="939" title="Two-round system" label="two-round systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q831304" start="1351" end="1392" title="Majority-preferred candidate" label="majority of voters would prefer Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="1405" end="1426" title="instant-runoff voting" label="instant-runoff voting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1433" end="1448" title="Instant-runoff voting#Tennessee" label="elect Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q128133956" start="1498" end="1512" title="center squeeze" label="center squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q868720" start="1532" end="1548" title="Condorcet method" label="Condorcet method"/>
<link wikidata="Q852733" start="1554" end="1566" title="score voting" label="score voting"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1573" end="1589" title="Condorcet method#Example: Voting on the location of Tennessee&amp;#x27;s capital" label="return Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="2467" end="2486" title="majority government" label="majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723526" start="2736" end="2740" title="1900 Canadian federal election" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q909860" start="2742" end="2746" title="1904 Canadian federal election" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723529" start="2748" end="2752" title="1917 Canadian federal election" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448629" start="2754" end="2758" title="1940 Canadian federal election" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q595982" start="2760" end="2764" title="1958 Canadian federal election" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125968" start="2769" end="2773" title="1984 Canadian federal election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q918375" start="2913" end="2917" title="1931 United Kingdom general election" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="2922" end="2926" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424520" start="3185" end="3202" title="majority reversal" label="majority reversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424520" start="3206" end="3225" title="electoral inversion" label="electoral inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q404531" start="3353" end="3357" title="2012 Ghanaian general election" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055243" start="3374" end="3378" title="1978 New Zealand general election" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016154" start="3383" end="3387" title="1981 New Zealand general election" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="3415" end="3419" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190721" start="3550" end="3554" title="2019 Canadian federal election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q73837865" start="3559" end="3563" title="2021 Canadian federal election" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144707" start="3587" end="3591" title="2003 Japanese general election" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="3762" end="3794" title="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932159" start="3798" end="3802" title="1966 Vincentian general election" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932168" start="3804" end="3808" title="1998 Vincentian general election" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q80301200" start="3814" end="3818" title="2020 Vincentian general election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883011" start="3836" end="3840" title="1993 Belizean general election" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784715" start="4292" end="4309" title="arbitrarily small" label="arbitrarily small"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="4563" end="4603" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q193156" start="4622" end="4633" title="Ralph Nader" label="Ralph Nader"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="4672" end="4679" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421390" start="4700" end="4721" title="Spoiler effect" label="spoiling the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134174" start="4783" end="4800" title="Make Votes Matter" label="Make Votes Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650628" start="5069" end="5100" title="ACE Electoral Knowledge Network" label="ACE Electoral Knowledge Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q637376" start="5185" end="5204" title="Duverger&amp;#x27;s law" label="Duverger&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="5219" end="5236" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="5318" end="5334" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q319189" start="5366" end="5379" title="Jeffrey Sachs" label="Jeffrey Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760429" start="6330" end="6343" title="marginal seat" label="marginal seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q46337" start="7523" end="7532" title="manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q911180" start="8248" end="8281" title="2009 Israeli legislative election" label="2009 Israeli legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q39655" start="8306" end="8312" title="Kadima" label="Kadima"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="8348" end="8353" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="8438" end="8465" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="8539" end="8550" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="8659" end="8678" title="electoral threshold" label="electoral threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q216393" start="8819" end="8826" title="Haaretz" label="Haaretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="8881" end="8888" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="9033" end="9043" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9229" end="9246" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="9271" end="9287" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="alternative vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="10465" end="10486" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="instant runoff voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q128133956" start="10760" end="10785" title="Center squeeze" label="center squeeze phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="11336" end="11349" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141155" start="11894" end="11910" title="strategic voting" label="strategic voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="12030" end="12057" title="Proportional representation" label="Proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466439" start="13448" end="13464" title="Extremism" label="extreme politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162586" start="14009" end="14036" title="electoral system of Hungary" label="electoral system of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614065" start="14137" end="14174" title="2022 Hungarian parliamentary election" label="2022 Hungarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q597892" start="14227" end="14231" title="2010 Hungarian parliamentary election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="14337" end="14353" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="14571" end="14583" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="14638" end="14647" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14665" end="14686" title="1948 South African general election#Results" label="1948 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343213" start="15370" end="15384" title="Peter Tatchell" label="Peter Tatchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046450" start="15923" end="15929" title="wasted vote" label="wasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q41302" start="16219" end="16223" title="2011 Canadian federal election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586271" start="16228" end="16232" title="2015 Canadian federal election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="16661" end="16692" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="16713" end="16723" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="16734" end="16741" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="16773" end="16783" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="16784" end="16798" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q193156" start="16852" end="16863" title="Ralph Nader" label="Ralph Nader"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="16871" end="16882" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892747" start="17020" end="17040" title="United States presidential election in Florida, 2000" label="results from Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="17198" end="17209" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683" start="17241" end="17256" title="Puerto Rican Independence Party" label="Independentista"/>
<link wikidata="Q199319" start="17275" end="17284" title="Popular Democratic Party of Puerto Rico" label="Populares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076562" start="17372" end="17382" title="New Progressive Party of Puerto Rico" label="Estadistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="18534" end="18547" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="18641" end="18659" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="18670" end="18676" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="18678" end="18694" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="18698" end="18705" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="18710" end="18715" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="18736" end="18739" title="Scottish National Party" label="SNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="18743" end="18751" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="18910" end="18932" title="single-member district" label="single-member district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421390" start="19008" end="19022" title="spoiler effect" label="spoiler effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="19078" end="19099" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="instant runoff voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="19116" end="19132" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q526530" start="19176" end="19191" title="approval voting" label="approval voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q868720" start="19196" end="19212" title="Condorcet method" label="Condorcet method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046450" start="19215" end="19226" title="Wasted vote" label="Wasted vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="19367" end="19394" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="UK general election of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046450" start="20515" end="20526" title="wasted vote" label="wasted vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="20589" end="20603" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355003" start="20986" end="21010" title="Electoral Reform Society" label="Electoral Reform Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134174" start="21540" end="21557" title="Make Votes Matter" label="Make Votes Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="21575" end="21596" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="21777" end="21798" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="22008" end="22012" title="UK Independence Party" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="22418" end="22436" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="22528" end="22540" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="22973" end="22986" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="23498" end="23507" title="safe seat" label="safe seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164580" start="23765" end="23781" title="United Kingdom parliamentary expenses scandal" label="expenses scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="23851" end="23878" title="House of Commons of England" label="House of Commons of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="24062" end="24084" title="block plurality voting" label="block plurality voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356385" start="24116" end="24132" title="electoral reform" label="electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="24251" end="24267" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="24310" end="24323" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="24693" end="24706" title="party primary" label="party primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="24745" end="24761" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="24882" end="24893" title="Ramon Llull" label="Ramon Llull"/>
<link wikidata="Q576578" start="24930" end="24941" title="Borda count" label="Borda count"/>
<link wikidata="Q201477" start="25013" end="25033" title="Marquis de Condorcet" label="Marquis de Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q369762" start="25038" end="25059" title="Jean-Charles de Borda" label="Jean-Charles de Borda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="25198" end="25225" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="25253" end="25277" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525678" start="25316" end="25334" title="Thomas Wright Hill" label="Thomas Wright Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q370241" start="25391" end="25398" title="Rowland Hill" label="Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094063" start="25407" end="25428" title="Adelaide City Council" label="Adelaide City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355003" start="25553" end="25588" title="Electoral Reform Society" label="Proportional Representation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894997" start="25701" end="25726" title="university constituencies" label="university constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506462" start="26074" end="26085" title="Sports gambling" label="horse races"/>
<link wikidata="Q781" start="26643" end="26662" title="Antigua and Barbuda" label="Antigua and Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="26665" end="26675" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="26678" end="26685" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="26688" end="26698" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="26701" end="26709" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="26712" end="26719" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="26722" end="26728" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="26731" end="26739" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="26742" end="26750" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="26753" end="26760" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="26763" end="26771" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="26774" end="26782" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="26785" end="26795" title="The Gambia" label="The Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="26798" end="26803" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="26806" end="26813" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="26817" end="26824" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="26827" end="26832" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="26835" end="26846" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="26849" end="26856" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="26859" end="26867" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="26870" end="26876" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="26879" end="26887" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="26890" end="26899" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="26902" end="26932" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="26935" end="26942" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="26945" end="26952" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="26955" end="26960" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="26963" end="26984" title="Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="26987" end="26998" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="27001" end="27033" title="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="27036" end="27041" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="27044" end="27059" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="27068" end="27080" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="27089" end="27108" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="27111" end="27123" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="27126" end="27132" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="27135" end="27140" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="27143" end="27149" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="27180" end="27186" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="27189" end="27207" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="27210" end="27216" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="27247" end="27253" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="27256" end="27261" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="27264" end="27269" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="27272" end="27286" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q279283" start="27316" end="27329" title="Elections in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="27382" end="27394" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="27411" end="27428" title="US Virgin Islands" label="US Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="27431" end="27438" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="27441" end="27455" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="27821" end="27827" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119413" start="27837" end="27851" title="Brazilian Senate" label="Federal Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="27863" end="27885" title="plurality block voting" label="plurality block voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="27912" end="27919" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="27994" end="28005" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476490" start="28056" end="28074" title="party block voting" label="party block voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="28077" end="28081" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q917663" start="28125" end="28134" title="Assembly of Experts" label="Khobregan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="28146" end="28168" title="plurality block voting" label="plurality block voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="28171" end="28176" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="28225" end="28241" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="28292" end="28314" title="plurality block voting" label="plurality block voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="28317" end="28323" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="28372" end="28377" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="28426" end="28430" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="28481" end="28503" title="plurality block voting" label="plurality block voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="28506" end="28514" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="28581" end="28592" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="28641" end="28650" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476490" start="28701" end="28719" title="party block voting" label="party block voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="28722" end="28733" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="28782" end="28808" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China (Taiwan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="28857" end="28865" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="28914" end="28922" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="29049" end="29056" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="29059" end="29066" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="29069" end="29080" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="29108" end="29116" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="29176" end="29182" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q109849243" start="29184" end="29208" title="Double simultaneous vote" label="Double simultaneous vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="29259" end="29281" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="29317" end="29325" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="29328" end="29360" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="29363" end="29380" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="29383" end="29393" title="The Gambia" label="The Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="29396" end="29402" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q109849243" start="29404" end="29428" title="Double simultaneous vote" label="Double simultaneous vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="29479" end="29487" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="29490" end="29497" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="29500" end="29508" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="29511" end="29517" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="29520" end="29526" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="29529" end="29538" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="29541" end="29548" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="29551" end="29560" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="29563" end="29569" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="29572" end="29580" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="29583" end="29594" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="29597" end="29603" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="29606" end="29615" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="29618" end="29629" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="29632" end="29638" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458244" start="29650" end="29674" title="Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="29678" end="29686" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="29689" end="29698" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="29719" end="29728" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q629133" start="29734" end="29753" title="Argentine Chamber of Deputies" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="29759" end="29772" title="Party-list proportional representation" label="party list PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789447" start="29902" end="29919" title="1951 Argentine general election" label="elections of 1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789467" start="29924" end="29928" title="1954 Argentine general election" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="29933" end="29942" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="29956" end="29959" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="IRV"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="29981" end="30005" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="30014" end="30020" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="30027" end="30030" title="Single transferable vote" label="STV"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="30073" end="30080" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="30111" end="30124" title="Party-list proportional representation" label="party list PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="30139" end="30172" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="Member of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677925" start="30181" end="30214" title="German-speaking electoral college" label="German-speaking electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="30242" end="30248" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="30262" end="30289" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="30301" end="30308" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="30322" end="30349" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="30361" end="30370" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="30401" end="30414" title="Party-list proportional representation" label="party list PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="30426" end="30431" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="30490" end="30497" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="30511" end="30538" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="30555" end="30562" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="30576" end="30579" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="MMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="30580" end="30590" title="Party-list proportional representation" label="Party list"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="30602" end="30607" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="30621" end="30624" title="Single transferable vote" label="STV"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="30636" end="30647" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="30661" end="30674" title="Party-list proportional representation" label="party list PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="30686" end="30697" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="30711" end="30714" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="MMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="30726" end="30742" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="30756" end="30759" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="IRV"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="30771" end="30779" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="30793" end="30806" title="Party-list proportional representation" label="party list PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="30810" end="30816" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="30847" end="30860" title="Party-list proportional representation" label="party list PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="30871" end="30883" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="30897" end="30910" title="Party-list proportional representation" label="party list PR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192215" start="30937" end="30946" title="Cube rule" label="Cube rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="30949" end="30979" title="Deviation from proportionality" label="Deviation from proportionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="30982" end="31007" title="Plurality block voting" label="Plurality-at-large voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q526530" start="31010" end="31025" title="Approval voting" label="Approval voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307208" start="31028" end="31056" title="Single non-transferable vote" label="Single non-transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="31059" end="31083" title="Single transferable vote" label="Single transferable vote"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261710" wikidata="Q7673266" url="?curid=261710" title="List of electoral systems by country">
<text>This is a list of electoral systems by country in alphabetical order. An electoral system is used to elect national legislatures and heads of state.

==Maps==
== Electoral systems by country ==
=== Democracies and hybrid regimes ===


=== Authoritarian regimes ===
According to the Economist Democracy Index 2023 on electoral process and pluralism. These countries have no elections or sham elections.
=== Countries with limited recognition ===


=== Colonies and dependencies ===


==Notes==

==References==
== External links ==
*ACE Electoral Knowledge Network Expert site providing encyclopedia on Electoral Systems and Management, country by country data, a library of electoral materials, latest election news, the opportunity to submit questions to a network of electoral experts, and a forum to discuss all of the above.
*A Handbook of Electoral System Design from International IDEA
*Electoral Design Reference Materials from the ACE Project
*PARLINE database from the Inter-Parliamentary Union
*Political Database of the Americas - Georgetown University
*Project for Global Democracy and Human Rights This page links to a table and a world map that is color-coded by the primary electoral system used by each country.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="18" end="34" title="electoral system" label="electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="116" end="127" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="133" end="147" title="Head of state" label="heads of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="278" end="312" title="The Economist Democracy Index" label="the Economist Democracy Index 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="386" end="400" title="Sham election" label="sham elections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261716" wikidata="Q249582" url="?curid=261716" title="E. W. Bullinger">
<text>Ethelbert William Bullinger (15 December 1837 – 6 June 1913) was an Anglican clergyman, biblical scholar, and ultradispensationalist theologian.

==Early life==
He was born in Canterbury, Kent, England, the youngest of five children of William and Mary (Bent) Bullinger. His family traced their ancestry back to Heinrich Bullinger, the Swiss Reformer and Johann Balthasar Bullinger, a Swiss painter.

His formal theological training was at King&#x27;s College London from 1860 to 1861, and he earned an associate degree. After graduation, on 15 October 1861, he married Emma Dobson, 13 years his senior. He later received a Doctor of Divinity in 1881 not from a university but from Archibald Campbell Tait, Archbishop of Canterbury, who cited Bullinger&#x27;s &quot;eminent service in the Church in the department of Biblical criticism&quot;.

==Career==
Bullinger&#x27;s career in the Church of England spanned from 1861 to 1888. He began as associate curate in the parish of St. Mary Magdalene, Bermondsey, in 1861, and was ordained as a priest in the Church of England in 1862. He served as parish curate in Tittleshall (1863–1866), Notting Hill (1866–1869), Leytonstone, (1869–1870) and Walthamstow until he became vicar of the new parish of St. Stephen&#x27;s in 1874. He resigned his vicarage in 1888.

==Trinitarian Bible Society==
In the spring of 1867, at the age of 29, Bullinger became clerical secretary of the Trinitarian Bible Society, which he held, with rare lapses for illness in his later years, until his death, in 1913.

The society&#x27;s accomplishments during his secretariat include the following:
*The completion and publication of a Hebrew version of the New Testament under a TBS contract with Christian David Ginsburg after the demise of Isaac Salkinson.
*The publication of Ginsburg&#x27;s first edition of the Tanakh (&quot;Introduction to the Massoretico-Critical Edition of the Hebrew Bible&quot;).
*The formation (1885) of the Brittany Evangelical Mission Society under Pasteur LeCoat and translation of the Bible into Breton.
*The first-ever Protestant Portuguese Reference Bible.
*Distribution of Spanish Bibles in Spain after the 1868 Spanish Revolution.

Bullinger and Ginsburg parted ways, and another edition of Tanakh was published by the British and Foreign Bible Society.

==Author==
Bullinger was editor of a monthly journal &quot;Things to Come&quot;, subtitled &quot;A Journal of Biblical Literature, with Special Reference to Prophetic Truth. The Official Organ of Prophetic Conferences&quot; for over 20 years (1894–1915), and he contributed many articles.

In the great Anglican debate of the Victorian era, he belonged to the Low Church, rather than the High Church.

He wrote four major works:
*&quot;A Critical Lexicon and Concordance to the English and Greek New Testament&quot; (1877) 
*&quot;Number in Scripture&quot; (1894) 
*&quot;Figures of Speech Used in the Bible&quot; (1898) 
*Primary editor of &quot;The Companion Bible&quot; (published in 6 parts, 1909–1922) . It was completed after his death by his associates.

As of 2020, those works and many others remain in print, or at least are reproduced on the Internet.

Bullinger was also a practiced musician. As part of his support for the Breton Mission, he collected and harmonized several previously-untranscribed Breton Hymns on his visits to Trémel, Brittany. He also published “Fifty original hymn-tunes” in 1874 which reached a third edition in 1897. The first, , is the only one still in use today, often sung to the words “I am trusting Thee, Lord Jesus”.

==Friends==
Bullinger&#x27;s friends included Zionist Dr. Theodor Herzl.

==Bullingerism==
Bullinger&#x27;s views were often unique and sometimes controversial. He is so closely tied to what is now called ultradispensationalism that it is sometimes referred to as Bullingerism. Bullingerism differed from mainstream dispensationalism on the beginning of the church. Mainstream dispensationalism holds that the Church began at Pentecost, as described early in the Acts of the Apostles. In contrast, Bullinger held that &quot;the Church&quot;, which the Apostle Paul revealed as the &quot;Body of Christ&quot;, began after the end of Acts, and was not revealed until the Prison Epistles of the Apostle Paul. Dispensationalist Harry A. Ironside (1876–1951) declared Bullingerism an &quot;absolutely Satanic perversion of the truth.&quot;

Bullinger described dispensations as divine &quot;administrations&quot; or &quot;arrangements&quot; under which God deals at distinct time periods and with distinct groups of people &quot;on distinct principles, and the doctrine relating to each must be kept distinct.&quot; He emphasizes, &quot;Nothing but confusion can arise from reading into one dispensation that which relates to another.&quot; He lists seven dispensations:

==Other views==
Other than ultradispensationalism, Bullinger had many unusual views. For example, Bullinger argued that the death of Jesus occurred on a Wednesday, not a Friday, after Pilate had condemned him at the previous midnight, and that Jesus was crucified on a single upright stake without crossbar with four, not just two, criminals and held that this last view was supported by a group of five crosses of different origins (all with crossbar) in Brittany (put together in the 18th century).

Bullinger argued for mortality of the soul, the cessation of the soul between death and resurrection. He did not express any views concerning the final state of the lost, but many of his followers hold to annihilationism.

Bullinger was a supporter of the theory of the Gospel in the Stars, which states the constellations to be pre-Christian expressions of Christian doctrine. In his book &quot;Number in Scripture&quot; he expounded his belief in the gematria or numerology values of words in Scripture (names and terms), a concept of which the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; says: &quot;Numerology sheds light on the innermost workings of the human mind but very little on the rest of the universe.&quot; He strongly opposed the theory of evolution and held that Adam was created in 4004 BC. He was a member of the Universal Zetetic Society, a group dedicated to believing and promoting the idea that the earth is flat, and on 7 March 1905, he chaired a meeting in Exeter Hall, London, in which the flat earth theory was expounded.

==Works==
List of works

*&quot;Fifty Original Hymn-Tunes.&quot; London: Eyre &amp; Spottiswode (1874)
*&quot;A Critical Lexicon and Concordance to the English and Greek New Testament&quot; (1877)
*&quot;Ten Sermons on the Second Advent&quot; (1892)
*&quot;The Witness of the Stars&quot; (1893)
*&quot;Number in Scripture&quot; (1894)
*&quot;Figures of Speech Used in the Bible&quot; (1898)
*&quot;Commentary on Revelation or, The Apocalypse&quot; (1902)
*&quot;The Church Epistles: Romans to Thessalonians&quot; (1902)
*&quot;The Book of Job, Including &quot;The Oldest Lesson in the World&quot; (1903)
*&quot;Word Studies on the Holy Spirit&quot; (1905)
*&quot;The Two Natures in the Child of God&quot; (1906)
*&quot;The Chief Musician Or, Studies in the Psalms, and Their Titles&quot; (1908)
*&quot;The Companion Bible&quot; (ed., 1909, completed posthumously in 1922)
*&quot;How to Enjoy the Bible&quot; (1910)
*&quot;Great Cloud of Witnesses&quot; (1911)
*&quot;The Foundations of Dispensational Truth&quot; (1911)

==Notes==
==References==

==External links==
*E.W. Bullinger Biography and Books
*https://archive.org/details/witnessofthestar00bulluoft
*E.W. Bullinger Books Website
*E.W. Bullinger Books online (html &amp; pdf)
*Appendixes to The Companion Bible (All 198 appendices to the Bible)
*Google has a limited preview of The Companion Bible
*The Companion Bible (Condensed) on line
*The Companion Bible Notes/Appendices in software module format (not PDF images. Fully searchable)
*E.W. Bullinger: Did Jephthah really sacrifice his daughter?
*Number in Scripture
*E.W. Bullinger: The Christian&#x27;s Greatest Need
*E.W. Bullinger: Number in Scripture Its Supernatural Design and Spiritual Significance (4th Edition, Revised)
*E.W. Bullinger: The Rich Man and Lazarus - the Intermediate State
*E.W. Bullinger: Great Cloud of Witnesses
*E.W. Bullinger: The Two Natures in the Child of God
*E.W. Bullinger: The Witness of the Stars
*E.W. Bullinger, Critical Lexicon Concordance EngGreek NT. 5thed, (1908).
*For more information on Bullinger&#x27;s dispensationalism go here : E.W. Bullinger&#x27;s &quot;How to Enjoy the Bible - Rightly Dividing the Word as to its Times and Dispensations&quot; and here : E.W. Bullinger&#x27;s &quot;How to Enjoy the Bible&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q249582" start="0" end="27" title="E. W. Bullinger" label="Ethelbert William Bullinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="68" end="76" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q123900650" start="110" end="132" title="ultradispensationalism" label="ultradispensationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="176" end="186" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="188" end="192" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="194" end="201" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q123839" start="312" end="330" title="Heinrich Bullinger" label="Heinrich Bullinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q119373" start="355" end="381" title="Johann Balthasar Bullinger" label="Johann Balthasar Bullinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="440" end="466" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q336875" start="682" end="705" title="Archibald Campbell Tait" label="Archibald Campbell Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="707" end="731" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="817" end="835" title="Biblical criticism" label="Biblical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="886" end="903" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753370" start="953" end="959" title="curate" label="curate"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="967" end="973" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q822040" start="997" end="1007" title="Bermondsey" label="Bermondsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186676" start="1111" end="1122" title="Tittleshall" label="Tittleshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="1136" end="1148" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368969" start="1162" end="1173" title="Leytonstone" label="Leytonstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321784" start="1191" end="1202" title="Walthamstow" label="Walthamstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="1219" end="1224" title="vicar" label="vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q511497" start="1423" end="1448" title="Trinitarian Bible Society" label="Trinitarian Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q517529" start="1721" end="1745" title="Christian David Ginsburg" label="Christian David Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053932" start="1766" end="1781" title="Yitzhak Salkinsohn" label="Isaac Salkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1840" end="1846" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="1960" end="1968" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2003" end="2017" title="Pasteur LeCoat" label="Pasteur LeCoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="2052" end="2058" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2087" end="2097" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2132" end="2139" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540751" start="2171" end="2189" title="Glorious Revolution (Spain)" label="Spanish Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q920404" start="2279" end="2312" title="British and Foreign Bible Society" label="British and Foreign Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="2641" end="2654" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323511" start="2675" end="2685" title="Low Church" label="Low Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="2703" end="2714" title="High Church" label="High Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q28494769" start="3328" end="3340" title="Breton Hymns" label="Breton Hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012959" start="3358" end="3364" title="Trémel" label="Trémel"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="3366" end="3374" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="3623" end="3630" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44003" start="3635" end="3648" title="Theodor Herzl" label="Theodor Herzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q849459" start="3893" end="3910" title="dispensationalism" label="dispensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q849459" start="3954" end="3971" title="dispensationalism" label="dispensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="4003" end="4012" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="4040" end="4060" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="4269" end="4281" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Apostle Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492818" start="4301" end="4318" title="Harry A. Ironside" label="Harry A. Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734273" start="5234" end="5255" title="The Five Crosses" label="group of five crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794963" start="5367" end="5388" title="soul sleep" label="mortality of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q567076" start="5551" end="5566" title="annihilationism" label="annihilationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q840378" start="5799" end="5807" title="gematria" label="gematria"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="5811" end="5821" title="numerology" label="numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="6083" end="6102" title="theory of evolution" label="theory of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q110821736" start="6169" end="6194" title="Universal Zetetic Society" label="Universal Zetetic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420121" start="6319" end="6330" title="Exeter Hall" label="Exeter Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6332" end="6338" title="London" label="London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261719" wikidata="Q463859" url="?curid=261719" title="Foot fetishism">
<text>Foot fetishism, also known as foot partialism or podophilia, is a pronounced sexual interest in feet. It is the most common form of sexual fetishism for otherwise non-sexual objects or body parts.

==Characteristics and related fetishes==

Foot fetishism has been defined as a pronounced sexual interest in feet. For a foot fetishist, points of attraction may include the shape and size of feet, feet soles, toes, jewelry (e.g., toe rings, anklets, etc.), treatments (such as massaging, washing partner&#x27;s feet or painting partner&#x27;s toenails), state of dress (e.g., barefoot, flip flops, boat shoes, ballet flats, sandals, high heels, clogs, hosiery, socked feet, etc.), foot odor or sensory interaction (e.g., rubbing the foot, smelling, tickling, licking, kissing, rubbing genitals on foot, etc.).

Extensions of this fetish include shoes, socks, olfactophilia (odor fetishism), and tickling. Sigmund Freud also considered foot binding as a form of fetishism, although this view was disputed.

Odor fetishism (pertaining to the smell of feet) seems to play a major role in foot fetishism, and is closely related to it: in a 1994 study, 45% of those with a foot fetish were found to be aroused by smelly socks or feet, making it one of the most widespread forms of olfactophilia.

In extreme cases, an individual with a pronounced sexual interest in feet could possibly be diagnosed with fetishism disorder (characterized by the eroticization of non-living objects and body parts) if they are in adherence with the following symptoms:

* Experiencing recurrent sexually arousing fantasies, urges, or behaviors involving the use of non-living objects over a period of at least six months.
* These fantasies, urges or behaviors cause significant distress in a social, occupational or personal environment.
* The fetish objects are not limited to articles of clothing or devices used for genital stimulation.

==Relative frequency==
To estimate the relative frequency of fetishes, in 2006 researchers at the University of Bologna examined 381 Internet discussions of fetish groups, in which at least 5,000 people had been participating. Researchers estimated the prevalence of different fetishes based on the following elements:

* (a) the number of discussion groups devoted to a particular fetish;
* (b) the number of individuals participating in the groups;
* (c) the number of messages exchanged.

It was concluded that the most common fetishes were for body parts or for objects usually associated with body parts (33% and 30%, respectively). Among those people preferring body parts, feet and toes were preferred by the greatest number, with 47% of those sampled preferring them. Among those people preferring objects related to body parts, 32% were in groups related to footwear (shoes, boots, etc.).

According to Ian Kerner, foot fetishism is the most common form of sexual fetish related to the body.

In August 2006, AOL released a database of the search terms submitted by their subscribers. In ranking only those phrases that included the word &quot;fetish&quot;, it was found that the most common search was for feet.

Foot fetishism may be more common in men than in women. Researchers using a polling agency to conduct a survey of the general Belgian population in 2017 found that 76 of the 459 male respondents (17%) and 23 of the 565 female respondents (4%) answered &quot;Agree&quot; or &quot;Strongly agree&quot; to a fetish interest in feet.

==Causes==
Similar to other forms of sexual fetishism, no consensus has yet been established about the specific causes of foot fetishism. While many works on the topic exist, their conclusions are often regarded as highly speculative. In a general sense, sexual fetishism can be caused by a number of factors, no singular cause for any type of fetishism has been conclusively established.

Foot fetishism may be caused by the feet and the genitals occupying adjacent areas of the somatosensory cortex, possibly entailing some neural crosstalk between the two. Neuroscientist V. S. Ramachandran proposed that an accidental link between these regions could explain the prevalence of foot fetishism.

Desmond Morris considered foot fetishism the result of mal-imprinting at an early age, the tactile pressure of a foot/shoe being important in this. Freud&#x27;s reading of foot fetishism also involved early imprinting, but he considered the smell of feet significant in this, as well as the foot as a penis-symbol/surrogate (castration complex, especially when encountered while voyeuristically exploring the female body from below). Otto Fenichel similarly saw castration fear as significant in foot fetishism, citing a future fetishist who as an adolescent said to himself &quot;You must remember this throughout life – that girls, too, have legs&quot;, to protect himself from the fear. Where fear of the (castrated) female body is too great, desire is felt not for shoes on female feet but for women&#x27;s shoes alone, without women.

Georges Bataille saw the lure of the feet as linked to their anatomical baseness (abjection).

===Health and disease===
Some researchers have hypothesized that foot fetishism increases as a response to epidemics of sexually transmitted infections. In one study, conducted by A James Giannini at Ohio State University, an increased interest in feet as sexual objects was observed during the great gonorrhea epidemic of twelfth-century Europe, and the syphilis epidemics of the 16th and 19th centuries in Europe. In the same study, the frequency of foot-fetish depictions in pornographic literature was measured over a 30-year interval. An exponential increase was noted during the period of the current AIDS epidemic. In these cases, sexual footplay was viewed as a safe sex alternative. However, the researchers noted that these epidemics overlapped periods of relative female emancipation.

==Society and culture==
Some of the earliest recorded instances of foot fetishism occur in the erotic poems &quot;To a Barefoot Woman&quot; and &quot;To a Barefoot Boy&quot; attributed to the Ancient Greek writer Philostratus. The Hindu god Brahma was aroused by the sight of Parvati&#x27;s feet in the eighth-century text &quot;Skanda Purana&quot;.

==See also==
* Body odour and sexual attraction
* Boot fetishism
* Boot worship
* Crush fetish
* Elmer Batters
* Footjob
* Footsies
* Hand fetishism
* Partialism
* Shoe fetishism
==References==
==Further reading==
*Havelock Ellis (1936), &quot;Studies in the Psychology of Sex, Vol. II&quot;, New York: Random House
*William Rossi (1989), &quot;The Sex Life of the Foot and Shoe&quot;, Malabar: Krieger Publishing Company. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q463859" start="0" end="14" title="Foot fetishism" label="Foot fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q463859" start="30" end="45" title="Foot fetishism" label="foot partialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q463859" start="49" end="59" title="Foot fetishism" label="podophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464859" start="77" end="92" title="sexual interest" label="sexual interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15807" start="96" end="100" title="feet" label="feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207791" start="132" end="148" title="sexual fetishism" label="sexual fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184493" start="429" end="437" title="toe ring" label="toe ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478508" start="440" end="447" title="ankle bracelet" label="anklets"/>
<link wikidata="Q808132" start="575" end="583" title="barefoot" label="barefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q380339" start="585" end="595" title="flip flops" label="flip flops"/>
<link wikidata="Q893193" start="597" end="607" title="boat shoes" label="boat shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q805212" start="609" end="621" title="ballet flats" label="ballet flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q131704" start="623" end="630" title="sandals" label="sandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057303" start="632" end="642" title="high heels" label="high heels"/>
<link wikidata="Q167633" start="644" end="649" title="Clog" label="clogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524539" start="651" end="658" title="hosiery" label="hosiery"/>
<link wikidata="Q595307" start="680" end="689" title="foot odor" label="foot odor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="738" end="746" title="Sense of smell" label="smelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150876" start="776" end="800" title="Footjob" label="rubbing genitals on foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651685" start="844" end="849" title="shoe fetishism" label="shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43663" start="851" end="856" title="socks" label="socks"/>
<link wikidata="Q108569898" start="894" end="902" title="tickling fetish" label="tickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="904" end="917" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q498231" start="934" end="946" title="foot binding" label="foot binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544406" start="1207" end="1219" title="smelly socks" label="smelly socks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="2015" end="2036" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981963" start="2829" end="2839" title="Ian Kerner" label="Ian Kerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="2935" end="2938" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q207791" start="3508" end="3524" title="sexual fetishism" label="sexual fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q956517" start="3951" end="3971" title="Postcentral gyrus" label="somatosensory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q380221" start="4046" end="4064" title="V. S. Ramachandran" label="V. S. Ramachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q311132" start="4169" end="4183" title="Desmond Morris" label="Desmond Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q624349" start="4224" end="4238" title="Imprinting (psychology)" label="mal-imprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877008" start="4494" end="4512" title="castration complex" label="castration complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q113126" start="4603" end="4616" title="Otto Fenichel" label="Otto Fenichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207359" start="5009" end="5025" title="Georges Bataille" label="Georges Bataille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815580" start="5091" end="5100" title="abjection" label="abjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="5224" end="5254" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="5304" end="5325" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="5405" end="5414" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="5459" end="5467" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q747483" start="5582" end="5605" title="pornographic literature" label="pornographic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="5711" end="5724" title="AIDS epidemic" label="AIDS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q318529" start="5774" end="5782" title="safe sex" label="safe sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="6093" end="6106" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274948" start="6114" end="6126" title="Philostratus" label="Philostratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="6132" end="6137" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="6142" end="6148" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q170485" start="6177" end="6184" title="Parvati" label="Parvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497735" start="6230" end="6243" title="Skanda Purana" label="Skanda Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936922" start="6267" end="6299" title="Body odour and sexual attraction" label="Body odour and sexual attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092561" start="6302" end="6316" title="Boot fetishism" label="Boot fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943849" start="6319" end="6331" title="Boot worship" label="Boot worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142083" start="6334" end="6346" title="Crush fetish" label="Crush fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051552" start="6349" end="6362" title="Elmer Batters" label="Elmer Batters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150876" start="6365" end="6372" title="Footjob" label="Footjob"/>
<link wikidata="Q11960442" start="6375" end="6383" title="Footsies" label="Footsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q965539" start="6386" end="6400" title="Hand fetishism" label="Hand fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366838" start="6403" end="6413" title="Partialism" label="Partialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651685" start="6416" end="6430" title="Shoe fetishism" label="Shoe fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q552983" start="6467" end="6481" title="Havelock Ellis" label="Havelock Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="6555" end="6567" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261722" wikidata="Q426325" url="?curid=261722" title="Pan-African colours">
<text>Pan-African colours is a term that may refer to two different sets of colours:

* Green, yellow and red, the colours of the flag of Ethiopia, have come to represent the pan-Africanist ideology due to the country&#x27;s history of having avoided being taken over by a colonial power. Numerous African countries have adopted the colours into their national flags, and they are similarly used as a symbol by many Pan-African organisations and the Rastafari movement.
* Red, black, and green, first introduced by Marcus Garvey in 1920, have also come to represent Pan-Africanism, and are shown on the pan-African flag. These colours have also been incorporated on national flags, and they have sometimes been used to represent black nationalism rather than Pan-Africanism.

==Green-yellow-red==

Green, yellow, and red are now found on the national flags of many African nations. The colour combination was borrowed from the flag of Ethiopia. The Ethiopian flag has influenced the flags of many Pan-African organizations and polities. Except for relatively brief periods of influence and occupation by the Kingdom of Italy, Ethiopia remained outside European control during the colonial era by defeating the Italian army at the battle of Adwa in 1896, ending the Italian protectorate. As a result, the country drew the admiration of many newly independent states in Africa. The adoption of the Ethiopian national colours by many Pan-African entities is a consequence of this. The first African state to adopt a gold, red and green flag upon independence was Ghana in 1957, designed by Theodosia Okoh.
==Red-black-green==

The Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA) founded by Marcus Garvey has a constitution that defines red, black, and green as the Pan-African colours: &quot;red representing the noble blood that unites all people of African ancestry, the colour black for the people, green for the rich land of Africa.&quot; The UNIA flag was designated the official colours of Black Africans by the UNIA at its convention in Madison Square Garden on August 13, 1920, in New York City, United States.

== Flags with Pan-African colors ==
=== Current country flags with the Pan-African symbolism ===
The following are countries and territories that use one or both sets of Pan-African colours in their official flags:

===Non-national flags===
===Former flags with pan-African colours===
===Non pan-African flags with pan-African colours===
Although the following flags contain a pan-African colour scheme, they were not officially designed to symbolise pan-Africanism. The designs may or may not be influenced by pan-African colours.

Rastafari colours also originate from the Ethiopian flag, but though Rastafari thought harbours pan-African sympathies, its use of the Ethiopian flag is historically rooted in the veneration of former Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie.
==See also==

* Flag of Lithuania
* Nordic Cross Flag
* Pan-African flag
* Pan-Iranian colors
* Pan-Arab colors
* Pan-Slavic colors
* Tricolour
**Malay tricolour
* United States of Africa

==References==

* Znamierowski, Alfred (2001). &quot;The World Encyclopedia of Flags: The Definitive Guide to International Flags, Banners, Standards and Ensigns&quot;. London: Anness Publishing.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q426325" start="0" end="19" title="Pan-African colours" label="Pan-African colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133" start="82" end="87" title="Green" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q943" start="89" end="95" title="yellow" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="100" end="103" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q162068" start="124" end="140" title="flag of Ethiopia" label="flag of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="169" end="183" title="pan-Africanist" label="pan-Africanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="444" end="453" title="Rastafari" label="Rastafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q23445" start="471" end="476" title="black" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="509" end="522" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029729" start="597" end="613" title="pan-African flag" label="pan-African flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="723" end="740" title="black nationalism" label="black nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133" start="792" end="797" title="Green" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q943" start="799" end="805" title="Yellow (color)" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="811" end="814" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q186516" start="836" end="849" title="national flag" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q162068" start="921" end="937" title="flag of Ethiopia" label="flag of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="1102" end="1118" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302519" start="1224" end="1238" title="battle of Adwa" label="battle of Adwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q973877" start="1400" end="1416" title="national colours" label="national colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1554" end="1559" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15457178" start="1581" end="1595" title="Theodosia Okoh" label="Theodosia Okoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="1622" end="1692" title="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League" label="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="1711" end="1724" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029729" start="1968" end="1977" title="Pan-African flag" label="UNIA flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q9026714" start="2065" end="2086" title="Madison Square Garden (1890)" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2110" end="2123" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="2592" end="2606" title="pan-Africanism" label="pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="2674" end="2683" title="Rastafari" label="Rastafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="2893" end="2907" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q81477" start="2925" end="2942" title="Flag of Lithuania" label="Flag of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q208324" start="2945" end="2962" title="Nordic Cross Flag" label="Nordic Cross Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029729" start="2965" end="2981" title="Pan-African flag" label="Pan-African flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q618926" start="2984" end="3002" title="Pan-Iranian colors" label="Pan-Iranian colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q821002" start="3005" end="3020" title="Pan-Arab colors" label="Pan-Arab colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q406991" start="3023" end="3040" title="Pan-Slavic colors" label="Pan-Slavic colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919464" start="3043" end="3052" title="Tricolour (flag)" label="Tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840392" start="3055" end="3070" title="Malay tricolour" label="Malay tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991472" start="3073" end="3096" title="United States of Africa" label="United States of Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261723" wikidata="Q362764" url="?curid=261723" title="Donald Byrd">
<text>Donaldson Toussaint L&#x27;Ouverture Byrd II (December 9, 1932 – February 4, 2013) was an American jazz and rhythm &amp; blues trumpeter and vocalist. A sideman for many other jazz musicians of his generation, Byrd was one of the few hard bop musicians who successfully explored funk and soul while remaining a jazz artist. As a bandleader, Byrd was an influence on the early career of Herbie Hancock and many others.

==Biography==
===Early life and career===
Byrd was born in 1932 in Detroit, Michigan. His family came from the African-American middle-class. His father, Elijah Thomas Byrd, was a Methodist minister who greatly valued education and oversaw his son&#x27;s schooling. His mother, Cornelia Taylor, introduced Byrd to jazz music and it was her brother who gave Byrd his first trumpet. He attended Cass Technical High School. He performed with Lionel Hampton before finishing high school. During this period, his first professional recording session was in 1949 at Fortune Records in Detroit with the Robert Barnes Sextette for the single &quot;Black Eyed Peas&quot; / &quot;Bobbin&#x27; At Barbee&#x27;s.&quot; After playing in a military band during a term in the United States Air Force, Byrd obtained a bachelor&#x27;s degree in music from Wayne State University and a master&#x27;s degree from Manhattan School of Music. While still at the Manhattan School, he joined Art Blakey&#x27;s Jazz Messengers as Clifford Brown&#x27;s successor. In 1955, he recorded with Gigi Gryce, Jackie McLean and Mal Waldron. After leaving the Jazz Messengers in 1956, he performed with many leading jazz musicians of the day, including John Coltrane, Sonny Rollins, Thelonious Monk, and later Herbie Hancock.

Byrd&#x27;s first regular group was a quintet that he co-led from 1958 to 1961 with baritone saxophonist Pepper Adams. The ensemble&#x27;s hard-driving performances are captured live on &quot;At the Half Note Cafe&quot;. Byrd&#x27;s 1961 LP &quot;Royal Flush&quot; was Hancock&#x27;s Blue Note debut. Hancock has credited Byrd as a key influence in his early career, recounting that Byrd took the young pianist &quot;under his wing&quot; when he was a struggling musician newly arrived in New York, even letting him sleep on a hide-a-bed in his Bronx apartment for several years.

Hancock also recalled that Byrd helped him in many other ways: he encouraged Hancock to make his debut album for Blue Note, connected him with Mongo Santamaria, who turned Hancock&#x27;s tune &quot;Watermelon Man&quot; into a chart-topping hit, and that Byrd also later urged him to accept Miles Davis&#x27; offer to join his quintet.

Hancock also credits Byrd with giving him one of the most important pieces of advice of his career – not to give away his publishing rights. When Blue Note offered Hancock the chance to record his first solo LP, label executives tried to convince him to relinquish his publishing in exchange for being able to record the album, but he stuck to Byrd&#x27;s advice and refused, so the meeting came to an impasse. At this point, he stood up to leave and when it became clear that he was about to walk out, the executives relented and allowed him to retain his publishing. Thanks to Santamaria&#x27;s subsequent hit cover version of &quot;Watermelon Man&quot;, Hancock was soon receiving substantial royalties, and he used his first royalty check of $6,000 to buy his first car, a 1963 Shelby Cobra (also recommended by Byrd) which Hancock still owns, and which is now the oldest production Cobra still in its original owner&#x27;s hands.

In June 1964, Byrd played with Eric Dolphy in Paris only two weeks before Dolphy died from insulin shock.

===Electric Byrd===
By 1969&#x27;s &quot;Fancy Free&quot;, Byrd was moving away from the hard bop jazz idiom and began to record jazz fusion and jazz-funk. He teamed up with the Mizell Brothers (producer-writers Larry and Fonce) for &quot;Black Byrd&quot; (1973) which was, for many years, Blue Note&#x27;s best-selling album. The title track climbed to No. 19 on &quot;Billboard&quot; R&amp;B chart and reached the Hot 100 pop chart, peaking at No. 88. The Mizell brothers&#x27; follow-up albums for Byrd, &quot;Street Lady&quot;, &quot;Places and Spaces&quot; and &quot;Stepping into Tomorrow&quot;, were also big sellers, and have subsequently provided a rich source of samples for acid jazz artists such as Us3. Most of the material for the albums was written by Larry Mizell.

In 1973, he helped to establish and co-produce the Blackbyrds, a fusion group consisting of then-student musicians from Howard University, where Byrd taught in the music department and earned his J.D. in 1976. They scored several major hits including &quot;Happy Music&quot; (No. 3 R&amp;B, No. 19 pop), &quot;Walking in Rhythm&quot; (No. 4 R&amp;B, No. 6 pop) and &quot;Rock Creek Park&quot;.

During his tenure at North Carolina Central University during the 1980s, he formed a group which included students from the college called the &quot;125th St NYC Band&quot;. They recorded three albums; &quot;Love Byrd&quot; and &quot;Words, Sounds, Colors and Shapes&quot; which featured Isaac Hayes. &quot;Love Has Come Around&quot; on &quot;Love Byrd&quot; became a disco hit, reaching number No. 4 on Billboard&#x27;s U.S. Dance Club Songs and in the UK and reached No. 41 on the charts.

Beginning in the 1960s, Byrd (who eventually gained his PhD in music education from Teachers College, Columbia University in 1982) taught at a variety of postsecondary institutions, including Rutgers University, the Hampton Institute, New York University, Howard University, Queens College, Oberlin College, Cornell University, North Carolina Central University and Delaware State University. Byrd returned to somewhat straight-ahead jazz later in his career, recording three albums for Orrin Keepnews&#x27; Landmark Records.

Byrd was a resident of Teaneck, New Jersey. He died on February 4, 2013, in Dover, Delaware, at age 80.

== Discography ==
=== As leader/co-leader ===
=== As sideman ===
With Art Blakey
* 1956: &quot;The Jazz Messengers&quot; (Columbia, 1956)
* 1956: &quot;Originally&quot; (Columbia, 1982)
* 1957: &quot;Art Blakey Big Band&quot; (Bethlehem, 1959)
* 1958: &quot;Holiday for Skins&quot; (Blue Note, 1959)

With Kenny Burrell
* 1956: &quot;All Night Long&quot; (Prestige, 1957)
* 1957: &quot;All Day Long&quot; (Prestige, 1957)
* 1957: &quot;2 Guitars&quot; (Prestige, 1957)

With Paul Chambers
* 1956: &quot;Whims of Chambers&quot; (Blue Note, 1957)
* 1957: &quot;Paul Chambers Quintet&quot; (Blue Note, 1958)

With Sonny Clark
* 1957: &quot;Sonny&#x27;s Crib&quot; (Blue Note, 1958)
* 1957-59: &quot;My Conception&quot; (Blue Note, 1979)

With Kenny Clarke
* &quot;Bohemia After Dark&quot; (Savoy, 1955)
* &quot;Klook&#x27;s Clique&quot; (Savoy, 1956)

With John Coltrane
* 1957-58: &quot;Lush Life&quot; (Prestige, 1958)
* 1957-58: &quot;The Believer&quot; (Prestige, 1964)
* 1957-58: &quot;The Last Trane&quot; (Prestige, 1966)
* 1958: &quot;Black Pearls&quot; (Prestige, 1964)

With Eric Dolphy
* 1960-64: &quot;Naima&quot; (Jazzway, 1987)
* 1964: &quot;Unrealized Tapes&quot; (&quot;Last Recordings&quot;) (West Wind, 1988)

With Lou Donaldson
* 1957: &quot;Wailing With Lou&quot; (Blue Note, 1957)
* 1957: &quot;Lou Takes Off&quot; (Blue Note, 1958)

With Red Garland
* 1957: &quot;All Mornin&#x27; Long&quot; (Prestige, 1958)
* 1957: &quot;Soul Junction&quot; (Prestige, 1960)
* 1957: &quot;High Pressure&quot; (Prestige, 1961)

With Dexter Gordon
* 1964 &quot;One Flight Up&quot; (Blue Note, 1965)
* 1965: &quot;Ladybird&quot; (SteepleChase, 2005)

With Guru 
* 1992-93: &quot;Jazzmatazz, Vol. 1&quot; (Chrysalis, 1993)
* 1994-95: &quot;Guru&#x27;s Jazzmatazz, Vol. 2: The New Reality&quot; (Chrysalis, 1995)

With Hank Jones
* 1955: &quot;Quartet-Quintet&quot; (Savoy, 1955)
* 1955: &quot;Bluebird&quot; (Savoy, 1956)

With Hank Mobley
* 1956: &quot;The Jazz Message of Hank Mobley&quot; (Prestige, 1956)
* 1956: &quot;Mobley&#x27;s Message&quot; (Prestige, 1957)
* 1956: &quot;Jazz Message No. 2&quot; (Savoy, 1957)
* 1956: &quot;Hank Mobley Sextet&quot; (Blue Note, 1957)
* 1957: &quot;Hank&quot; (Blue Note, 1957)
* 1963: &quot;No Room for Squares&quot; (Blue Note, 1964)
* 1963-65: &quot;The Turnaround!&quot; (Blue Note, 1965)
* 1963-66: &quot;Straight No Filter&quot; (Blue Note, 1986)
* 1967: &quot;Far Away Lands&quot; (Blue Note, 1984)

With Jackie McLean
* 1955: &quot;Presenting... Jackie McLean&quot; (Ad Lib, 1956)
* 1956: &quot;Lights Out!&quot; (Prestige, 1956)
* 1956: &quot;4, 5 and 6&quot; (Prestige, 1956)
* 1959: &quot;New Soil&quot; (Blue Note, 1959)
* 1959: &quot;Jackie&#x27;s Bag&quot; (Blue Note, 1961)
* 1963: &quot;Vertigo&quot; (Blue Note, 1980)

With Duke Pearson
* 1962: &quot;Hush!&quot; (Jazztime, 1962)
* 1964: &quot;Wahoo!&quot; (Blue Note, 1965)

With Oscar Pettiford
* 1955: &quot;Another One&quot; (Bethlehem, 1955)
* 1957: &quot;Winner&#x27;s Circle&quot; (Bethlehem, 1958)

With Sonny Rollins 
* &quot;Sonny Rollins, Volume 1&quot; (Blue Note, 1957) – rec. 1956
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop the Carnival&quot; (Milestone, 1978) – live

With Horace Silver
* 1956: &quot;Silver&#x27;s Blue&quot; (Epic, 1957)
* 1956: &quot;6 Pieces of Silver&quot; (Blue Note, 1957)

With Jimmy Smith
* &quot;A Date with Jimmy Smith Volume One&quot; (Blue Note, 1957)
* &quot;A Date with Jimmy Smith Volume Two&quot; (Blue Note, 1957)

With George Wallington
* 1955: &quot;George Wallington Quintet at The Bohemia&quot; (Progressive, 1956) – live
* 1956: &quot;Jazz for the Carriage Trade&quot; (Prestige, 1956)
* 1957: &quot;The New York Scene&quot; (Prestige, 1957)
* 1957: &quot;Jazz at Hotchkiss&quot; (Savoy, 1957)

With others
* Pepper Adams, &quot;10 to 4 at the 5 Spot&quot; (Riverside, 1958) – live
* Manny Albam, Bill Russo, Teo Macero, Teddy Charles, &quot;Something New, Something Blue&quot; (Columbia, 1959)
* Gene Ammons, &quot;Jammin&#x27; with Gene&quot; (Prestige, 1956)
* Cannonball Adderley, &quot;Discoveries&quot; (Savoy, 1987) – rec. 1955
* Robert Barnes Sextette, &quot;Black Eyed Peas / Bobbin&#x27; At Barbee&#x27;s&quot; (Fortune, 1949)
* Chris Connor, &quot;Ballads of the Sad Cafe&quot; (Atlantic, 1959)
* Walter Davis Jr., &quot;Davis Cup&quot; (Blue Note, 1959)
* Kenny Drew, &quot;This Is New&quot; (Riverside, 1957)
* Art Farmer, &quot;Three Trumpets&quot; (Prestige, 1957) – also with Idrees Sulieman
* Bunky Green, &quot;My Babe&quot; (Vee-Jay, 1965) – rec. 1960
* Al Grey, &quot;Snap Your Fingers&quot; (Argo, 1962)
* Johnny Griffin, &quot;Johnny Griffin Sextet&quot; (Riverside, 1958)
* Gigi Gryce, &quot;Gigi Gryce and the Jazz Lab Quintet&quot; (Riverside, 1957)
* Herbie Hancock, &quot;My Point of View&quot; (Blue Note, 1963)
* Gene Harris, &quot;Tone Tantrum&quot; (Blue Note, 1977)
* Jimmy Heath, &quot;Swamp Seed&quot; (Riverside, 1963)
* Elmo Hope, &quot;Informal Jazz&quot; (Prestige, 1956)
* Solomon Ilori, &quot;African High Life&quot; (Blue Note, 1964)
* Ahmad Jamal, &quot;Big Byrd: The Essence Part 2&quot; (Birdology, 1995)
* Michel Legrand, &quot;Legrand Jazz&quot; (Columbia, 1958)
* Mundell Lowe, &quot;TV Action Jazz!&quot; (RCA Camden, 1959)
* Thelonious Monk, &quot;The Thelonious Monk Orchestra at Town Hall&quot; (Riverside, 1959)
* Wes Montgomery, &quot;Goin&#x27; Out of My Head&quot; (Verve, 1965)
* Dizzy Reece, &quot;Blues in Trinity&quot; (Blue Note, 1958)
* Rita Reys and The Jazz Messengers, &quot;The Cool Voice of Rita Reys&quot; (Columbia, 1956)
* Sam Rivers, &quot;Dimensions &amp; Extensions&quot; (Blue Note, 1967)
* Art Taylor, &quot;Taylor&#x27;s Wailers&quot; (Prestige, 1957)
* Jim Timmens, &quot;Gilbert and Sullivan Revisited&quot; (Warner Bros., 1958)
* Cal Tjader, &quot;Soul Sauce&quot; (Verve, 1965) – rec. 1964
* Stanley Turrentine, &quot;A Bluish Bag&quot; (Blue Note, 2007) – rec. 1967
* Doug Watkins, &quot;Watkins at Large&quot; (Transition, 1956)
* Ernie Wilkins, &quot;Top Brass&quot; (Savoy, 1956) – rec. 1955
* Phil Woods, &quot;Pairing Off&quot; (Prestige, 1956)
==References==
== External links ==
*
*Donald Byrd discography at jazzdisco.org
*Donald Byrd at newyorkjazzworkshop.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362764" start="0" end="44" title="Donald Byrd" label="Donaldson Toussaint L&amp;#x27;Ouverture Byrd II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="99" end="103" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="108" end="126" title="rhythm &amp;amp; blues" label="rhythm &amp;amp; blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q177718" start="153" end="160" title="sideman" label="sideman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181010" start="234" end="242" title="hard bop" label="hard bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="386" end="400" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="486" end="503" title="Detroit" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922381" start="530" end="559" title="African-American middle class" label="African-American middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="599" end="608" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049183" start="812" end="838" title="Cass Technical High School" label="Cass Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q313525" start="858" end="872" title="Lionel Hampton" label="Lionel Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q641814" start="979" end="994" title="Fortune Records" label="Fortune Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1180" end="1203" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q349055" start="1258" end="1280" title="Wayne State University" label="Wayne State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702106" start="1313" end="1338" title="Manhattan School of Music" label="Manhattan School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q311715" start="1387" end="1397" title="Art Blakey" label="Art Blakey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684482" start="1405" end="1420" title="Jazz Messengers" label="Jazz Messengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q354490" start="1424" end="1445" title="Clifford Brown" label="Clifford Brown&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q563275" start="1483" end="1493" title="Gigi Gryce" label="Gigi Gryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q920490" start="1495" end="1508" title="Jackie McLean" label="Jackie McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q955767" start="1513" end="1524" title="Mal Waldron" label="Mal Waldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="1637" end="1650" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q299208" start="1652" end="1665" title="Sonny Rollins" label="Sonny Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="1667" end="1682" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="1694" end="1708" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q552381" start="1816" end="1828" title="Pepper Adams" label="Pepper Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812525" start="1903" end="1924" title="At the Half Note Cafe" label="At the Half Note Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374180" start="1958" end="1969" title="Royal Flush (album)" label="Royal Flush"/>
<link wikidata="Q885833" start="1995" end="2004" title="Blue Note Records" label="Blue Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q472644" start="2435" end="2451" title="Mongo Santamaria" label="Mongo Santamaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502987" start="2490" end="2504" title="Watermelon Man (composition)" label="Watermelon Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="2582" end="2593" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q289168" start="3410" end="3422" title="Shelby Cobra" label="Shelby Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q367508" start="3595" end="3606" title="Eric Dolphy" label="Eric Dolphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141863" start="3655" end="3668" title="insulin shock" label="insulin shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993034" start="3712" end="3722" title="Fancy Free (Donald Byrd album)" label="Fancy Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q181010" start="3760" end="3768" title="hard bop" label="hard bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="3800" end="3811" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38656" start="3816" end="3825" title="jazz-funk" label="jazz-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884615" start="3849" end="3864" title="Mizell Brothers" label="Mizell Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920469" start="3910" end="3920" title="Black Byrd" label="Black Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622868" start="4184" end="4195" title="Street Lady" label="Street Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200331" start="4209" end="4226" title="Places and Spaces" label="Places and Spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335714" start="4243" end="4265" title="Stepping into Tomorrow" label="Stepping into Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q221772" start="4356" end="4365" title="acid jazz" label="acid jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755857" start="4382" end="4385" title="Us3" label="Us3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718487" start="4500" end="4514" title="the Blackbyrds" label="the Blackbyrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="4573" end="4590" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="4649" end="4653" title="Juris Doctor" label="J.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1518804" start="4869" end="4902" title="North Carolina Central University" label="North Carolina Central University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690416" start="5056" end="5065" title="Love Byrd" label="Love Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q18224866" start="5082" end="5114" title="Words, Sounds, Colors and Shapes" label="Words, Sounds, Colors and Shapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206439" start="5136" end="5147" title="Isaac Hayes" label="Isaac Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690599" start="5155" end="5175" title="Love Has Come Around" label="Love Has Come Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691246" start="5424" end="5461" title="Teachers College, Columbia University" label="Teachers College, Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="5532" end="5550" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797817" start="5556" end="5573" title="Hampton Institute" label="Hampton Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="5575" end="5594" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="5596" end="5613" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760438" start="5615" end="5629" title="Queens College" label="Queens College"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="5631" end="5646" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="5648" end="5666" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518804" start="5668" end="5701" title="North Carolina Central University" label="North Carolina Central University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183967" start="5706" end="5731" title="Delaware State University" label="Delaware State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q352028" start="5827" end="5841" title="Orrin Keepnews" label="Orrin Keepnews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237836" start="5848" end="5864" title="Landmark Records" label="Landmark Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q991387" start="5890" end="5909" title="Teaneck, New Jersey" label="Teaneck, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311715" start="6042" end="6052" title="Art Blakey" label="Art Blakey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796706" start="6067" end="6086" title="The Jazz Messengers (1956 album)" label="The Jazz Messengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102610" start="6124" end="6134" title="Originally" label="Originally"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242591" start="6172" end="6191" title="Art Blakey Big Band" label="Art Blakey Big Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880520" start="6230" end="6247" title="Holiday for Skins" label="Holiday for Skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q255355" start="6278" end="6291" title="Kenny Burrell" label="Kenny Burrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729176" start="6306" end="6320" title="All Night Long (Kenny Burrell album)" label="All Night Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728686" start="6358" end="6370" title="All Day Long (Kenny Burrell album)" label="All Day Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633326" start="6408" end="6417" title="2 Guitars" label="2 Guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q541659" start="6447" end="6460" title="Paul Chambers" label="Paul Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283501" start="6475" end="6492" title="Whims of Chambers" label="Whims of Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149776" start="6531" end="6552" title="Paul Chambers Quintet" label="Paul Chambers Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q939908" start="6583" end="6594" title="Sonny Clark" label="Sonny Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490631" start="6609" end="6626" title="Sonny&amp;#x27;s Crib" label="Sonny&amp;#x27;s Crib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331153" start="6668" end="6681" title="My Conception" label="My Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q346779" start="6712" end="6724" title="Kenny Clarke" label="Kenny Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938067" start="6733" end="6751" title="Bohemia After Dark" label="Bohemia After Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785464" start="6780" end="6799" title="Klook&amp;#x27;s Clique" label="Klook&amp;#x27;s Clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="6826" end="6839" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q269337" start="6857" end="6866" title="Lush Life (John Coltrane album)" label="Lush Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985845" start="6907" end="6919" title="The Believer (John Coltrane album)" label="The Believer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987922" start="6960" end="6974" title="The Last Trane" label="The Last Trane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640747" start="7012" end="7024" title="Black Pearls" label="Black Pearls"/>
<link wikidata="Q367508" start="7054" end="7065" title="Eric Dolphy" label="Eric Dolphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106522150" start="7083" end="7088" title="Naima (Eric Dolphy album)" label="Naima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806717" start="7125" end="7141" title="Unrealized Tapes" label="Unrealized Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q723821" start="7202" end="7215" title="Lou Donaldson" label="Lou Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960070" start="7230" end="7246" title="Wailing With Lou" label="Wailing With Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685790" start="7285" end="7298" title="Lou Takes Off" label="Lou Takes Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q706697" start="7329" end="7340" title="Red Garland" label="Red Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729084" start="7355" end="7376" title="All Mornin&amp;#x27; Long" label="All Mornin&amp;#x27; Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564243" start="7414" end="7427" title="Soul Junction" label="Soul Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15639753" start="7465" end="7478" title="High Pressure (album)" label="High Pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q118116" start="7508" end="7521" title="Dexter Gordon" label="Dexter Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092647" start="7535" end="7548" title="One Flight Up" label="One Flight Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600889" start="7587" end="7595" title="Ladybird (Dexter Gordon album)" label="Ladybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q974795" start="7629" end="7633" title="Guru (rapper)" label="Guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389007" start="7652" end="7670" title="Guru&amp;#x27;s Jazzmatazz, Vol. 1" label="Jazzmatazz, Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7712" end="7759" title="Guru&amp;#x27;s Jazzmatazz, Vol. 2: The New Reality" label="Guru&amp;#x27;s Jazzmatazz, Vol. 2: The New Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q447907" start="7790" end="7800" title="Hank Jones" label="Hank Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q20813945" start="7815" end="7830" title="Quartet-Quintet" label="Quartet-Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20813282" start="7865" end="7873" title="Bluebird (Hank Jones album)" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q534842" start="7900" end="7911" title="Hank Mobley" label="Hank Mobley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743041" start="7926" end="7957" title="The Jazz Message of Hank Mobley" label="The Jazz Message of Hank Mobley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887376" start="7995" end="8016" title="Mobley&amp;#x27;s Message" label="Mobley&amp;#x27;s Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168276" start="8054" end="8072" title="Jazz Message No. 2" label="Jazz Message No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648411" start="8107" end="8125" title="Hank Mobley Sextet" label="Hank Mobley Sextet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648262" start="8164" end="8168" title="Hank (album)" label="Hank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044921" start="8207" end="8226" title="No Room for Squares" label="No Room for Squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770743" start="8268" end="8283" title="The Turnaround!" label="The Turnaround!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621018" start="8325" end="8343" title="Straight No Filter" label="Straight No Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434501" start="8382" end="8396" title="Far Away Lands" label="Far Away Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q920490" start="8427" end="8440" title="Jackie McLean" label="Jackie McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084117" start="8455" end="8482" title="Presenting... Jackie McLean" label="Presenting... Jackie McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546526" start="8518" end="8529" title="Lights Out!" label="Lights Out!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637062" start="8567" end="8577" title="4, 5 and 6" label="4, 5 and 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011569" start="8615" end="8623" title="New Soil" label="New Soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116176" start="8662" end="8679" title="Jackie&amp;#x27;s Bag" label="Jackie&amp;#x27;s Bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922944" start="8718" end="8725" title="Vertigo (Jackie McLean album)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184976" start="8756" end="8768" title="Duke Pearson" label="Duke Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092093" start="8783" end="8788" title="Hush! (Duke Pearson album)" label="Hush!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959826" start="8826" end="8832" title="Wahoo!" label="Wahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q497183" start="8863" end="8878" title="Oscar Pettiford" label="Oscar Pettiford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15965666" start="8893" end="8904" title="Another One (Oscar Pettiford album)" label="Another One"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025580" start="8943" end="8963" title="Winner&amp;#x27;s Circle" label="Winner&amp;#x27;s Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q299208" start="8994" end="9007" title="Sonny Rollins" label="Sonny Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490653" start="9017" end="9040" title="Sonny Rollins, Volume 1" label="Sonny Rollins, Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035682" start="9085" end="9113" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Carnival (Sonny Rollins album)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q365560" start="9151" end="9164" title="Horace Silver" label="Horace Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515744" start="9179" end="9197" title="Silver&amp;#x27;s Blue" label="Silver&amp;#x27;s Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642529" start="9231" end="9249" title="6 Pieces of Silver" label="6 Pieces of Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q318948" start="9280" end="9291" title="Jimmy Smith (musician)" label="Jimmy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656264" start="9300" end="9334" title="A Date with Jimmy Smith Volume One" label="A Date with Jimmy Smith Volume One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656264" start="9367" end="9401" title="A Date with Jimmy Smith Volume Two" label="A Date with Jimmy Smith Volume Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508519" start="9432" end="9449" title="George Wallington" label="George Wallington"/>
<link wikidata="Q552381" start="9726" end="9738" title="Pepper Adams" label="Pepper Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546958" start="9746" end="9767" title="10 to 4 at the 5 Spot" label="10 to 4 at the 5 Spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q338018" start="9801" end="9812" title="Manny Albam" label="Manny Albam"/>
<link wikidata="Q350561" start="9814" end="9824" title="Bill Russo" label="Bill Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q265494" start="9826" end="9836" title="Teo Macero" label="Teo Macero"/>
<link wikidata="Q346768" start="9838" end="9851" title="Teddy Charles" label="Teddy Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q713291" start="9914" end="9925" title="Gene Ammons" label="Gene Ammons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147969" start="9933" end="9955" title="Jammin&amp;#x27; with Gene" label="Jammin&amp;#x27; with Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q110477" start="9981" end="10000" title="Cannonball Adderley" label="Cannonball Adderley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281827" start="10008" end="10019" title="Discoveries (Cannonball Adderley album)" label="Discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q462322" start="10156" end="10168" title="Chris Connor" label="Chris Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q721383" start="10225" end="10241" title="Walter Davis Jr." label="Walter Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5241875" start="10249" end="10258" title="Davis Cup (album)" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q721315" start="10285" end="10295" title="Kenny Drew" label="Kenny Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785898" start="10303" end="10314" title="This Is New (Kenny Drew album)" label="This Is New"/>
<link wikidata="Q500464" start="10341" end="10351" title="Art Farmer" label="Art Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15928628" start="10359" end="10373" title="Three Trumpets" label="Three Trumpets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656883" start="10409" end="10424" title="Idrees Sulieman" label="Idrees Sulieman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009609" start="10427" end="10438" title="Bunky Green" label="Bunky Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787291" start="10446" end="10453" title="My Babe (Bunky Green album)" label="My Babe"/>
<link wikidata="Q715687" start="10490" end="10497" title="Al Grey" label="Al Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30605460" start="10505" end="10522" title="Snap Your Fingers (album)" label="Snap Your Fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q708439" start="10544" end="10558" title="Johnny Griffin" label="Johnny Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266802" start="10566" end="10587" title="Johnny Griffin Sextet" label="Johnny Griffin Sextet"/>
<link wikidata="Q563275" start="10614" end="10624" title="Gigi Gryce" label="Gigi Gryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560309" start="10632" end="10667" title="Gigi Gryce and the Jazz Lab Quintet" label="Gigi Gryce and the Jazz Lab Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="10694" end="10708" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331253" start="10716" end="10732" title="My Point of View" label="My Point of View"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374734" start="10759" end="10770" title="Gene Harris" label="Gene Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820856" start="10778" end="10790" title="Tone Tantrum" label="Tone Tantrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q711314" start="10817" end="10828" title="Jimmy Heath" label="Jimmy Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653344" start="10836" end="10846" title="Swamp Seed" label="Swamp Seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333051" start="10873" end="10882" title="Elmo Hope" label="Elmo Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030554" start="10890" end="10903" title="Informal Jazz" label="Informal Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558638" start="10929" end="10942" title="Solomon Ilori" label="Solomon Ilori"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689781" start="10950" end="10967" title="African High Life" label="African High Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q379613" start="10994" end="11005" title="Ahmad Jamal" label="Ahmad Jamal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11013" end="11041" title="Big Byrd: The Essence Part 2" label="Big Byrd: The Essence Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q313281" start="11068" end="11082" title="Michel Legrand" label="Michel Legrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q485883" start="11128" end="11140" title="Mundell Lowe" label="Mundell Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672293" start="11148" end="11163" title="TV Action Jazz!" label="TV Action Jazz!"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="11191" end="11206" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768640" start="11214" end="11256" title="The Thelonious Monk Orchestra at Town Hall" label="The Thelonious Monk Orchestra at Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q298601" start="11283" end="11297" title="Wes Montgomery" label="Wes Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577696" start="11305" end="11330" title="Goin&amp;#x27; Out of My Head (album)" label="Goin&amp;#x27; Out of My Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231829" start="11353" end="11364" title="Dizzy Reece" label="Dizzy Reece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930523" start="11372" end="11388" title="Blues in Trinity" label="Blues in Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q275258" start="11415" end="11424" title="Rita Reys" label="Rita Reys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684482" start="11429" end="11448" title="The Jazz Messengers" label="The Jazz Messengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048940" start="11456" end="11483" title="The Cool Voice of Rita Reys" label="The Cool Voice of Rita Reys"/>
<link wikidata="Q722432" start="11509" end="11519" title="Sam Rivers (jazz musician)" label="Sam Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277280" start="11527" end="11554" title="Dimensions &amp;amp; Extensions" label="Dimensions &amp;amp; Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q705751" start="11581" end="11591" title="Art Taylor" label="Art Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516486" start="11599" end="11620" title="Taylor&amp;#x27;s Wailers" label="Taylor&amp;#x27;s Wailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q491368" start="11725" end="11735" title="Cal Tjader" label="Cal Tjader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491619" start="11743" end="11753" title="Soul Sauce" label="Soul Sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q638824" start="11788" end="11806" title="Stanley Turrentine" label="Stanley Turrentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655532" start="11814" end="11826" title="A Bluish Bag" label="A Bluish Bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251883" start="11865" end="11877" title="Doug Watkins" label="Doug Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q326634" start="11929" end="11942" title="Ernie Wilkins" label="Ernie Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q24077972" start="11950" end="11959" title="Top Brass" label="Top Brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q639345" start="11994" end="12004" title="Phil Woods" label="Phil Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125139" start="12012" end="12023" title="Pairing Off" label="Pairing Off"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261726" wikidata="Q1189165" url="?curid=261726" title="Church of the Nazarene">
<text>The Church of the Nazarene is an evangelical Christian denomination that emerged in North America from the Wesleyan-Holiness movement within Methodism during the late 19th century.

The denomination has its headquarters in Lenexa, Kansas. and its members are commonly referred to as Nazarenes. It is the largest denomination in the world aligned with the Wesleyan-Holiness movement, with just under 3 million members worldwide. The Church of the Nazarene is also one of the more culturally conservative members of the World Methodist Council. The denomination differentiates itself by placing particular emphasis on the process of sanctification as a part of the Holiness movement.

== Mission and vision ==
The mission of the Church of the Nazarene is taken from the Great Commission in Matthew 28. &quot;To make Christlike disciples in the nations&quot; was adopted in 2006 as the Church&#x27;s mission statement. In 2009, it refined that mission statement to be expressed by &quot;making disciples through evangelism, education, showing compassion, working for justice, and bearing witness to the kingdom of God.&quot;

The denominational vision is: &quot;to be a disciple-making church, an international community of faith, in the Wesleyan-Holiness tradition.&quot;

=== Core values ===

Since 2001, the three &quot;core values&quot; of the Church have been identified as &quot;Christian, Holiness, Missional&quot;. In 2013, the Church adopted seven characteristics to express the core values which are meaningful worship, theological coherence, passionate evangelicalism, intentional discipleship, church development, transformational leadership, and purposeful compassion.

The guiding principles for the Church are found in a book called &quot;The Manual for the Church of the Nazarene&quot; (also referred to as just &quot;The Manual&quot;) and it is updated every four years during a convention called General Assembly. General Assembly is &quot;the supreme doctrine-formulating and lawmaking body of the Church of the Nazarene&quot;. The Manual is the official &quot;statement of faith and practice of the church... and therefore authoritative as a guide for action.&quot;

The &quot;Manual&quot; includes a brief historical statement of the denomination; the sixteen core beliefs, or &quot;Articles of Faith&quot;; its Constitution details the Church polity; and guidance on living a contemporary Christian lifestyle.

== History ==

The formation of the Church of the Nazarene is a part of the history of Methodism in the United States. The Church of the Nazarene is the product of a series of mergers that occurred between various holiness churches, associations and denominations throughout the 20th century, with roots starting in the 1880s. Churches with similar points of view concentrated in New England, California and Texas agreed to meet and align more formally as one denomination. The first of these meetings was in Chicago, Illinois followed by Pilot Point, Texas, in , respectively. These meetings, now known as General Assemblies, resulted in the formation of the Church of the Nazarene, as it appears today, and with a centralized denominational headquartered in Kansas City, Missouri.

=== Formation and early years (1890–1907) ===
The origins of the Church of the Nazarene today have seeds in the Third Great Awakening period in America. In October 1895, Dr. Bresee and Dr. Widney founded a church in downtown Los Angeles to refocus the Methodist Episcopal Church on serving the poor living in cities, under the name Church of the Nazarene. Groups with similar beliefs along the east coast known as the Association of Pentecostal Churches of America, which itself was a merger of two older denominations dating back to 1890 called The Central Evangelical Holiness Association, were led by Fred A. Hillery, C. Howard Davis and William Howard Hoople. On November 12, 1896, these two groups met in Brooklyn and agreed to merge, which included retaining the name and &quot;Manual&quot; of Hoople&#x27;s group. Both the east coast churches and Bresee&#x27;s west coast church met in Chicago from October 10–17, 1907, and decided to merge into a new church named The Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene. This has since been considered the First General Assembly of the Church. At the time of its merger with the Church of the Nazarene in 1907, the APCA existed principally from Nova Scotia to Iowa and the northeastern United States.

In April 1908, Bresee accepted Edgar P. Ellyson, president of the Holiness University of Texas of Peniel, Texas; his wife, Mary Emily Ellyson; and its members of the Holiness Association of Texas into the Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene. In September 1908, the Pennsylvania Conference of the Holiness Christian Church under the leadership of Horace G. Trumbauer merged with the Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene.

The newly merged east and west coast branches now focused on merging with the Holiness Church of Christ in the southern United States. The Holiness Church of Christ itself was the merger of the New Testament Church of Christ (founded in July 1894 in Milan, Tennessee by R.L. Harris, but soon led by his widow Mary Lee Cagle), and a group (also called the Holiness Church of Christ), that formed in November 1904 at Rising Star, Texas from the prior merger of The Holiness Church (founded in 1888 in Texas) and the Independent Holiness Church formed at Van Alstyne, Texas, in 1901, and led by Charles B. Jernigan and J.B. Chapman.

The merger of the Holiness Church of Christ in the south and the Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene took place on Tuesday, October 13, 1908, at 10:40 am, &quot;amid great shouts of joy and holy enthusiasm.&quot; This is considered to be the Second General Assembly of the Church of the Nazarene. The latter date marks the &quot;official&quot; founding date. Bresee, Reynolds and Ellyson were elected general superintendents. The newly merged Church of the Nazarene began with 10,034 members, 228 congregations, 11 districts, and 19 missionaries.

Other independent bodies joined at later dates, including the Pentecostal Church of Scotland (founded in 1909 by Rev. George Sharpe) and the Pentecostal Mission (founded in 1898 by J.O. McClurkan), both in 1915. In 1922, more than one thousand members and most of the workers led by Joseph G. Morrison, from the Laymen&#x27;s Holiness Association (founded in 1917) located in the Dakotas, joined the Church of the Nazarene. Additional smaller churches would be merged into the Nazarene Church during the 1940-60s.

==== Denominational name ====

The name of the denomination comes from the biblical description of Jesus Christ, who had been raised in the village of Nazareth, Israel, and using the demonym of Nazarene. Jesus, and later his followers, is called a &quot;Nazarene&quot; in several bible verses, as well as many bible translations, such as the NASB Bible and KJV. It was first used in October 1895 by Dr. Phineas F. Bresee&#x27;s church based in downtown Los Angeles, California. It was first recommended by Dr. Joseph Pomeroy Widney, a former president of the University of Southern California and an influential figure in the early days of the Church of the Nazarene on the West Coast. The denomination started as a church that ministered to the homeless and poor, and wanted to keep that attitude of ministering to &quot;lower classes&quot; of society.

Bresee&#x27;s west coast portion met with similar holiness churches based in south and along the east coast of the United States. The southern churches were under the name Association of Pentecostal Churches of America. To reflect both denominational tributaries the newly formed merged church operated under the title the Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene.

The term &quot;Pentecostal&quot; in the church&#x27;s original name soon proved to be increasingly problematic. Inside the Wesleyan-holiness movement, the word was used widely as a synonym simply for &quot;holiness&quot;. However, the rise of 20th century Pentecostalism, especially after 1906, new meanings and associations, &quot;particularly in regards to charismatic gifts like speaking in tongues,&quot; attached themselves to the term – meanings that the Pentecostal Nazarenes rejected.

In 1919, at the fifth General Assembly in Nashville, the Church voted to remove the word &quot;Pentecostal&quot; from the church name, returning to Breese&#x27;s Los Angeles&#x27; Church name, simply as Church of the Nazarene.

=== The First Century (1907–2008) ===
By 1908, there were churches in Canada and organized work in India, Swaziland, Cape Verde, and Japan, soon followed by work in central Africa, Mexico, and China. The 1915 mergers added congregations in the British Isles and work in Cuba, Central America, and South America. There were congregations in Syria and Palestine by 1922. General Superintendent Reynolds advocated &quot;a mission to the world&quot;, and support for world evangelization became a distinguishing characteristic of Nazarene life. Taking advantage of new technologies, the church began producing the &quot;Showers of Blessing&quot; radio program in the 1940s, followed by the Spanish broadcast &quot;La Hora Nazarena&quot; and later by broadcasts in other languages. At the time of the 50th anniversary of the denomination in October 1958, a total of 19.8% of all Nazarenes lived outside the continental United States, and by 2008, that number was close to 45%. By 2020, the number of Nazarene members living outside of the USA is around 75%.

Hiram F. Reynolds, championed the church to grow outside of the United States. Influenced by the indigenous church mission theories of Anglican Henry Venn and American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions secretary Rufus Anderson, from the beginning of the global expansion of the Church of the Nazarene, there was a commitment to the development of indigenous churches and districts within the framework of a unitary global denomination under the authority of the &quot;Manual&quot;. As early as March 3, 1914, Nazarene mission policy developed for the work in Japan by Reynolds encouraged the creation of &quot;self-supporting and self-governing churches.

By the 1930s, Nazarene missions leaders &quot;did not aim toward the development of autonomous national churches, but a federation of districts. They did not plan for indefinite missionary control. Without a great deal of thought about where this would lead, without consciously copying any other denomination&#x27;s model of church government, and without much theological reflection, the Church of the Nazarene became an international body.&quot; The first non-missionary district superintendents were George Sharpe in Britain and Vicente G. Santin, appointed district superintendent in Mexico in 1919.

In January 1936, the General Board divided the Japan District into two, and the Western or Kwansai district became the first regular district in the denomination, &quot;with all the rights and privileges of any of the North American and British Isles districts subject to the Manual and the General Assembly&quot;, however the effects of World War II on the church in Japan saw the two districts reunified and revert to a missionary-led district.

The process of &quot;internationalization&quot;, a deliberate policy of being one church of congregations and districts worldwide, rather than splitting into national churches like earlier Protestant denominations started in 1964 at the General Assembly in Portland, Oregon. With the founding parents of the church gone, the next generation of leaders struggled with interpreting the vision they were given. These main struggles dealt with speaking in tongues and legalism, which the majority of churches that broke away from the Nazarene church doing so in the 1960s.

At the General Assembly held in 1972 in Miami Beach, Florida, the Church adopted several policies, now known as the &quot;Covenant of Christian Conduct,&quot; into &quot;The Manual&quot;. These included statements advising how a Nazarene should view and act in regards to contemporary social issues, like abortion, human sexuality, gambling, and entertainment. These are still a feature of &quot;The Manual&quot;, the wording of which are updated and adjusted every four years at the General Assembly. It was only in 1972 that the general secretary of the church began to include overseas membership in reporting totals, as prior to this time it had been difficult to collect the needed data.

In 1974, the Nazarene Young Peoples Society (now Nazarene Youth International) in its desire to be more inclusive, held its fifth International Institute on the campus of European Nazarene Bible College in Büsingen, Germany, the first one held outside the United States. In 1978, the Church fully integrated some of its segregated church in the American South by merging the Black overlay Districts into their respective geographic main districts. Even though women have been allowed to preach since the church‘s inception, promotion to higher ranking leadership levels was not church practice. In 1988, the church had only promoted 2 women to the District Superintendent levels. The first of which was in 1926.

2000 marked the peak of membership in the Church in the United States. By the 2001, General Assembly, held in Indianapolis, 42 percent of delegates were not native English speakers. As many elected delegates from outside the United States could not attend the General Assembly due to US immigration policies, financial or other reasons, the General Assembly authorized the creation of &quot;a committee to address the concern that a high percentage of non-North American/non-United States delegates are unable to attend a General Assembly&quot;. 2003 had the largest Nazarene Youth Conference to date with 12,000 students meeting in Houston, Texas. In 2005, the General Assembly elected the first person of color and 2nd non-US resident, as well as the first woman (Nina Gunter) to the General Superintendent office.

As the Church approached its 100th anniversary, the Board of General Superintendents decided to have regional and local Centennial celebrations rather than one global gathering. It also made a controversial move from downtown Kansas City into Lenexa, Kansas, which was seen as abandoning the primary call of ministering to the inner cities. The new Global Ministry Center opened in 2008, centralized many of the church&#x27;s departments in one building, versus the campus style of the former Headquarters building.
==== Separations ====

Throughout its history, there have been several groups that separated from the Church of the Nazarene to form new denominations. Among the new denominations formed by those seceding or being expelled from the Church of the Nazarene are: the People&#x27;s Mission Church (1912); the Pentecost Pilgrim Church (1917); the Bible Missionary Church (1955); the Holiness Church of the Nazarene (1961) in the Philippines; the Church of the Bible Covenant (1967); the Crusaders Churches of the United States of America (1972); and the Fellowship of Charismatic Nazarenes (1977). The Crusaders Churches were organized due to a difference in belief on teaching regarding divorce and remarriage. The formation of the Fellowship of Charismatic Nazarenes was a result of differences on the use of charismatic gifts of the Holy Spirit in church services. Individual churches have also left to become independent, although this is still rare. Most notably Gold Creek Community Church in Washington became non-denominational in 2012.

=== The Second Century (2009–present) ===

At the 2009 General Assembly the delegates voted to create a global &quot;Manual&quot; that would be streamlined in comparison to recent Manuals, consist of the foreword, and Parts I, II, and III of the current Manual, and would also include parts of the Manual that are global in scope, retaining the universally appropriate polity and principles.&quot; The General Assembly authorized the different regions to adapt the &quot;Manual&quot; to fit specific cultural contexts and would function as a &quot;regional Manual policy handbook.&quot;

In 2017, the Church elected two more people of color and one more woman (Carla Sunberg) to fill vacancies in the Board of General Superintendents. During the COVID-19 global pandemic, the church worked to provide medical help to its world areas. It also postponed its General Assembly until 2023. The 2023 General Assembly delegates elected Christian Sarmiento, who was the 45th General Superintendent and fifth person who is a non-US resident.

== Theology and doctrine ==

The Church of the Nazarene is a Methodist denomination that emerged during the holiness movement. The official doctrines of the Church of the Nazarene are published in the &quot;Manual: Church of the Nazarene&quot;, which is published quadrennially after the General Assembly, the primary convention and gathering of Nazarenes, at which leaders are elected, and amendments and suggestions are incorporated into the &quot;Manual&quot;. The &quot;Manual&quot; is published in print, and is available online at the Nazarene Church&#x27;s website. Nazarenes have established 16 &quot;Articles of Faith&quot; as a guiding principle for living Christianity. The &quot;Articles&quot; include the following: one eternal self-existent God manifest in a Trinity; the divinity of Jesus and the Holy Spirit; the authority of the Bible; Original and Personal Sin; the work of atonement; prevenient grace; the need for repentance; justification, regeneration, and adoption; entire sanctification; the church; creedal baptism; the Lord&#x27;s Supper for all believers; divine healing; the return of Jesus Christ; and the resurrection of the dead. A key outgrowth of this theology is the commitment of Nazarenes not only to the Evangelical Gospel of repentance and a personal relationship with God, but also to compassionate ministry to the poor.

While there is no official theology text authorised by the denomination, there are several that have been widely used in the pre-ordination training course for ministers. In the early years of the denomination, books by John Miley and William Burt Pope were used. The most influential theologians within the Church of the Nazarene have been Edgar P. Ellyson, author of &quot;Theological Compend&quot; (1908); A.M. Hills, author of &quot;Fundamental Christian Theology&quot; (1931); H. Orton Wiley, author of the three-volume &quot;Christian Theology&quot; (1940–1943); Mildred Bangs Wynkoop, author of &quot;A Theology of Love&quot; (1972) and &quot;Foundations of Wesleyan-Arminian Theology&quot; (1972); Richard S. Taylor, author of &quot;A Right Conception of Sin&quot; (1945) and &quot;Exploring Christian Holiness, Vol.3: The Theological Formulation&quot; (1985); H. Ray Dunning, author of &quot;Grace, Faith &amp; Holiness&quot; (1988); and J. Kenneth Grider, author of &quot;A Wesleyan-Holiness Theology&quot; (1994). Contemporary Nazarene theologians include Craig Keen, Samuel M. Powell, Bryan Stone, Rob Staples, and Thomas A. Noble. Noble has been commissioned to write a three-volume systematic theology for the denomination that seeks to be intellectually coherent, comprehensive, contemporary, and global.

=== Arminianism ===

The Church of the Nazarene stands in the Arminian tradition of free grace for all and human freedom to choose to partake of that saving grace. The Nazarene Church distinguishes itself from many other Protestant churches because of its belief that God&#x27;s Holy Spirit empowers Christians to be constantly obedient to God—similar to the belief of other churches in the Wesleyan-Holiness movement. The Nazarene Church does not believe that a Christian is helpless to sin every day. Rather, it teaches that sin should be the rare exception in the life of a sanctified Christian. Also, there exists the belief in entire sanctification, the idea that a person can have a relationship of entire devotion to God in which they are no longer under the influence of original sin. This means that, through the power of the Holy Spirit, people can be changed so as to be able to live a holy life for the glory of God. The concept of entire sanctification (also called Christian perfection and Baptism with the Holy Ghost) stems from John Wesley&#x27;s teaching. This is interpreted on a variety of different levels; as with any denomination, certain believers interpret the theology more rigidly and others less so.

In recent years, Nazarene theologians have increasingly understood the movement&#x27;s distinctive theological doctrine, entire sanctification, as best understood in terms of love. Love is the core notion of the various understandings of holiness and sanctification found in the Bible. Christians are called to love when in relation to God and others.

=== Distinctive Wesleyan emphases ===

The spiritual vision of early Nazarenes was derived from the doctrinal core of John Wesley&#x27;s preaching and the holiness movement of the 19th century. The affirmations of the church include justification by grace through faith alone in Jesus Christ, sanctification by grace through faith united with good works, entire sanctification as an inheritance available to every Christian, and the witness of the Spirit to God&#x27;s work in human lives. The holiness movement arose in the 1830s to promote these doctrines, especially Entire Sanctification, but splintered by 1900. The Church of the Nazarene remains committed to Christian holiness. The key emphasis of Wesley&#x27;s theology relates to how Divine grace operates within the individual. Wesley defined the Way of Salvation as the operation of grace in at least three parts: Prevenient Grace, Justifying Grace, and Sanctifying Grace.

Prevenient grace, or the grace that &quot;goes before&quot; us, is given to all people. It is that power which enables us to love and motivates us to seek a relationship with God through Jesus Christ. This grace is the present work of God to turn us from our sin-corrupted human will to the loving will of the Father. In this work, God desires that we might sense both our sinfulness before God and God&#x27;s offer of salvation. Prevenient grace allows those tainted by sin to nevertheless make a truly free choice to accept or reject God&#x27;s salvation in Christ.

Justifying Grace, or Accepting Grace, is the grace offered by God to all people, that we receive by faith and trust in Christ, through which God pardons the believer of sin. It is in justifying grace we are received by God, in spite of our sin. In this reception, we are forgiven through the atoning work of Jesus Christ on the cross. The justifying grace cancels our guilt and empowers us to resist the power of sin and to fully love God and neighbor. Today, justifying grace is also known as conversion, &quot;accepting Jesus as your personal Lord and Savior&quot;, or being &quot;born again&quot;. John Wesley originally called this experience the New Birth. This experience can occur in different ways; it can be one transforming moment, such as an altar call experience, or it may involve a series of decisions across a period of time.

Sanctifying Grace is that grace of God which sustains the believers in the journey toward Christian Perfection: a genuine love of God with heart, soul, mind, and strength, and a genuine love of our neighbors as ourselves. Sanctifying grace enables us to respond to God by leading a Spirit-filled and Christ-like life aimed toward love.

Wesleyan theology maintains that salvation is the act of God&#x27;s grace entirely, from invitation, to pardon, to growth in holiness. Furthermore, God&#x27;s prevenient, justifying, and sanctifying grace interact dynamically in the lives of Christians from birth to death. For Wesley, good works were the fruit of one&#x27;s salvation, not the way in which that salvation was earned. Faith and good works go hand in hand in Methodist theology: a living tree naturally and inevitably bears fruit. Wesleyan theology rejects the doctrine of eternal security, believing that salvation can be rejected (conditional security).&lt;ref name=&quot;Weber/Kalberg-Conditional preservation of the saints&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Wesley emphasized that believers must continue to grow in their relationship with Christ, through the process of Sanctification.

=== Historical and contemporary issues ===

The Church of the Nazarene also takes a stance on a wide array of current moral and social issues, which is published in the &quot;Manual&quot; and online. These issues have included stances regarding human sexuality, theatrical arts, movies, social dancing, AIDS/HIV, and organ donation. On some matters the church is very conservative, such as human sexuality; the church has said that homosexuality is a sin &quot;subject to the wrath of God&quot;, and yet its stance on scientific discovery might be considered comparatively liberal.

Consistent with the position of classical Nazarene theologian H. Orton Wiley, several contemporary Nazarene theologians, have endeavored to reconcile the theory of evolution with theology. There are an increasing number of Nazarene scientists who support theistic evolution, among them Karl Giberson, Darrel R. Falk, and Richard G. Colling. The 2009 General Assembly, delegates reaffirmed the Church&#x27;s existing position after extended debate.

Throughout its history, the Church of the Nazarene has maintained a stance supporting total abstinence from alcohol and any other intoxicant, including cigarettes. Primary Nazarene founder Bresee was active in the Prohibition cause. Although this continues to be debated, the position remains in the church. While the church does not consider alcohol itself to be the &quot;cause&quot; of sin, it recognizes that intoxication and the like are a &#x27;danger&#x27; to many people, both physically and spiritually. Historically, the Nazarene Church was founded in order to help the poor. Alcohol, gambling and the like, and their addictions, were cited as things that kept people poor. So in order to help the poor, as well as everyone else, Nazarenes have traditionally abstained from those things. Also, a person who is meant to serve an example to others should avoid the use of them, in order not to cause others to stray from their &quot;walk with God&quot;, as that is considered a sin for both parties.

== Worship and rituals ==
Worship styles vary widely, and are contextual to the local, customs and demographics of the congregations. The Church has a congregational structure so each individual church can create its own schedule and does not follow a united liturgy. In the past, Nazarene Churches had services on Sunday morning, Sunday and Wednesday evenings, each lasting for about an hour to an hour and half. The typical Sunday Morning service included music with hymns with a band and choir or by a &#x27;praise and worship&#x27; band, an offering, time for testimony, sermon, and a response (typically an altar call). Service order is viewed to be less structured and rigid and that the Holy Spirit should lead worship.

Sunday and Wednesday evening services in many Nazarene churches have changed from worship services to discipleship training, and many growing churches have utilized weekly small group meetings. Worship services typically contain singing a mix of hymns and contemporary worship songs, prayer, special music, reading of Scripture, sermon, and offering. Services are often focused toward a time of prayer and commitment at the end of the sermon, with people finding spiritual help as they gather for corporate praying.

Over the last twenty years, an increasing number of Nazarene churches have utilized contemporary worship services as their predominant worship style. This may involve the use of a projector to display song and chorus lyrics onto a video screen. More traditional Nazarene churches may have a song leader who directs congregational hymns from the pulpit or platform. More recently, a small number of local churches have adopted a more formal liturgical style based on practices in the Anglican tradition.

Annual revival meetings have long been a traditional part of Nazarene life, and are still encouraged in the Manual, though may be seen less today than they once were. An evangelist comes to preach the revival services. The Church of the Nazarene licenses and credentials evangelists, many of whom earn their entire living through their ministry of evangelism. Most Nazarene districts also sponsor an annual camp meeting for adults and their families as well as separate camps for both teens and children. While Nazarenes believe that the ill should utilize all appropriate medical agencies, Nazarenes also affirm God&#x27;s will of divine healing and pastors may &quot;lay hands&quot; upon the ill in prayer, either at the hospital or in a worship service. A prayer for divine healing is never understood as excluding medical services and agencies.

=== Sacraments and rituals ===

The Church of the Nazarene recognizes two sacraments: Christian baptism and the Lord&#x27;s Supper, or communion. The 2017–2021 &quot;Manual&quot; included a significantly revised Article XIII on The Lord&#x27;s Supper.

Nazarenes permit both believer&#x27;s baptism and infant baptism. When a family in the Church of the Nazarene chooses not to baptize their infants they often participate in an infant dedication. Whether a child is baptized or dedicated is the choice of the parents of the child. This decision is often based on geographic location, and other contextual cultural points of view.

Along with sacraments, the Nazarene &quot;Manual&quot; includes rituals for the believer&#x27;s baptism, infant baptism, infant dedication, reception of new church members, communion, weddings, funerals, the organization of a local church, the installation of new officers, and church dedications.

== Church polity and leadership ==

The Church of the Nazarene combines episcopal and congregational polities to form a &quot;representative&quot; government. The salient feature of this structure is shared power between people and clergy as well as between the local church and the denomination. At the 1923 General Assembly, the following was stated in relation to the denomination&#x27;s polity: &quot;Our people have felt they did not want extreme
episcopacy in the appointment of pastors, neither did they want extreme congregationalism. In the past, we have tried to find a middle ground, so as to respect the spirit of democracy and at the same time retain a degree of efficiency.&quot;

=== General Assembly ===

According to the denominational website, &quot;The General Assembly of the church serves as the supreme doctrine-formulating, lawmaking, and elective authority of the Church of the Nazarene, subject to the provisions of the church constitution.&quot; Composed of elected representatives from all of the denomination&#x27;s districts globally, since 1985 the General Assembly has met once every four years. All General Assemblies have been held in the United States. At the General Assembly held in Orlando, Florida, US, in June 2009, a total of 1,030 delegates were finally registered, with 982 eligible to vote, and 48 non-voting delegates. The General Assembly elects the members of the Board of General Superintendents and considers legislative proposals from the church&#x27;s 465 districts. Topics under consideration may range from the method of calling a pastor to bioethics.

=== Board of General Superintendents ===

The highest elected office in the Church of the Nazarene is that of General Superintendent. Every four years six ordained elders, who are at least 35 years old and are not over 70 years old, are elected by the General Assembly of the Church of the Nazarene for a four-year term. Both ordained females and males are eligible to be elected to the office of General Superintendent. Of the forty-five persons who have served in this office, only two women have been elected: Dr. Nina G. Gunter (2005–2009), and Dr. Carla Sunberg, who was elected in 2017 and is currently serving. Until 2005, all of the elders elected were from the United States of America. Dr. Crocker, a native of San Jerónimo, Guatemala, the first General Superintendent from Central America, and the 2nd general superintendent elected while residing outside the US/Canada Region, also was elected on a record 53rd ballot. Collectively these six elders constitute the Board of General Superintendents, which is according to the denominational &quot;Manual&quot;, are &quot;charged with the responsibility of administering the worldwide work of the Church of the Nazarene,&quot; and interpret the denomination&#x27;s of polity. All official acts of the Board of General Superintendents are subject to the review of the General Assembly.

The youngest person elected General Superintendent was Roy T. Williams, who was only 32 when chosen to fill a vacancy caused by the deaths of Phineas F. Bresee and William C. Wilson, both of whom died within weeks of the 1915 General Assembly. Wilson is the shortest-serving General Superintendent, dying only 33 days after his election at the age of 47. R.T. Williams was the longest-serving general superintendent, who served for just over 30 years from January 1916 to his death in March 1946. Eight of the first eleven General Superintendents died in office, resulting in both the expansion in the number of general superintendents, and an upper age limit of 72. Dr Hiram F. Reynolds (1854–1938), one of the original two General Superintendents elected in October 1907, holds the record as the oldest person to serve in this office, retiring in 1932, at the age of 78.

=== General Board ===

The General Board of the Church of the Nazarene was created by action of the 1923 General Assembly to replace a system of independent general boards that often competed with one another for the church budget. These independent boards became departments of the General Board. The General Board is made up of district superintendents, pastors and lay leaders representing the global church and elected by the regional caucuses at General Assembly. Convening in late February each year, the board has governing responsibility for the international Church of the Nazarene between general assemblies. The General Board carries out the corporate business of the denomination. 48 board members represent the church&#x27;s regions, and an additional four members were elected to represent Education, Nazarene Youth International, and Nazarene Missions International. Of the 52 Board Members roughly half are elected from outside the United States, and only 6 are women.

=== Ministers ===

The Church of the Nazarene has two orders of ordained ministry: the ordained elder and the ordained deacon. The ordained elder is a person, either male or female, who has been set apart for a ministry of &quot;Word and Sacrament&quot;. Their primary assignment is to preach the Word, administer the sacraments, and lead the local church. The ordained deacon is a man or woman who has been set apart for full-time ministry in a role other than &quot;Word and Sacrament&quot;. Those eligible to be ordained as deacons include those who are called to a full-time ministry of music, Christian social ministry, or director of Christian education, or another ministry that does not typically involve leading a congregation. The church also has district licensed ministers. Usually these are persons who are on the path toward ordination or who are strongly considering a call to ordained ministry. A licensed minister may, in some cases, be the pastor of a church.

The Church of the Nazarene also recognizes these specialized forms of Christian service and ministry. In September 2014, the Church of the Nazarene had 17,017 ordained elders, 838 ordained deacons and 9,847 licensed ministers, for a total of 27,702 credentialed or licensed ministers. On March 24, 2010, the Bangladesh District set a denominational record with 193 women and men ordained in one service, including 30 women, the most ever in the denomination&#x27;s history, exceeding the 39 ordained in Peru.

=== Local church ===

The basic unit of organization in the Church of the Nazarene is the local church congregation, which may be either an organized church or church-type mission (often known as &quot;New Starts&quot;). At the end of September 2014, there were 21,425 organized churches and a further 7,970 church-type missions, for a total of 29,395 congregations. The average Nazarene congregation globally has 78 members, and an average weekly worship attendance of 51. The largest congregation in the denomination as measured by average weekly attendance each Sunday morning (as of February 2009) was the Central De Campinas church on the Paulista Sudeste district in Brazil, which reported 8,216 members and an average weekly Sunday morning worship attendance of 7,237. During 2009, it received 873 new Nazarenes. The next four largest congregations were the Casa De Oracion Paso Ancho church in Colombia (4,600 members; 7,000 worship); the Americana church in Brazil; Grove City Church of the Nazarene in Grove City, Ohio; and College Church of the Nazarene in Olathe, Kansas.

=== District ===

Local congregations are grouped administratively into geographical districts. Each district is led by a district superintendent, who is usually elected by delegates from each local church in an annual meeting called the District Assembly. In newer districts, the district superintendent may be appointed by the jurisdictional general superintendent. There are currently 465 districts worldwide. Size depends upoon the concentration of Nazarene churches. There are 80 Districts in the US and Canada. The largest districts are Brazil Sudeste Paulista (24,686 full members), South Korea National District (23,143 members), India East (19,490 members), and Oklahoma (17,530), the largest district in the US. Districts may also be sub-divided into Zones where local churches within a Zone may cooperate for various activities, particularly for youth events.

=== Region ===

All Districts of the Church of the Nazarene are organized into 6 geographic regions:

* Africa: 611,398 members, in 8,686 churches in 130 districts in 6 fields in 42 world areas;
* Asia-Pacific: 119,349 members in 1,894 churches in 46 districts in 7 fields in 29 world areas);
* Eurasia: 240,585 members in 7,832 churches in 52 districts in 7 fields in 36 world areas;
* MesoAmerica: 364,368 members in 3,133 churches in 77 districts in 5 fields in 31 world areas;
* South America: 279,408 members in 2,603 churches in 80 districts in 8 fields in 10 world areas;
* USA/Canada (US, Canada, and Bermuda): 649,998 members in 5,247 churches in 80 districts in 9 zones in 3 world areas

The regions are administered through Nazarene Global Mission, an entity formed in 2011 after a strategic restructuring that incorporates all functions of the former World Mission Department. It focuses on partnership and collaboration to help equip Nazarene churches support mission at community, district, regional and international levels.

In the United States and Canada, there are educational zones centered on one of the denominational institutions of higher education. Each local church pays an agreed budget to the District level, and each District remits a portion of the local and district budgets for their zone&#x27;s Nazarene institution of higher education. Educational zones for the Church of the Nazarene were first established in 1918.

=== Field ===

Districts in areas administered by the Global Mission are often grouped into &quot;fields&quot;, with a field strategy co-ordinator providing strategic leadership. In the US and Canada the sub-regional areas may be referred to as &quot;Zones&quot;. On January 31, 2008, India became the first field in the global Church of the Nazarene to be entirely indigenous with the field strategy co-ordinator, Rev Sunil Dange, and all 15 district superintendents, all ministry coordinators, and all pastors from India.

== Memberships statistics ==
The estimated number of members of the Church of the Nazarene was 2,640,216, attended 31,049 congregations worldwide in 2020. The Church crossed 2,000,000 members worldwide in 2010. The Church of the Nazarene makes a distinction between new members who come to the church through a new profession of faith in Christianity, and those entering from another denomination. According to their internal statistical reporting an average of 455 join the Nazarene Church per day. From 2006 to 2016, 139,560 people became new members of the Church of the Nazarene, with 113,968 received by profession of faith and a further 25,592 coming from other denominations. With 626,811 members, the USA was the country with the greatest number of Nazarenes.

The highest concentration of Nazarene membership is in the United States where 626,811 members constitute 23.26% of the global membership. The Africa region as a whole makes up 27.29%, the USA/CAN region is 25.87% and all other church regions making up 46.84%. The USA/CAN region is the only region to have a decrease in membership since 2000. Nazarene membership in the United States hit its peak in the year 2000. Since 2006, average weekly worship attendance worldwide is 1,150,482, mostly in small congregations, under 100 in attendance, or new churches.

During 2016, Nazarene churches received annual income from all sources of US$860,949,037, a decrease of US$941,336 from 2015, and a 3.79% decadal decrease from the US$894,866,142 reported in September 2006. Worldwide per capita expenses amounted to US$353.04 (a decrease of $198.77 from that reported in 2006).

In 2016, the Church of the Nazarene had the highest percentage presence in the nation of Barbados (where its members constitute 2.84% of the population), Cape Verde (1.54% of the population), Eswatini (1.42% of the population), Haiti (1.34% of the population) Mozambique (0.82% of the population), and Samoa (0.66% of the population). The highest percentage of Nazarene presence in the US occurred in 2000, when there were 2.25 members for every 1,000 US people (0.25%). 


=== Denominational affiliations ===
, the Church of the Nazarene participates in 8 cross-denominational associations, ecumenical networks, majority of which are pairing with other Wesleyan or evangelical denominations:

* Christian Holiness Partnership
* Global Wesleyan Alliance
* National Association of Evangelicals
* World Methodist Council 
* Mission Exchange (formerly the Evangelical Fellowship of Missions Agencies)
* Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability,
* Wesleyan Holiness Consortium
* Wesleyan Holiness Study Project

== Ministries and activities ==

For more than a century, the international denominational headquarters was located in Kansas City, Missouri. Since September 2008, the denomination moved to Lenexa, Kansas and rebranded under the name &quot;Global Ministry Center&quot; The denominational&#x27;s publishing company was known as Nazarene Publishing House until 2017, and now is (The Foundry Publishing), has been located in Kansas City, Missouri, since its inception in 1912.

There are several key ministries that focus on different aspect of the larger mission statement. The biggest of these are Nazarene Youth International (NYI), Sunday School and Discipleship Ministries, Nazarene Missions International (NMI), and Nazarene Publishing House (NPH).

=== Higher education ===
The Church of the Nazarene owns and operates 52 educational institutions in 35 countries, comprising 5 graduate seminaries; 31 undergraduate Bible/theological colleges; 2 nurses training colleges, and 1 teacher training college. The Manual of the Church of the Nazarene says that &quot;[t]he Church of the Nazarene... has been committed to higher education. The church college/university, while not a local congregation, is an integral part of the church; it is an expression of the church.&quot; Nazarene educational institutions are overseen by the Nazarene International Board of Education (IBOE).

A portion of each local church and district budget is allocated for Nazarene higher education, which subsidizes the cost of each educational zone or nation&#x27;s respective institution. Globally the denomination contributed US$23,904,271 in 2010 to Nazarene educational institutions. In 2016, the combined global enrollment was 51,555 students. Approximately 31,000 students enrolled in on-campus programs and 19,000 students enrolled in extension programs. As of 2010, these educational assets were valued at US$1,041,436,984, with liabilities of US$341,009,574, for a net worth of US$700,427,410.

In the United States and Canada, there is one Nazarene liberal arts college per region. Accompanying that logic of institutional support, there is a gentlemen&#x27;s agreement between the Nazarene liberal arts colleges in the United States to not actively recruit outside their respective educational zone, requiring that a Nazarene prospective college student must first seek information from any &quot;Off-Region&quot; institution on an individual basis.

The regional colleges are for the Canada Region, Ambrose University in Calgary, Alberta; for the Eastern USA Region, Eastern Nazarene College in Quincy, Massachusetts; for North Central USA Region, MidAmerica Nazarene University in Olathe, Kansas; for the East Central USA Region, Mount Vernon Nazarene University in Mount Vernon, Ohio; for the Northwest USA Region, Northwest Nazarene University in Nampa, Idaho; for the Central USA Region, Olivet Nazarene University in Bourbonnais, Illinois; for the Southwest USA Region, Point Loma Nazarene University in San Diego, California; for the South Central USA Region, Southern Nazarene University in Bethany, Oklahoma; for the Southeast USA Region, Trevecca Nazarene University in Nashville. On July 25, 2024, ENC announced that it would begin the process of closure.

On October 16, 2009, the Global Consortium of Nazarene Graduate Seminaries and Schools of Theology (GCNGSST) was inaugurated in Manchester, England. It comprised the following eight institutions: Africa Nazarene University (Ongata Rongai, Kenya); Asia-Pacific Nazarene Theological Seminary (Taytay, Rizal, Philippines); Brazil Nazarene College (Faculdade Nazarena do Brasil) (Campinas, Brazil); Korea Nazarene University (Cheonan, South Korea); Nazarene Theological College, (Brisbane, Australia); Nazarene Theological College, (Manchester, England); Nazarene Theological Seminary (Kansas City, Missouri); and Seminario Nazareno de las Americas (SENDAS) (San José, Costa Rica). Funded through a grant from the Henry Luce Foundation, the consortium connects Nazarene seminaries by optimizing the global resources available for theological education. While much of the work of the consortium is done throughout the year via video conferencing, subsequent meetings of the presidents and academic deans of the member institutions were held on the campuses of Korean Nazarene University, and Nazarene Theological Seminary.

=== Nazarene Youth International (NYI) ===

Nazarene Youth International is a youth organisation that has partnered with the Church of the Nazarene since its inception as the Nazarene Young Peoples Society (NYPS) in 1923. In 1976, it adopted its current name, and focused on young people aged 12 to 23 (later 12 to 29). In September 2014, NYI membership globally was 422,012 young people aged 14–25 (a decrease of 8,871 from 2013, but an increase of 85,062 or 25.24% since 2004) in 16,597 local organizations.

The NYI-sponsored Third Wave emerging leadership conference was held from January 3–8, 2012 in Bangkok, Thailand, with approximately 250 participants from 55 countries attending.

=== Nazarene Discipleship International (NDI) ===

At the end of 2010, Sunday School and Discipleship Ministries International (SDMI) reported an average global Sunday School weekly attendance of 703,344, and the Global Discipleship Group attendance was 191,912, for a total of 895,256 (an increase of 52,132 from 2009). The Total Global Responsibility List was 1,690,255 in 2009.
In 2016, the Global Discipleship attendance was 1,245,818; a decadal growth rate of 55%. The total global responsibility lists was 1,845,786. In 2022, there was a need to better align SDMI with the new denominational focus on Nazarene Discipleship as a Journey of Grace. It was at this time that SDMI was rebranded as Nazarene Discipleship International (NDI).

=== Nazarene Missions International (NMI) ===

Nazarene Missions International (NMI) was founded in 1915 at the fourth General Assembly, as the Nazarene Foreign Missionary Society, with Susan Norris Fitkin, wife of financier Abram Fitkin, elected the first president. Fitkin remained in office until June 1948. NMI is &quot;the church-relations heart of World Mission within each local church&quot;, and &quot;the local-church-based global mobilization and promotional arm of the Church of the Nazarene&quot;. has 916,470 members. The purpose of NMI is to mobilize churches in mission through praying, discipling, giving, and educating.

==== Missions ====

The Church of the Nazarene has been committed to obeying the Great Commission since its inception. According to the 2013–2017 &quot;Manual&quot;, &quot;Historically, Nazarene global ministry has centered around evangelism, compassionate ministry, and education.&quot; In 2014, the denomination had a total of 702 salaried missionaries (funded by the World Evangelism Fund for the Church of the Nazarene) in 40 world areas, of whom, forty percent of General Board missionaries were non-U.S. missionaries. Additionally, there were contracted volunteers serving as missionaries in 40 world areas. In 2013, 687 missionaries and 231 missionary kids were deployed from 27 world areas (including 313 Mission Corps volunteers). In 2014, Nazarene missionaries originated from 35 different world areas. 10,824 volunteers participated in mission in 2013. In addition to Mission Corps, there were 292 individual volunteers, and 10,219 Work &amp; Witness team members. In 2010, 92 Youth in Mission participants served in 14 world areas, including 52 participants from outside the US/Canada Regions.

From a peak of $54 million given for the World Evangelism Fund (WEF) in 2002, as a consequence of the 2007–2008 financial crisis, the total amount raised for the World Evangelism Fund in 2012 was approximately US$38.3 million (a decrease of $0.5 million from the previous year). However, Mission Specials receipted were an additional US$26.1 million, a decrease of US$5.3 million from the previous year. This combined giving totaled US$64.4 million, a decrease of $5.8 million. Despite its membership being less than 33% of the denominational total, the USA regions contributed 94% of WEF funding, and 90% of Approved Specials. During 2012, 27.7% of Nazarene congregations gave the recommended 5.5% of total income to the WEF, an additional 37.5% of congregations made some contribution to the WEF, while 35% of congregations made no contribution.

==== JESUS Film Harvest Partners ====

The Church of the Nazarene is an active participant in the Jesus Film Project, organizing teams to show the &quot;Jesus film&quot;. In 2014, Global Mission (GM) and JESUS Film Harvest Partners (JFHP) has 619 JESUS Film teams working with missionaries and local leaders, spreading the gospel in 290 languages and in 135 world areas. The cumulative total from 1998 to June 2014 is 67,280,854 evangelistic contacts with a reported 12,640,017 decisions made for Christ (18.8 percent of contacts) and 5,261,310 (41.6 percent of decisions) initial discipleship follow-ups. Since 1998, 43,481 new preaching points were started. The most current information is available on the jfhp.org website.

==== Work and Witness ====

Since its inception in 1974, Work and Witness, an endeavor that sends teams of volunteers into cross-cultural situations primarily to construct buildings on the mission field, has 196,060 participants who have given 13,246,196 labor hours, which equals 6,564 years of labor. In 2010, there were 537 Work &amp; Witness teams with a total of 8,955 participants. In 2008 teams served in 72 world areas.

=== Nazarene Compassionate Ministries ===

The Church of the Nazarene has 245 full-time compassionate ministries centers and volunteer efforts around the world. Nazarenes have been instrumental in assisting people in every part of the globe who have been affected by war, famine, hurricane, flood, and other natural and human-made disasters. In 2008, Nazarene Compassionate Ministries&#x27; Child Development program had 123 Child Development Centers globally that provided more than 11,140 sponsorships in 77 countries, and met the needs of more than 50,000 children through nutritional programs. The church operates 64 medical clinics and hospitals worldwide. In 2010, 11,874 children were fed each week through Nazarene Compassionate Ministries.

=== Nazarene Publishing House (NPH) ===

Nazarene Publishing House (NPH), also called Foundry Publishing, the publishing arm of the Church of the Nazarene, is the largest publisher of Wesleyan-Holiness literature in the world. NPH prints more than 25 million pieces of literature each year. NPH processes more than 250,000 orders each year from more than 11,000 churches.

The Third General Assembly of the Church of the Nazarene held in Nashville in 1911 recommended that the infant denomination&#x27;s three publishing companies (then located in Rhode Island, Texas, and Los Angeles) each founded by a different Nazarene parent body, consolidate into &quot;one central publishing company&quot; and merge their three papers into one strong paper. The newly created Pentecostal Nazarene Publishing House was sited at 2923 Troost Avenue, Kansas City, Missouri, in 1912, with Clarence J. Kinne, a Nazarene ordained minister, as its first manager. The &quot;Herald of Holiness&quot;, the new weekly paper, edited by B. F. Haynes, appeared for the first time on Wednesday, April 17, 1912. &quot;The Other Sheep&quot; (later &quot;World Mission&quot;) magazine began publication in 1913 under founding editor Charles Allen McConnell, who was NPH manager from 1916 to 1918. Both magazines were published until 1999, when they were discontinued in favor of &quot;Holiness Today&quot;, a new publication. In the meantime, Spanish, Portuguese, and French editions of &quot;Herald of Holiness&quot; appeared over the years.

NPH is a separate corporate entity from General Church of the Nazarene, although it is accountable to the church. NPH has a board of directors and is also accountable to one of the six General Superintendents of the Church of the Nazarene who has oversight of NPH. NPH publishes a variety of books, music and materials. The primary label under which books are published is Beacon Hill Press. Sunday school curriculum is published under the label Word Action. Youth ministry resources are published under the label Barefoot Ministries. Spanish materials are produced by Casa Nazarena de Publicaciones.

Music and drama resources are published under the label Lillenas Publishing, which was founded in Indianapolis, Indiana, in 1925 by Nazarene minister and composer Haldor Lillenas, and subsequently purchased by NPH in 1930.

== Notable Nazarenes ==

The following are notable people who have past or current affiliation or membership in the Church of the Nazarene.
=== Current Nazarenes ===
* South African politician Rev. William Bantom, the first black mayor of Cape Town (1995–2000), was a minister in the Church of the Nazarene since 1968;
* Historical fiction author Donna Fletcher Crow, author of &quot;Glastonbury&quot;, a graduate of Northwest Nazarene University, is a member of the Church of the Nazarene;
* American psychologist Dr. James Dobson, founder of &quot;Focus on the Family&quot;, a graduate of Pasadena College, is a member of the Eastborough Church of the Nazarene in Colorado Springs, Colorado.
* Former USAID Acting Administrator Dr. Kent R. Hill, a graduate of Northwest Nazarene University, and former president of Eastern Nazarene College (1992–2001), is an active member.
* Dove Award-winning Gospel singer Crystal Lewis.
* Mexican politician Pablo Salazar Mendiguchía, former governor of Chiapas (2000–2006) and former senator of the Republic (1994–2000), is a member of the Church of the Nazarene;
* Esther R. Sanger was the founder of two nonprofit organizations: the Quincy Crisis Center, based in Quincy, Massachusetts, and the Martha–Mary Learning Center in Hingham, Massachusetts. She was ordained an elder in the Church of the Nazarene in 1994.
* Scottish businessman Brian Souter, the prominent leader of the Keep the Clause campaign, is an active member of the denomination;
* Larry Wall, creator of the Perl computer programming language and important early contributor to the open source movement, is a member of the New Life Church of the Nazarene in Cupertino, California;
* Former U.S. representative from Kansas Vince Snowbarger
* Author and historian Randall Stephens
* Aguiar Valvassoura, pastor of the Campinas Central Church of the Nazarene in Campinas, Brazil

=== Former Nazarenes ===
* Four-time governor of Louisiana Edwin Edwards early in life was a Nazarene preacher before converting to Roman Catholicism.
* American investment banker and philanthropist Abram Fitkin, husband of NMI founder, Susan Norris Fitkin, was a member of the John Wesley Church of the Nazarene, Brooklyn
* American nuclear scientist Robert W. Faid was a member of the First Church of the Nazarene, Greenville, South Carolina
* Convicted murderer Caril Ann Fugate, the then girlfriend of spree killer Charles Starkweather, the youngest female in United States history to be tried for first-degree murder, while imprisoned at the Nebraska Center for Women in York, Nebraska (1958–1976), &quot;worked in a Nazarene church nursery, taught Bible classes on Sunday, and occasionally delivered sermons&quot;.
* Southern Gospel singer and songwriter Bill Gaither, winner of five Grammy Awards and 28 Dove Awards, and a 1982 inductee to the Gospel Music Hall of Fame, grew up in a Nazarene family, and became a member of the denomination at his home church in Alexandria, Indiana. Currently he attends the Park Place Church of God in Anderson, Indiana;
* Academy Award-winning actor Tom Hanks attended the Church of the Nazarene while living with an aunt as a teenager.
* American politician Gary Hart, who served as a United States Senator (1974–1980) and was a two-time candidate for president of the United States (1984, 1988), was raised as a member of the Church of the Nazarene; married Oletha Ludwig, the daughter of the General Secretary of the denomination; and also graduated from Southern Nazarene University;
* Tunney Hunsaker former police chief of Fayetteville, West Virginia, the first opponent of Muhammad Ali in a professional boxing bout in 1960, was a member of the Church of the Nazarene in Oak Hill, West Virginia
* Haitian-American musician Wyclef Jean is the son of the late Rev. Gesner Jean a Nazarene pastor, and was raised in the denomination, including the Good Shepherd Church of the Nazarene in Newark, New Jersey, and briefly attended Eastern Nazarene College;
* Prolific Christian author R. T. Kendall who pastored the Westminster Chapel for 25 years (1977–2002), was born into a Nazarene family in Ashland, Kentucky, named for general superintendent Roy T. Williams, graduated from Trevecca Nazarene University, and commenced his ministry in the denomination before his Calvinistic convictions necessitated his resignation. In 2008, he was awarded an honorary doctor of divinity degree by Trevecca Nazarene University;
* American artist Thomas Kinkade was a member of the Church of the Nazarene;
* Norwegian Gospel Hall of Fame inductee Haldor Lillenas, was an ordained minister in the Church of the Nazarene, author, song evangelist, poet, music publisher and prolific hymnwriter, who is estimated to have composed over 4,000 hymns;
* Grammy Award-winning American rock singer-songwriter John Mellencamp was raised in the Church of the Nazarene in Seymour, Indiana;
* Actor Ron Raines is the son of a Nazarene minister, and was active in the denomination until at least 1969.
* Actress Debbie Reynolds was raised within the Church of the Nazarene, attending three times a week for sixteen years;
* American Bob Pierce the founder of international Christian relief and development organizations World Vision in 1950, and Samaritan&#x27;s Purse (1970), was an ordained minister in the Church of the Nazarene;
* Canadian Charles Templeton the co-founder of Youth for Christ, was an evangelist in the Church of the Nazarene, and founder of the Avenue Road Church of the Nazarene in Toronto, Ontario before becoming an agnostic
* Southern Gospel pioneer and music publisher James David Vaughan, the founder of the Vaughan Conservatory of Music and the James D. Vaughan Publishing Company, who was inducted into the Southern Gospel Music Hall of Fame in 1997, became a member of the Church of the Nazarene in Lawrenceburg, Tennessee (now known as Vaughan Memorial Church of the Nazarene) in the 1920s, and brought the singing Speers Family into the denomination.
* Japanese graphic designer, set designer, essayist and novelist Kappa Senoo grew up in a Nazarene family in Kobe, Japan before and during WWII.
* Dorothy Davis Cook was appointed to the Nazarene missionary service on November 22, 1939. She established the first state-registered nurse program in Swaziland and wrote four nursing texts, which became the gold standard in the surrounding countries.

=== Nazarenes in pop culture ===
* In Kacey Musgraves&#x27;s song &quot;This Town&quot;, off her album &quot;Pageant Material&quot;, the church is listed as one of the churches in her town (&quot;Got a Methodist, a Baptist, and a Church of the Nazarene&quot;).
* Jennifer Aniston&#x27;s character in &quot;The Good Girl&quot; says the First Church of the Nazarene has a good bible study.

== See also ==
* List of Church of the Nazarene schools
* List of Church of the Nazarene conventions
* Nazarene Hymnals
* Nazarene Missionaries

== References ==
== Further reading ==
=== General ===

 
* 

=== Biographies ===
* 

=== Comparative and Sociological ===
* 

=== History ===
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Internationalisation ===
* 
* 

=== Theology ===
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* Church of the Nazarene: Association of Religion Data Archives </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="4" end="26" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Church of the Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="33" end="44" title="evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="45" end="67" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="107" end="133" title="Wesleyan-Holiness movement" label="Wesleyan-Holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="141" end="150" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q992536" start="223" end="237" title="Lenexa, Kansas" label="Lenexa, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="283" end="292" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Nazarenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641470" start="518" end="541" title="World Methodist Council" label="World Methodist Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="768" end="784" title="Great Commission" label="Great Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="788" end="798" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Matthew 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="1009" end="1019" title="evangelism" label="evangelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412160" start="1040" end="1050" title="compassion" label="compassion"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="1100" end="1114" title="kingdom of God" label="kingdom of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q460290" start="1911" end="1927" title="List of Church of the Nazarene conventions" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526886" start="2362" end="2368" title="Ecclesiastical polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004691" start="2506" end="2547" title="history of Methodism in the United States" label="history of Methodism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2939" end="2956" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q982258" start="2969" end="2987" title="Pilot Point, Texas" label="Pilot Point, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="3190" end="3211" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005432" start="3326" end="3347" title="Third Great Awakening" label="Third Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="3466" end="3492" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494397" start="3818" end="3833" title="Fred A. Hillery" label="Fred A. Hillery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3835" end="3850" title="C. Howard Davis" label="C. Howard Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012574" start="3855" end="3876" title="William Howard Hoople" label="William Howard Hoople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="4400" end="4411" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="4415" end="4419" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337224" start="4488" end="4504" title="Edgar P. Ellyson" label="Edgar P. Ellyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162882" start="4523" end="4551" title="Peniel College" label="Holiness University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q976490" start="4555" end="4568" title="Peniel, Texas" label="Peniel, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4580" end="4598" title="Mary Emily Ellyson" label="Mary Emily Ellyson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4802" end="4821" title="Horace G. Trumbauer" label="Horace G. Trumbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856043" start="5125" end="5141" title="Milan, Tennessee" label="Milan, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5145" end="5156" title="R.L. Harris" label="R.L. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780068" start="5184" end="5198" title="Mary Lee Cagle" label="Mary Lee Cagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q981984" start="5290" end="5308" title="Rising Star, Texas" label="Rising Star, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q778693" start="5427" end="5445" title="Van Alstyne, Texas" label="Van Alstyne, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5467" end="5486" title="Charles B. Jernigan" label="Charles B. Jernigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104660" start="5491" end="5503" title="J.B. Chapman" label="J.B. Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283307" start="6336" end="6354" title="Joseph G. Morrison" label="Joseph G. Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304424" start="6433" end="6440" title="Dakotas" label="Dakotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="6667" end="6679" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="6719" end="6727" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="6751" end="6758" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q733399" start="6910" end="6920" title="New American Standard Bible" label="NASB Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="6925" end="6928" title="King James Version" label="KJV"/>
<link wikidata="Q942835" start="6971" end="6988" title="Phineas F. Bresee" label="Phineas F. Bresee"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7021" end="7044" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287936" start="7078" end="7099" title="Joseph Pomeroy Widney" label="Joseph Pomeroy Widney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="7127" end="7160" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="8039" end="8053" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="8319" end="8328" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8575" end="8581" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8604" end="8609" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="8611" end="8620" title="Eswatini" label="Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="8622" end="8632" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="8638" end="8643" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="8686" end="8692" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8698" end="8703" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="8775" end="8779" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="8845" end="8850" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="8855" end="8864" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769138" start="9559" end="9576" title="Hiram F. Reynolds" label="Hiram F. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024678" start="9656" end="9690" title="Indigenous church mission theory" label="indigenous church mission theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975113" start="9703" end="9713" title="Henry Venn (Church Missionary Society)" label="Henry Venn"/>
<link wikidata="Q463587" start="9718" end="9770" title="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions" label="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377994" start="9781" end="9795" title="Rufus Anderson" label="Rufus Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="9916" end="9926" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="11536" end="11552" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q639174" start="11743" end="11751" title="Legalism (theology)" label="legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="11889" end="11909" title="Miami Beach, Florida" label="Miami Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q61698" start="12749" end="12766" title="Büsingen am Hochrhein" label="Büsingen, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="12840" end="12850" title="Racial integration" label="integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="13889" end="13903" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037958" start="14022" end="14033" title="Nina Gunter" label="Nina Gunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903102" start="14932" end="14955" title="Bible Missionary Church" label="Bible Missionary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110398" start="15273" end="15295" title="Christian views on divorce" label="divorce and remarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="15584" end="15594" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="15602" end="15620" title="Nondenominational Christianity" label="non-denominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194353" start="16292" end="16305" title="Carla Sunberg" label="Carla Sunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="16726" end="16735" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="16773" end="16790" title="holiness movement" label="holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="17394" end="17445" title="Trinitarianism" label="one eternal self-existent God manifest in a Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="17451" end="17459" title="divinity" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="17463" end="17468" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="17477" end="17488" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="17557" end="17566" title="Atonement in Christianity" label="atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268825" start="17568" end="17584" title="prevenient grace" label="prevenient grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="17654" end="17675" title="entire sanctification" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="17706" end="17728" title="Eucharist" label="the Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420463" start="17748" end="17762" title="divine healing" label="divine healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="17768" end="17790" title="second coming" label="return of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="17906" end="17924" title="Evangelism" label="Evangelical Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313970" start="17928" end="17938" title="Repentance in Christianity" label="repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248737" start="18246" end="18256" title="John Miley" label="John Miley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006194" start="18261" end="18278" title="William Burt Pope" label="William Burt Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337224" start="18367" end="18383" title="Edgar P. Ellyson" label="Edgar P. Ellyson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18435" end="18445" title="A.M. Hills" label="A.M. Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628449" start="18508" end="18522" title="H. Orton Wiley" label="H. Orton Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850938" start="18595" end="18616" title="Mildred Bangs Wynkoop" label="Mildred Bangs Wynkoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983278" start="18732" end="18749" title="Richard S. Taylor" label="Richard S. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628512" start="18895" end="18909" title="H. Ray Dunning" label="H. Ray Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106238" start="18973" end="18990" title="J. Kenneth Grider" label="J. Kenneth Grider"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980397" start="19123" end="19134" title="Bryan Stone" label="Bryan Stone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19136" end="19147" title="Rob Staples" label="Rob Staples"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19153" end="19168" title="Thomas A. Noble" label="Thomas A. Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q13446873" start="19409" end="19417" title="Arminian" label="Arminian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499862" start="19431" end="19441" title="free grace" label="free grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="19626" end="19637" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="20126" end="20138" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="20291" end="20312" title="entire sanctification" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="20391" end="20402" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311414" start="20750" end="20754" title="Love (religious views)" label="love"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="21046" end="21057" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="21083" end="21100" title="holiness movement" label="holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q653345" start="21161" end="21174" title="Justification (theology)" label="justification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="21178" end="21183" title="divine grace" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="21207" end="21219" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="21221" end="21235" title="sanctification" label="sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="21283" end="21304" title="entire sanctification" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="21376" end="21382" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="21603" end="21611" title="Sacred" label="holiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="21671" end="21683" title="Divine grace" label="Divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268825" start="21803" end="21819" title="Prevenient Grace" label="Prevenient Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q653345" start="21821" end="21837" title="Justification (theology)" label="Justifying Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="21843" end="21860" title="Sanctification" label="Sanctifying Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268825" start="21863" end="21879" title="Prevenient grace" label="Prevenient grace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22410" end="22419" title="Salvation#Arminianism" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q653345" start="22432" end="22448" title="Justification (theology)" label="Justifying Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="22601" end="22604" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="22740" end="22752" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="22926" end="22936" title="Conversion to Christianity" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="23015" end="23025" title="Born again Christianity" label="born again"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="23083" end="23092" title="Born again (Christianity)" label="New Birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q434651" start="23185" end="23195" title="altar call" label="altar call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="23274" end="23291" title="Sanctification" label="Sanctifying Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="23364" end="23384" title="Christian Perfection" label="Christian Perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="23611" end="23628" title="Methodism" label="Wesleyan theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="23736" end="23744" title="Sacred" label="holiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738804" start="24150" end="24166" title="eternal security" label="eternal security"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350780" start="24183" end="24208" title="Conditional preservation of the saints" label="salvation can be rejected"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628449" start="25101" end="25115" title="H. Orton Wiley" label="H. Orton Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="25193" end="25212" title="theory of evolution" label="theory of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q498382" start="25294" end="25312" title="theistic evolution" label="theistic evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372334" start="25325" end="25338" title="Karl Giberson" label="Karl Giberson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224567" start="25340" end="25354" title="Darrel R. Falk" label="Darrel R. Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325818" start="25360" end="25378" title="Richard G. Colling" label="Richard G. Colling"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="25580" end="25603" title="teetotalism" label="abstinence from alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="25640" end="25649" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="25702" end="25713" title="Prohibition" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q960252" start="26648" end="26662" title="Congregational polity" label="congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285545" start="26756" end="26763" title="Christian liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424911" start="27042" end="27050" title="Offertory" label="offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="27072" end="27078" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q434651" start="27109" end="27119" title="altar call" label="altar call"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="28087" end="28093" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="28225" end="28233" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907505" start="28253" end="28269" title="revival meetings" label="revival meetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="28416" end="28426" title="Evangelism" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729207" start="28582" end="28590" title="Religious ministry (Christian)" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="28594" end="28604" title="evangelism" label="evangelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029878" start="28653" end="28665" title="camp meeting" label="camp meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="29170" end="29180" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="29192" end="29199" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="29231" end="29240" title="eucharist" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532651" start="29371" end="29394" title="believer&amp;#x27;s baptism" label="believer&amp;#x27;s baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="29399" end="29413" title="infant baptism" label="infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="30099" end="30108" title="episcopal polity" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="30113" end="30127" title="congregational" label="congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="30259" end="30265" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="31246" end="31262" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q194294" start="31620" end="31629" title="bioethics" label="bioethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532223" start="31742" end="31764" title="General Superintendent (Church of the Nazarene)" label="General Superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037958" start="32149" end="32163" title="Nina G. Gunter" label="Nina G. Gunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194353" start="32185" end="32198" title="Carla Sunberg" label="Carla Sunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q962529" start="32353" end="32376" title="San Jerónimo, Baja Verapaz" label="San Jerónimo, Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="32859" end="32865" title="polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373414" start="33032" end="33047" title="Roy T. Williams" label="Roy T. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q942835" start="33119" end="33136" title="Phineas F. Bresee" label="Phineas F. Bresee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488982" start="33141" end="33158" title="William C. Wilson (minister)" label="William C. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769138" start="33647" end="33664" title="Hiram F. Reynolds" label="Hiram F. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638480" start="36416" end="36428" title="Church (congregation)" label="local church"/>
<link wikidata="Q590713" start="37338" end="37354" title="Grove City, Ohio" label="Grove City, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q593022" start="37394" end="37408" title="Olathe, Kansas" label="Olathe, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="38892" end="38899" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="40101" end="40111" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="42493" end="42503" title="Ecumenism" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="42579" end="42592" title="Religious denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109730" start="42597" end="42627" title="Christian Holiness Partnership" label="Christian Holiness Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003768" start="42630" end="42654" title="Global Wesleyan Alliance" label="Global Wesleyan Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091996" start="42657" end="42693" title="National Association of Evangelicals" label="National Association of Evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415671" start="42754" end="42797" title="Evangelical Fellowship of Missions Agencies" label="Evangelical Fellowship of Missions Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415667" start="42801" end="42849" title="Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability" label="Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="43036" end="43057" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q269308" start="43244" end="43269" title="Nazarene Publishing House" label="Nazarene Publishing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q269308" start="43294" end="43316" title="Nazarene Publishing House" label="The Foundry Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43514" end="43542" title="Nazarene Youth International" label="Nazarene Youth International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43550" end="43591" title="Sunday School Ministries (Nazarene)" label="Sunday School and Discipleship Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43593" end="43624" title="Nazarene Missions International" label="Nazarene Missions International"/>
<link wikidata="Q269308" start="43636" end="43661" title="Nazarene Publishing House" label="Nazarene Publishing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="43807" end="43817" title="seminaries" label="seminaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q576603" start="43836" end="43841" title="Bible college" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="43842" end="43862" title="theological colleges" label="theological colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="44953" end="44973" title="liberal arts college" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046626" start="45047" end="45073" title="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement" label="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="45095" end="45116" title="liberal arts colleges" label="liberal arts colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741870" start="45405" end="45423" title="Ambrose University" label="Ambrose University"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="45427" end="45443" title="Calgary, Alberta" label="Calgary, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046576" start="45473" end="45497" title="Eastern Nazarene College" label="Eastern Nazarene College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49143" start="45501" end="45522" title="Quincy, Massachusetts" label="Quincy, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840874" start="45554" end="45584" title="MidAmerica Nazarene University" label="MidAmerica Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q593022" start="45588" end="45602" title="Olathe, Kansas" label="Olathe, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924393" start="45637" end="45669" title="Mount Vernon Nazarene University" label="Mount Vernon Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q998575" start="45673" end="45691" title="Mount Vernon, Ohio" label="Mount Vernon, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060132" start="45723" end="45752" title="Northwest Nazarene University" label="Northwest Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q622633" start="45756" end="45768" title="Nampa, Idaho" label="Nampa, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088000" start="45798" end="45824" title="Olivet Nazarene University" label="Olivet Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110162" start="45828" end="45849" title="Bourbonnais, Illinois" label="Bourbonnais, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208069" start="45881" end="45911" title="Point Loma Nazarene University" label="Point Loma Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="45915" end="45936" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570171" start="45972" end="46000" title="Southern Nazarene University" label="Southern Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924825" start="46004" end="46021" title="Bethany, Oklahoma" label="Bethany, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838935" start="46053" end="46081" title="Trevecca Nazarene University" label="Trevecca Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="46085" end="46094" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="46301" end="46320" title="Manchester, England" label="Manchester, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689577" start="46369" end="46395" title="Africa Nazarene University" label="Africa Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882702" start="46397" end="46410" title="Ongata Rongai" label="Ongata Rongai"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="46412" end="46417" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806257" start="46420" end="46462" title="Asia-Pacific Nazarene Theological Seminary" label="Asia-Pacific Nazarene Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q373204" start="46464" end="46477" title="Taytay, Rizal" label="Taytay, Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="46479" end="46490" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q171617" start="46549" end="46565" title="Campinas, Brazil" label="Campinas, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431679" start="46568" end="46593" title="Korea Nazarene University" label="Korea Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42146" start="46595" end="46602" title="Cheonan" label="Cheonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983278" start="46618" end="46646" title="Nazarene Theological College (Australia)" label="Nazarene Theological College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="46649" end="46668" title="Brisbane, Australia" label="Brisbane, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261260" start="46671" end="46699" title="Nazarene Theological College (England)" label="Nazarene Theological College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="46702" end="46712" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983281" start="46724" end="46753" title="Nazarene Theological Seminary" label="Nazarene Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="46755" end="46776" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="46828" end="46848" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José, Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q516473" start="46883" end="46893" title="Henry Luce" label="Henry Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="47898" end="47915" title="Bangkok, Thailand" label="Bangkok, Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648243" start="48912" end="48931" title="Susan Norris Fitkin" label="Susan Norris Fitkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669350" start="48951" end="48963" title="Abram Fitkin" label="Abram Fitkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="49445" end="49461" title="Great Commission" label="Great Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="49595" end="49605" title="evangelism" label="evangelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="49946" end="49958" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="50573" end="50599" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188145" start="51418" end="51436" title="Jesus Film Project" label="Jesus Film Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q575248" start="51473" end="51483" title="Jesus (1979 film)" label="Jesus film"/>
<link wikidata="Q269308" start="53268" end="53293" title="Nazarene Publishing House" label="Nazarene Publishing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="53775" end="53787" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="53789" end="53794" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="53800" end="53811" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845577" start="54049" end="54062" title="Troost Avenue" label="Troost Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="54064" end="54085" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54182" end="54200" title="Herald of Holiness" label="Herald of Holiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888640" start="54240" end="54252" title="B. F. Haynes" label="B. F. Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54583" end="54597" title="Holiness Today" label="Holiness Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="55442" end="55463" title="Indianapolis, Indiana" label="Indianapolis, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641310" start="55507" end="55522" title="Haldor Lillenas" label="Haldor Lillenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146891" start="55766" end="55780" title="William Bantom" label="William Bantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="55807" end="55816" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="55889" end="55907" title="Historical fiction" label="Historical fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296348" start="55915" end="55934" title="Donna Fletcher Crow" label="Donna Fletcher Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060132" start="55985" end="56014" title="Northwest Nazarene University" label="Northwest Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q955266" start="56087" end="56099" title="James Dobson" label="James Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435085" start="56118" end="56137" title="Focus on the Family" label="Focus on the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208069" start="56159" end="56175" title="Point Loma Nazarene University" label="Pasadena College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="56234" end="56260" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="56271" end="56276" title="USAID" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391867" start="56302" end="56314" title="Kent R. Hill" label="Kent R. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060132" start="56330" end="56359" title="Northwest Nazarene University" label="Northwest Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046576" start="56385" end="56409" title="Eastern Nazarene College" label="Eastern Nazarene College"/>
<link wikidata="Q909430" start="56446" end="56456" title="Dove Award" label="Dove Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191271" start="56479" end="56492" title="Crystal Lewis" label="Crystal Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961491" start="56515" end="56540" title="Pablo Salazar Mendiguchía" label="Pablo Salazar Mendiguchía"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589647" start="56549" end="56568" title="governor of Chiapas" label="governor of Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q264113" start="56592" end="56615" title="Senate (Mexico)" label="senator of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23616707" start="56674" end="56690" title="Esther R. Sanger" label="Esther R. Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q49143" start="56774" end="56795" title="Quincy, Massachusetts" label="Quincy, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305817" start="56836" end="56858" title="Hingham, Massachusetts" label="Hingham, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965350" start="56948" end="56960" title="Brian Souter" label="Brian Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383161" start="56990" end="57014" title="Keep the Clause campaign" label="Keep the Clause campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q92597" start="57059" end="57069" title="Larry Wall" label="Larry Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="57086" end="57090" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q189471" start="57236" end="57257" title="Cupertino, California" label="Cupertino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q456213" start="57300" end="57316" title="Vince Snowbarger" label="Vince Snowbarger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291562" start="57340" end="57356" title="Randall J. Stephens" label="Randall Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694538" start="57359" end="57377" title="Aguiar Valvassoura" label="Aguiar Valvassoura"/>
<link wikidata="Q737491" start="57513" end="57526" title="Edwin Edwards" label="Edwin Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669350" start="57653" end="57665" title="Abram Fitkin" label="Abram Fitkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="57788" end="57805" title="nuclear scientist" label="nuclear scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570243" start="57806" end="57820" title="Robert W. Faid" label="Robert W. Faid"/>
<link wikidata="Q574192" start="57871" end="57897" title="Greenville, South Carolina" label="Greenville, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618824" start="57919" end="57935" title="Caril Ann Fugate" label="Caril Ann Fugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q920200" start="57973" end="57993" title="Charles Starkweather" label="Charles Starkweather"/>
<link wikidata="Q656815" start="58130" end="58144" title="York, Nebraska" label="York, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022163" start="58277" end="58292" title="Southern Gospel" label="Southern Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q795012" start="58315" end="58327" title="Bill Gaither" label="Bill Gaither"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="58344" end="58357" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q909430" start="58365" end="58376" title="Dove Awards" label="Dove Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587398" start="58405" end="58430" title="Gospel Music Hall of Fame" label="Gospel Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q521651" start="58524" end="58543" title="Alexandria, Indiana" label="Alexandria, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q485823" start="58581" end="58594" title="Church of God (Anderson)" label="Church of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q491461" start="58598" end="58615" title="Anderson, Indiana" label="Anderson, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="58619" end="58632" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="58647" end="58656" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q919448" start="58756" end="58765" title="Gary Hart" label="Gary Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="58797" end="58804" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="58850" end="58880" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570171" start="59055" end="59083" title="Southern Nazarene University" label="Southern Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853343" start="59087" end="59102" title="Tunney Hunsaker" label="Tunney Hunsaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131289" start="59126" end="59153" title="Fayetteville, West Virginia" label="Fayetteville, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="59177" end="59189" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q285202" start="59275" end="59298" title="Oak Hill, West Virginia" label="Oak Hill, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="59327" end="59338" title="Wyclef Jean" label="Wyclef Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="59488" end="59506" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046576" start="59529" end="59553" title="Eastern Nazarene College" label="Eastern Nazarene College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274031" start="59583" end="59596" title="R. T. Kendall" label="R. T. Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130561" start="59614" end="59632" title="Westminster Chapel" label="Westminster Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q725562" start="59694" end="59711" title="Ashland, Kentucky" label="Ashland, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373414" start="59746" end="59761" title="Roy T. Williams" label="Roy T. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838935" start="59778" end="59806" title="Trevecca Nazarene University" label="Trevecca Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="59866" end="59877" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984623" start="59956" end="59974" title="doctor of divinity" label="doctor of divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q724181" start="60033" end="60047" title="Thomas Kinkade" label="Thomas Kinkade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587398" start="60104" end="60123" title="Gospel Hall of Fame" label="Gospel Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641310" start="60133" end="60148" title="Haldor Lillenas" label="Haldor Lillenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="60332" end="60344" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q345431" start="60385" end="60400" title="John Mellencamp" label="John Mellencamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998315" start="60445" end="60461" title="Seymour, Indiana" label="Seymour, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940979" start="60471" end="60481" title="Ron Raines" label="Ron Raines"/>
<link wikidata="Q263696" start="60583" end="60598" title="Debbie Reynolds" label="Debbie Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158492" start="60704" end="60714" title="Robert Pierce" label="Bob Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594001" start="60791" end="60803" title="World Vision" label="World Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470648" start="60817" end="60839" title="Samaritan&amp;#x27;s Purse" label="Samaritan&amp;#x27;s Purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960301" start="60915" end="60932" title="Charles Templeton" label="Charles Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q328071" start="60951" end="60967" title="Youth for Christ" label="Youth for Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828203" start="61037" end="61055" title="Avenue Road Church" label="Avenue Road Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="61075" end="61091" title="Toronto, Ontario" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="61111" end="61119" title="agnostic" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022163" start="61122" end="61137" title="Southern Gospel" label="Southern Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132385" start="61166" end="61185" title="James David Vaughan" label="James David Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569952" start="61307" end="61341" title="Southern Gospel Music Association" label="Southern Gospel Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472594" start="61400" end="61423" title="Lawrenceburg, Tennessee" label="Lawrenceburg, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="61663" end="61674" title="Kobe, Japan" label="Kobe, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123849061" start="61701" end="61719" title="Dorothy Davis Cook" label="Dorothy Davis Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983274" start="61741" end="61760" title="Nazarene Missionaries" label="Nazarene missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783855" start="61991" end="62006" title="Kacey Musgraves" label="Kacey Musgraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q19954673" start="62062" end="62078" title="Pageant Material" label="Pageant Material"/>
<link wikidata="Q32522" start="62216" end="62232" title="Jennifer Aniston" label="Jennifer Aniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q668357" start="62259" end="62272" title="The Good Girl" label="The Good Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567284" start="62359" end="62397" title="List of Church of the Nazarene schools" label="List of Church of the Nazarene schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q460290" start="62400" end="62442" title="List of Church of the Nazarene conventions" label="List of Church of the Nazarene conventions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62445" end="62461" title="List of hymnals#Church of the Nazarene" label="Nazarene Hymnals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983274" start="62464" end="62485" title="Nazarene Missionaries" label="Nazarene Missionaries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261727" wikidata="Q885774" url="?curid=261727" title="Blue Mitchell">
<text>Richard Allen&quot;Blue&quot;Mitchell (March 13, 1930 – May 21, 1979) was an American trumpeter and composer who worked in jazz, rhythm and blues, soul, rock and funk. He recorded albums as leader and sideman for Riverside, Mainstream Records, and Blue Note.

== Early life ==
Mitchell was born and raised in Miami, Florida, United States. He began playing trumpet in high school, with the nickname &quot;Blue&quot;.

== Career ==
After high school, he played in the rhythm &amp; blues ensembles of Paul Williams, Earl Bostic, and Chuck Willis. He returned to Miami and was heard by Cannonball Adderley, with whom he recorded for Riverside Records in New York in 1958.

Mitchell then joined the Horace Silver Quintet, playing with tenor saxophonist Junior Cook, bassist Gene Taylor, and drummer Roy Brooks. Mitchell stayed with Silver&#x27;s group until the band&#x27;s break-up in 1964, after which Mitchell formed a group with members from the Silver quintet, substituting the young pianist Chick Corea for Silver and replacing Brooks, who had fallen ill, with drummer Al Foster. This group produced a number of records for Blue Note. It disbanded in 1969, after which Mitchell joined and toured with Ray Charles until 1971.

From 1971 to 1973 Mitchell performed with John Mayall, appearing on &quot;Jazz Blues Fusion&quot; and subsequent albums. From the mid-1970s, he recorded and worked as a session man in the genres noted previously, performed with the big band leaders Louie Bellson, Bill Holman, and Bill Berry, and was the principal soloist for Tony Bennett and Lena Horne. Other band leaders Mitchell recorded with are Lou Donaldson, Grant Green, Philly Joe Jones, Jackie McLean, Hank Mobley, Johnny Griffin, Al Cohn, Dexter Gordon, and Jimmy Smith.

== Death ==
Mitchell performed with the Harold Land quintet until he died from cancer on May 21, 1979, in Los Angeles, California, aged 49.

== Discography ==
=== As leader/co-leader ===
=== As sideman ===
==References==
==External links==
*Blue Mitchell site
*Blue Mitchell leader discography at jazzdiscography.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q885774" start="0" end="13" title="Blue Mitchell" label="Richard Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q885774" start="19" end="23" title="Blue Mitchell" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q885774" start="29" end="37" title="Blue Mitchell" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="86" end="95" title="trumpeter" label="trumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="100" end="108" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="123" end="127" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="129" end="145" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="147" end="151" title="soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="153" end="157" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="162" end="166" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975356" start="213" end="222" title="Riverside Records" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043631" start="224" end="242" title="Mainstream Records" label="Mainstream Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q885833" start="248" end="257" title="Blue Note Records" label="Blue Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="309" end="314" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="316" end="323" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063152" start="499" end="512" title="Paul Williams (saxophonist)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q557435" start="514" end="525" title="Earl Bostic" label="Earl Bostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q726440" start="531" end="543" title="Chuck Willis" label="Chuck Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110477" start="583" end="602" title="Cannonball Adderley" label="Cannonball Adderley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975356" start="630" end="647" title="Riverside Records" label="Riverside Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q365560" start="695" end="708" title="Horace Silver" label="Horace Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q352191" start="749" end="760" title="Junior Cook" label="Junior Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501449" start="770" end="781" title="Gene Taylor (bassist)" label="Gene Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q356908" start="795" end="805" title="Roy Brooks" label="Roy Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192465" start="993" end="1004" title="Chick Corea" label="Chick Corea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341043" start="1071" end="1080" title="Al Foster" label="Al Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q885833" start="1126" end="1135" title="Blue Note" label="Blue Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="1203" end="1214" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q316282" start="1270" end="1281" title="John Mayall" label="John Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q176511" start="1302" end="1319" title="Jazz Blues Fusion" label="Jazz Blues Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q252126" start="1477" end="1490" title="Louie Bellson" label="Louie Bellson"/>
<link wikidata="Q348471" start="1492" end="1503" title="Bill Holman (musician)" label="Bill Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q861938" start="1509" end="1519" title="Bill Berry (trumpeter)" label="Bill Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q296729" start="1555" end="1567" title="Tony Bennett" label="Tony Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="1572" end="1582" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q723821" start="1630" end="1643" title="Lou Donaldson" label="Lou Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q601427" start="1645" end="1656" title="Grant Green" label="Grant Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q709873" start="1658" end="1674" title="Philly Joe Jones" label="Philly Joe Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q920490" start="1676" end="1689" title="Jackie McLean" label="Jackie McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q534842" start="1691" end="1702" title="Hank Mobley" label="Hank Mobley"/>
<link wikidata="Q708439" start="1704" end="1718" title="Johnny Griffin" label="Johnny Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382232" start="1720" end="1727" title="Al Cohn" label="Al Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q118116" start="1729" end="1742" title="Dexter Gordon" label="Dexter Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318948" start="1748" end="1759" title="Jimmy Smith (musician)" label="Jimmy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375630" start="1802" end="1813" title="Harold Land" label="Harold Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1868" end="1879" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261730" wikidata="Q1050725" url="?curid=261730" title="Holiness movement">
<text>The Holiness movement is a Christian movement that emerged chiefly within 19th-century Methodism, and to a lesser extent influenced other traditions such as Quakerism, Anabaptism, and Restorationism. Churches aligned with the holiness movement teach that the life of a born again Christian should be free of sin. The movement is historically distinguished by its emphasis on the doctrine of a second work of grace, which is called entire sanctification or Christian perfection. The word &quot;Holiness&quot; refers specifically to this belief in entire sanctification as an instantaneous, definite second work of grace, in which original sin is cleansed, the heart is made perfect in love, and the believer is empowered to serve God. For the Holiness movement, &quot;the term &#x27;perfection&#x27; signifies completeness of Christian character; its freedom from all sin, and possession of all the graces of the Spirit, complete in kind.&quot; A number of Christian denominations, parachurch organizations, and movements emphasize those Holiness beliefs as central doctrine.

In addition to the regular holding of church services in the morning and evening of the Lord&#x27;s Day, and usually having a midweek Wednesday church service, within parts of denominations or entire denominations aligned with the holiness movement, camp meetings and tent revivals are organized throughout the year—especially in the summertime. These are aimed at preaching the New Birth (first work of grace) and entire sanctification (second work of grace), along with calling backsliders to repentance. Churches in the holiness tradition emphasize a sober lifestyle, especially with regard to clean speech, modesty, and teetotalism.

==Beliefs==
=== Entire sanctification ===

The Holiness movement believes that the &quot;second work of grace&quot; (or &quot;second blessing&quot;) refers to a personal experience subsequent to regeneration, in which the believer is cleansed from original sin. It was actually upon this doctrine, the attainment of complete freedom from sin, that the movement was built. 

&quot;In this line of thinking, a person is first saved, at which point he is justified and born again. Following this, he experiences a period of growth...This ultimately culminates in a second work of grace whereby the Holy Spirit cleanses his heart of original sin, eradicating all inbred sin. The Holy Spirit then imparts His indwelling presence, empowering the believer...This is the baptism of the Holy Spirit. It happens instantaneously as the believer presents himself or herself as a living sacrifice to God with an attitude of full consecration,&quot; and faith. 

John Wesley, who articulated the doctrine, taught that those who had been entirely sanctified would be perfect in love, engaging in works of piety and works of mercy—both of which are characteristic of a believer&#x27;s growing in grace.

The First General Holiness Assembly&#x27;s 1885 Declaration of Principles, which explained:&quot;Entire Sanctification... is that great work wrought subsequent to regeneration, by the Holy Ghost, upon the sole condition of faith...such faith being preceded by an act of solemn and complete consecration. This work has these distinct elements:

# The entire extinction of the carnal mind, the total eradication of the birth principle of sin
# The communication of perfect love to the soul...
# The abiding indwelling of the Holy Ghost.&quot;

The Church of the Nazarene, a large Wesleyan-Holiness denomination in the Methodist tradition, explains that:&quot;We believe that entire sanctification is that act of God, subsequent to regeneration, by which believers are made free from original sin, or depravity, and brought into a state of entire devotement to God, and the holy obedience of love made perfect.

It is wrought by the baptism with or infilling of the Holy Spirit, and comprehends in one experience the cleansing of the heart from sin and the abiding, indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit, empowering the believer for life and service.

Entire sanctification is provided by the blood of Jesus, is wrought instantaneously by grace through faith, preceded by entire consecration; and to this work and state of grace the Holy Spirit bears witness.

This experience is also known by various terms representing its different phases, such as “Christian perfection,” “perfect love,” “heart purity,” “the baptism with or infilling of the Holy Spirit,” “the fullness of the blessing,” and “Christian holiness.”According to Stephen S. White, a noted Holiness scholar from the mid-1900s, there are &quot;five cardinal elements&quot; in the doctrine of entire sanctification:

# &quot;Entire Sanctification is a Second work of Grace
# Entire Sanctification is received Instantaneously
# Entire Sanctification -- Frees from Sin
# Entire Sanctification -- Is Attainable in This Life
# Entire Sanctification -- and the Baptism with the Holy Spirit are Simultaneous&quot;

This experience of entire sanctification or Perfection is generally identified with the filling of or the baptism of the Holy Ghost, the term used by Methodism&#x27;s systematic theologian John William Fletcher. As such, entire sanctification is also known in the Methodist tradition as Baptism with the Holy Spirit. Fletcher emphasized that the experience of entire sanctification, through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, cleanses the believer of original sin and empowers the believer for service to God. John Swanel Inskip, a minister in the Methodist Episcopal Church, explained, &quot;There is, however, one doctrine, in a great measure peculiar to Methodism. It is that, in which we teach the possibility of man attaining a state of grace in the present life, in which he will be made free from sin.&quot; 

Reflecting this inward holiness, denominations alinged with the holiness movement have emphasized modesty and sobriety, though the terminology that is used to define this varies with the tradition, e.g. Methodist versus Quaker versus Anabaptist. Holiness Methodists, who make up the bulk of the Holiness Movement, have emphasized the Wesleyan-Arminian doctrine outward holiness, which includes practices such as the wearing of modest clothing and not using profanity in speech. Holiness Quakers have emphasized the Friends teaching on testimony of simplicity. Holiness Anabaptists, such as Holiness River Brethren and Holiness Mennonites, have upheld their belief in nonconformity to the world. 

=== Definition of sin ===
Holiness adherents also hold to a distinctive definition of (actual) sin. They believe that &quot;only conscious sins are truly sins.&quot; Historian Charles Jones explained, &quot;Believing that sin was conscious disobedience to a known law of God, holiness believers were convinced that the true Christian, having repented of every known act of sin, did not and could not willfully sin again and remain a Christian.&quot; Historian Benjamin Pettit described the approach of the Wesleyan-Holiness movement as: 1.              &quot;The person who sins is not a Christian but a sinner.

2.              When a person is saved, he is out of the sin business (may but must not sin)

3.              The sinner must repent and be restored to his lost relationship with God.

4.              To sin results in spiritual death.&quot;In his study of this question, Caleb Black concluded that &quot;the consensus understanding of sin in the Holiness tradition is that sin is an avoidable, voluntary, morally responsible act that those born of God do not commit.&quot; Put simply, Holiness adherents adhere to the definition of sin, as explained by Wesley himself. 
&quot;Nothing is sin, strictly speaking, but a voluntary transgression of a known law of God. Therefore, every voluntary breach of the law of love is sin; and nothing else, if we speak properly. To strain the matter farther is only to make way for Calvinism.&quot;
Dr. Timothy Cooley explained, &quot;If this definition is compromised, victorious Christian living becomes meaningless, and entire sanctification an impossibility.&quot; &quot;The definition and consequences of sin are a key theological distinctive of the Holiness Movement as it underlies their entire theological system. To differ on the conception of sin is to destroy the foundation of holiness theology.&quot;

With this definition of sin, Holiness adherents believe while Christians may fall into sin, they also have the God-given power to avoid committing sin, and in this sense be free from sin. Furthermore, not only does God enable this obedience he also requires it. One of the founders of the movement, J. A. Wood, explains &quot;The lowest type of a Christian sinneth not, and is not condemned. The minimum of salvation is salvation from sinning. The maximum is salvation from pollution—the inclination to sin.&quot; Another founder, C. J. Fowler explains that &quot;We teach that regeneration does not allow the committing of conscious sin.&quot; 

Harry Jessop warns &quot;It should ever be born in mind that believers cannot commit sin without forfeiting justification.&quot; The founder of the Church of God (Anderson, Indiana), D. S. Warner, explains &quot;Holiness writers and teachers, as far as my knowledge extends, uniformly hold up a sinless life, as the true test and Bible standard of regeneration.&quot; This doctrine follows in the footsteps of Wesley who wrote “If a believer wilfully sins, he casts away his faith. Neither is it possible he should have justifying faith again, without previously repenting.&quot;

=== Lifestyle ===
Denominations aligned with the Holiness movement believe the moral aspects of the law of God are pertinent for today, and adherents obey teachings regarding modesty, clean speech and sober living. Consequently, members of the Holiness movement readily apply Scriptural lifestyle commands to their lives, and view them as generally binding today, and apply these principles in numerous different ways. &quot;Holiness churches have been distinguished from other churches by their more careful lifestyle. Many churches and denominations in the Holiness movement prohibit smoking, drinking, dancing, listening to inappropriate worldly music, or wearing makeup or flashy clothes.&quot;

===Diversity in belief and practice===
Christian denominations aligned with the holiness movement all share a belief in the doctrine of Christian perfection (entire sanctification). Apart from this, denominations identified with the holiness movement differ on several issues, given that there are Methodist, Quaker, Anabaptist and Restorationist churches that comprise the holiness movement and these denominations have unique doctrines and theologies. Methodist denominations that are a part of the holiness movement, such as the Free Methodist Church or Missionary Methodist Church, affirm the celebration of the sacraments, chiefly Holy Baptism and Holy Communion. Denominations of the Quaker tradition, such as the Central Yearly Meeting of Friends, are entirely non-sacramental. 

Anabaptist denominations aligned with the holiness movement, such as the Apostolic Christian Church, teach the observance of ordinances, such as communion, headcovering and footwashing. While the Methodist denominations of the holiness movement hold to church membership, such as the Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church, the concept of membership rolls is rejected in holiness denominations of a Restorationist background, such as the Church of God (Anderson, Indiana).

==History==
=== Roots ===
Though it became a multi-denominational movement over time and was furthered by the Second Great Awakening which energized churches of all stripes, the bulk of Holiness movement has its roots in John Wesley and Methodism.

===Early Methodism===
The Holiness movement traces their roots back to John Wesley, Charles Wesley, John Fletcher, and the Methodists of the 18th century. The Methodists of the 19th century continued the interest in Christian holiness that had been started by their founder, John Wesley in England. They continued to publish Wesley&#x27;s works and tracts, including his famous &quot;A Plain Account of Christian Perfection&quot;. From 1788 to 1808, the entire text of &quot;A Plain Account&quot; was placed in the &quot;Discipline&quot; manual of the Methodist Episcopal Church (U.S.), and numerous persons in early American Methodism professed the experience of entire sanctification, including Bishop Francis Asbury. The Methodists during this period placed a strong emphasis on holy living, and their concept of entire sanctification.

===Second Great Awakening===
By the 1840s, a new emphasis on Holiness and Christian perfection began within American Methodism, brought about in large part by the revivalism and camp meetings of the Second Great Awakening (1790–1840).

Two major Holiness leaders during this period were Methodist preacher Phoebe Palmer and her husband, Dr. Walter Palmer. In 1835, Palmer&#x27;s sister, Sarah A. Lankford, started holding Tuesday Meetings for the Promotion of Holiness in her New York City home. In 1837, Palmer experienced what she called entire sanctification and had become the leader of the Tuesday Meetings by 1839. At first only women attended these meetings, but eventually Methodist bishops and hundreds of clergy and laymen began to attend as well. At the same time, Methodist minister Timothy Merritt of Boston founded a journal called the &quot;Guide to Christian Perfection&quot;, later renamed &quot;The Guide to Holiness&quot;. This was the first American periodical dedicated exclusively to promoting the doctrine of Christian holiness. In 1865, the Palmers purchased &quot;The Guide&quot; which at its peak had a circulation of 30,000. In New York City, Palmer met with Amanda Smith, a preacher in the African Methodist Episcopal Church who testified that she became entirely sanctified in 1868 and then began to preach Christian holiness throughout the world.

Also representative was the revivalism of Rev. James Caughey, an American missionary sent by the Wesleyan Methodist Church to work in Ontario, Canada from the 1840s through 1864. He brought in the converts by the score, most notably in the revivals in Canada West 1851–53. His technique combined restrained emotionalism with a clear call for personal commitment, thus bridging the rural style of camp meetings and the expectations of more &quot;sophisticated&quot; Methodist congregations in the emerging cities. Phoebe Palmer&#x27;s ministry complemented Caughey&#x27;s revivals in Ontario circa 1857. Jarena Lee of the African Methodist Episcopal Church and Julia A. J. Foote of the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church aligned themselves with the Wesleyan-Holiness movement and preached the doctrine of entire sanctification throughout the pulpits of their connexions.

While many holiness proponents stayed in the mainline Methodist Churches, such as Henry Clay Morrison who became president of Asbury College and Theological Seminary, at least two major Holiness Methodist denominations broke away from mainline Methodism during this period. In 1843, Orange Scott organized the Wesleyan Methodist Connection (an antecedent of the Wesleyan Church, as well as the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection and the Bible Methodist Connection of Churches) at Utica, New York. The major reason for the foundation of the Wesleyan Methodist Church was their emphasis on the abolition of slavery. 

In 1860, B.T. Roberts and John Wesley Redfield founded the Free Methodist Church on the ideals of slavery abolition, egalitarianism, and second-blessing holiness. In 1900, the Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church was organized to minister to Native Americans, especially the Lumbee tribe. Advocacy for the poor remained a hallmark of these and other Methodist offshoots. Some of these offshoots would currently be more specifically identified as part of the Conservative holiness movement, a group that would represent the more conservative branch of the movement.

At the Tuesday Meetings, Methodists soon enjoyed fellowship with Christians of different denominations, including the Congregationalist Thomas Upham. Upham was the first man to attend the meetings, and his participation in them led him to study mystical experiences, looking to find precursors of Holiness teaching in the writings of persons like German Pietist Johann Arndt and the Roman Catholic mystic Madame Guyon.

Baptists who have embraced the second work of grace have founded their own denominations, such as the Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God. The Original Church of God and the Church of Christ (Holiness) U.S.A. were founded by Baptist ministers, including Charles W. Gray and Charles Price Jones, who embraced the doctrine of entire sanctification.

Other non-Methodists also contributed to the Holiness movement in the U.S. and in England. &quot;New School&quot; Calvinists such as Asa Mahan, the first president of Oberlin College, and Charles Grandison Finney, an evangelist associated with the college and later its second president, promoted the idea of Christian holiness and slavery abolition, which Wesleyan Methodists also supported. In 1836, Mahan experienced what he called a baptism with the Holy Spirit. Mahan believed that this experience had cleansed him from the desire and inclination to sin. Finney believed that this experience might provide a solution to a problem he observed during his evangelistic revivals. Some people claimed to experience conversion but then slipped back into their old ways of living. Finney believed that the filling with the Holy Spirit could help these converts to continue steadfast in their Christian life. This phase of the Holiness movement is often referred to as the Oberlin-Holiness revival.

Presbyterian William Boardman promoted the idea of Holiness through his evangelistic campaigns and through his book &quot;The Higher Christian Life&quot;, which was published in 1858, which was a zenith point in Holiness activity prior to a lull brought on by the American Civil War.

Many adherents of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers) stressed George Fox&#x27;s doctrine of Perfectionism (which is analogous to the Methodist doctrine of entire sanctification). These Holiness Quakers formed Yearly Meetings such as the Central Yearly Meeting of Friends. Around the same period, Hannah Whitall Smith, an English Quaker, experienced a profound personal conversion. Sometime in the 1860s, she found what she called the &quot;secret&quot; of the Christian life—devoting one&#x27;s life wholly to God and God&#x27;s simultaneous transformation of one&#x27;s soul. Her husband, Robert Pearsall Smith, had a similar experience at the camp meeting in 1867. The couple became figureheads in the now-famous Keswick Convention that gave rise to what is often called the Keswick-Holiness revival, which became distinct from the holiness movement.

Among Anabaptists, the Brethren in Christ Church (as well as the Calvary Holiness Church that later split from it) emerged in Lancaster County as a denomination of River Brethren who adopted Radical Pietistic teaching, which &quot;emphasized spiritual passion and a warm, personal relationship to Jesus Christ.&quot; They teach &quot;the necessity of a crisis-conversion experience&quot; as well as the existence of a second work of grace that &quot;results in the believer resulting in the ability to say no to sin&quot;. These Holiness Anabaptist denominations emphasize the wearing of a headcovering by women, plain dress, temperance, footwashing, and pacifism. Founded by Samuel Heinrich Fröhlich, the Apostolic Christian Church (Nazarene) is an Anabaptist denomination aligned with the holiness movement, thus being &quot;distinguished by its emphasis on entire sanctifiation&quot;. Mennonites who were impacted by Radical Pietism and the teaching of holiness founded the Missionary Church, a holiness church in the Anabaptist tradition.

General Baptists who embraced belief in the second work of grace established their own denominations, such as the Holiness Baptist Association (founded in 1894) and the Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God (formed in 1931).

===Post-Civil War===
Following the American Civil War, many Holiness proponents—most of them Methodists—became nostalgic for the heyday of camp meeting revivalism during the Second Great Awakening.

The first distinct &quot;Holiness camp meeting&quot; convened at Vineland, New Jersey in 1867 under the leadership of John Swanel Inskip, John A. Wood, Alfred Cookman, and other Methodist ministers. The gathering attracted as many as 10,000 people. At the close of the encampment, while the ministers were on their knees in prayer, they formed the National Camp Meeting Association for the Promotion of Holiness, and agreed to conduct a similar gathering the next year. This organization was commonly known as the National Holiness Association. Later, it became known as the Christian Holiness Association and subsequently the Christian Holiness Partnership.

The second National Camp Meeting was held at Manheim, Pennsylvania, and drew upwards of 25,000 persons from all over the nation. People called it a &quot;Pentecost.&quot; The service on Monday evening has almost become legendary for its spiritual power and influence. The third National Camp Meeting met at Round Lake, New York. This time the national press attended and write-ups appeared in numerous papers, including a large two-page pictorial in &quot;Harper&#x27;s Weekly&quot;. These meetings made instant religious celebrities out of many of the workers. &quot;By the 1880s holiness was the most powerful doctrinal movement in America and seemed to be carrying away all opposition both within the Methodist Church and was quickly spreading throughout many other denominations.&quot; This was not without objection. &quot;The leaders of the National Camp Meeting Association for the Promotion of Holiness generally opposed &#x27;come-outism,&#x27;...They urged believers in entire sanctification and Christian perfection to remain in their denominations and to work within them to promote holiness teaching and general spiritual vitality.&quot;

Though distinct from the mainstream Holiness movement, the fervor of the Keswick-Holiness revival in the 1870s swept Great Britain, where it was sometimes called the higher life movement after the title of William Boardman&#x27;s book &quot;The Higher Life&quot;. Higher life conferences were held at Broadlands and Oxford in 1874 and in Brighton and Keswick in 1875. The Keswick Convention soon became the British headquarters for this movement. The Faith Mission in Scotland was another consequence of the British Holiness movement. Another was a flow of influence from Britain back to the United States: In 1874, Albert Benjamin Simpson read Boardman&#x27;s &quot;Higher Christian Life&quot; and felt the need for such a life himself. Simpson went on to found the Christian and Missionary Alliance.

American Holiness associations began to form as an outgrowth of this new wave of camp meetings, such as the Western Holiness Association—first of the regional associations that prefigured &quot;come-outism&quot;—formed at Bloomington, Illinois. In 1877, several &quot;general holiness conventions&quot; met in Cincinnati and New York City.

In 1871, the American evangelist Dwight L. Moody had what he called an &quot;endowment with power&quot; as a result of some soul-searching and the prayers of two Free Methodist women who attended one of his meetings. He did not join the Wesleyan-Holiness movement but maintained a belief in progressive sanctification which his theological descendants still hold to.

While the great majority of Holiness proponents remained within the three major denominations of the mainline Methodist church, Holiness people from other theological traditions established standalone bodies. In 1881, D. S. Warner started the Evening Light Reformation, out of which was formed the Church of God (Anderson, Indiana), bringing Restorationism to the Holiness family. The Church of God Reformation Movement held that &quot;interracial worship was a sign of the true Church&quot;, with both whites and blacks ministering regularly in Church of God congregations, which invited people of all races to worship there. Those who were entirely sanctified testified that they were &quot;saved, sanctified, and prejudice removed.&quot; Though outsiders would sometimes attack Church of God services and camp meetings for their stand for racial equality, Church of God members were &quot;undeterred even by violence&quot; and &quot;maintained their strong interracial position as the core of their message of the unity of all believers&quot;. 

In the 1890s, Edwin Harvey and Marmaduke Mendenhall Farson started the Metropolitan Methodist Mission which became known as the Metropolitan Church Association; it taught communal living, holding that &quot;material possessions could be idols that might threaten one&#x27;s sanctification experience&quot; and that &quot;while people who do not have the Holy Spirit may give, those who do give all.&quot;

Palmer&#x27;s &quot;The Promise of the Father&quot;, published in 1859, which argued in favor of women in ministry, later influenced Catherine Booth, co-founder of the Salvation Army. The practice of ministry by women is common but not universal within the denominations of the Holiness movement. The founding of the Salvation Army in 1878 helped to rekindle Holiness sentiment in the cradle of Methodism—a fire kept lit by Primitive Methodists and other British descendants of Wesley and George Whitefield in prior decades.

Overseas missions emerged as a central focus of the Holiness people. As one example of this world evangelism thrust, Pilgrim Holiness Church founder Martin Wells Knapp, who also founded the &quot;Revivalist&quot; in 1883, the Pentecostal Revival League and Prayer League, the Central Holiness League 1893, the International Holiness Union and Prayer League, and God&#x27;s Bible School and College, saw much success in Korea, Japan, China, India, South Africa and South America. Methodist mission work in Japan led to the creation of the One Mission Society, one of the largest missionary-sending Holiness agencies in the world. Another such missionary organization, World Gospel Mission, originated out of the Missionary Department of the National Association for the Promotion of Holiness, continuing to receive support from Free Methodist, Global Methodist, Nazarene and Wesleyan congregations.

===Wesleyan realignment===

Though many Holiness preachers, camp meeting leaders, authors, and periodical editors were Methodists, this was not universally popular with Methodist leadership. Out of the four million Methodists in the United States during the 1890s, probably one-third to one-half were committed to the idea of entire sanctification as being brought about instantaneously. 

An opponent of the Holiness movement within Methodism named Daniel Whedon, a newsletter editor, claimed that &quot;they are not Wesleyan. We believe that a living Wesley would never admit them to the Methodist system.” Methodist proponents of the Holiness Movement fiercely resisted this accusation, and defended their doctrine from Wesley&#x27;s own words. One of the founders of the camp meeting association, J. A. Wood, defended his doctrine with an extensive survey of Wesley&#x27;s doctrine of Christian Perfection, entitled &quot;Christian Perfection as Taught by John Wesley&quot;. In this book, he spent several hundred pages exclusively quoting Wesley in defense of the Holiness Movement&#x27;s view of entire sanctification. 

The Holiness Movement was able to defend its doctrine so well that historian Melvin Dieter comments that &quot;The holiness movement was &#x27;so closely identified with traditional Methodism and Wesleyan doctrine and life that Methodist opponents of the revival were forced to distance themselves from Wesley and the standard authors of prevailing Methodist theology to re-solve the struggle with the holiness elements within the church.&#x27;&quot; Even still &quot;The leaders of the National Camp Meeting Association for the Promotion of Holiness generally opposed “come-outism,”...They urged believers in entire sanctification and Christian perfection to remain in their denominations and to work within them to promote holiness teaching and general spiritual vitality.&quot;

Southern Methodist minister B. F. Haynes wrote in his book, &quot;Tempest-Tossed on Methodist Seas&quot;, about his decision to leave the Methodist church and join what would become Church of the Nazarene. In it, he described the bitter divisions within the Methodist church over the Holiness movement, including verbal assaults made on Holiness movement proponents at the 1894 conference. This tension reached a head at the 1898 conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, when it passed rule 301:

Many Holiness evangelists and traveling ministers found it difficult to continue their ministry under this new rule—particularly in mainline Methodist charges and circuits that were unfriendly to the Holiness movement. In the years that followed, scores of new Holiness Methodist associations were formed—many of these &quot;come-outer&quot; associations and various parties alienated by certain parts of Mainline Methodism consolidated to form new denominations (e.g., the Free Methodist Church, the Wesleyan Methodist Church, the Salvation Army and the Church of the Nazarene).

Other Holiness Methodists (the &quot;stay-inners&quot;) remained within the mainline Methodist Churches, such as H. C. Morrison who became the first president of Asbury Theological Seminary, a prominent university of the holiness movement that remains influential among holiness adherents in Methodism.

Those who left mainline Methodist churches to form Holiness denominations during this time numbered no more than 100,000.

===Early 20th century===

Throughout the early 20th century, week-long revival campaigns with local churches, and revival elements brought into the worship service, carried on the tradition of camp meetings.

Pentecostalism and the Charismatic movement competed for the loyalties of Holiness advocates (see related section below), and a separate &quot;Holiness Pentecostal movement&quot; was born that taught three works of grace: (1) New Birth, (2) entire sanctification, (3) speaking in tongues. This new dichotomy gradually dwindled the population of the mainstream of the Holiness movement.

Some Holiness advocates found themselves at home with Fundamentalism and later the Evangelical movement. It was during this time (1939) that the Methodist Episcopal Church (North and South) and the Methodist Protestant Church merged to form The Methodist Church. This merger created a Mainline Christian organization which made remaining Holiness elements within U.S. Methodism less influential.

===Mid-to-late 20th century===

Cultural shifts following World War II resulted in a further division in the Holiness movement.

Not content with what they considered to be a lax attitude toward sin, several small groups left Holiness denominations of the Methodist tradition, and to a lesser extent Quaker, Anabaptist and Restorationist denominations, to form the conservative holiness movement. Staunch defenders of Biblical inerrancy, they stress modesty in dress and revivalistic worship practices. They identify with classical Fundamentalism more so than Evangelicalism. While some have pointed out that the broader holiness movement has declined in its original strong emphasis of the doctrine of entire sanctification, the conservative holiness movement still frequently promotes, preaches, and teaches this definition of holiness and entire sanctification, both at the scholarly level, and in pastoral teaching.

As the Holiness Conservatives were distancing themselves even further, Mainline Methodism was becoming larger with the merger between The Methodist Church and the Evangelical United Brethren Church, forming the United Methodist Church in 1968. A slow trickle of disaffected Holiness-friendly United Methodists left for Holiness movement denominations. Other Holiness advocates stayed in the United Methodist Church and are represented in the Good News Movement and Confessing Movement. These movements eventually led to the creation of the Global Methodist Church. Many United Methodist clergy, and now Global Methodist clergy, in the holiness tradition are educated at Asbury Theological Seminary.

Meanwhile, the bulk of the Wesleyan-Holiness churches began to developed a disdain for what they considered to be legalism, and gradually dropped prohibitions against dancing and theater patronage, while maintaining rules against gambling, as well as alcohol and tobacco use. Continued stances on the sanctity of marriage and abstinence matched similar convictions. In the 1970s, opposition to abortion became a recurring theme, and by the 1990s statements against practicing homosexuality were increasingly common. A devotion to charity work continued, particularly through the Salvation Army and other denominational and parachurch agencies.

===21st century===

Faced with a growing identity crisis and continually dwindling numbers, Wesleyan-Holiness Evangelicals have hosted several inter-denominational conferences and begun several initiatives to draw a clearer distinction between Wesleyan theology and that of other Evangelicals and to explore how to address contemporary social issues and appear winsome to a &quot;post-modern world.&quot; As one such example, in 2006 the Wesleyan Holiness Consortium published &quot;The Holiness Manifesto&quot; in conjunction with representatives from historic Holiness Methodist denominations, including the Free Methodist Church, United Methodist Church, Wesleyan Church, and the Church of the Nazarene.

The divide between classical Fundamentalism and Evangelicalism became greater following the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the U.S. by militant Muslim fundamentalists—as the term &quot;fundamental&quot; became associated with intolerance and aggressive attitudes. Several Evangelical Holiness groups and publications have denounced the term &quot;fundamentalist&quot; (preferring Evangelical) while others are reconciling to what extent the Fundamentalist movement of the 1920s remains a part of their history.

The Church of the Nazarene, the Wesleyan Church, and the Free Methodist Church were the largest Wesleyan-Evangelical Holiness bodies as of 2015. Talks of a merger were tabled, but new cooperatives such as the Global Wesleyan Alliance were formed as the result of inter-denominational meetings.

The Global Methodist Church consists of a large number of traditionalists, including those aligned with the Wesleyan-Holiness movement. The Book of Discipline of the Global Methodist Church thus teaches that &quot;a life of holiness or &#x27;entire sanctification&#x27; should be the goal of each individual’s journey with God.&quot; After its establishment, Asbury Theological Seminary, a flagship institution of the Wesleyan-Holiness movement, signed a church planting partnership with the Global Methodist Church. 

At this point the legacy of the Holiness Movement is fragmented between the more conservative branch (cf. conservative holiness movement), attempting to maintain and revive historic Holiness doctrine and practice, and others more willing to move beyond the doctrine and tradition of the past.

==Influences==

The main roots of the Holiness movement are as follows:

* The Reformation itself, with its emphasis on salvation by grace through faith alone.
* Puritanism in 17th-century England and its transplantation to America, with its emphasis on adherence to the Bible and the right to dissent from the established church.
* Pietistic Lutheranism in 17th-century Germany, led by Philipp Jakob Spener, as well as the Moravian Church, both of which emphasized the spiritual life of the individual, coupled with a responsibility to live an upright life.
* Quietism, as taught by the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), with its emphasis on the individual&#x27;s ability to experience God and understand God&#x27;s will for himself.
* The teaching of Christian perfection by the founder of Quaker Christianity, George Fox.
* The 1730s Evangelical Revival in England, led by Methodists John Wesley and his brother Charles Wesley, which introduced the concept of Entire Sanctification and certain teachings of Moravianism to England and eventually to the United States.
* The First Great Awakening in the 18th and early 19th centuries in the United States, propagated by George Whitefield, Jonathan Edwards, and others, with its emphasis on the initial conversion experience of Christians.
* The Second Great Awakening in the 19th century in the United States, propagated by Francis Asbury, Charles Finney, Lyman Beecher, Phoebe Palmer and others, which also emphasized the need for personal holiness, and is characterized by the rise of evangelistic revival meetings.

==Relation and reaction to Pentecostalism==
The traditional Holiness movement is distinct from the Holiness Pentecostal movement, the latter of which believes that the baptism in the Holy Spirit is a third work of grace of empowerment that involves supernatural manifestations such as speaking in unknown tongues. On the other hand, the holiness movement views entire sanctification and baptism with the Holy Spirit synonymously, being the second work of grace that empowers the believer to serve God with an undivided heart. 

Many of the early Pentecostals (known as Holiness Pentecostals) originated from the Holiness movement, and to this day Holiness Pentecostals maintain the belief in a first work of grace (New Birth) and second work of grace (entire sanctification). However, Holiness Pentecostals teach a third work of grace, being empowered with the manifestation of speaking in tongues. This concept of a third work of grace is rejected by the holiness movement. Several of the Holiness Pentecostal denominations include the word &quot;Holiness&quot; in their names, including the Calvary Holiness Association and Pentecostal Holiness Church, among others.

The terms &quot;pentecostal&quot; and &quot;apostolic&quot;, now used by adherents to Pentecostal and charismatic doctrine, were once widely used by Holiness churches in connection with the consecrated lifestyle they see described in the New Testament. Denomnations of the holiness movement, however, started to use these terms less as Holiness Pentecostal churches used them more, e.g. the Apostolic Faith Church. 

During the Azusa Street Revival, often considered the advent of Pentecostalism, the practice of speaking in tongues was strongly rejected by leaders of the traditional Holiness movement. Alma White, the leader of the Pillar of Fire Church, a Holiness Methodist denomination, wrote a book against the Pentecostal movement that was published in 1936. The work, entitled &quot;Demons and Tongues&quot;, represented early rejection of the tongues-speaking Pentecostal movement. White called speaking in tongues &quot;satanic gibberish&quot; and Pentecostal services &quot;the climax of demon worship&quot;. However, some contemporary Holiness churches (such as those networking with Aldersgate Renewal Ministries) now believe in the legitimacy of speaking in unknown tongues, but not as a sign of baptism with the Holy Spirit as Holiness Pentecostals teach. Others, such as the Pilgrim Holiness Church, maintain the historic rejection of speaking in tongues.

There are an estimated 78 million classical Pentecostals, and 510 million assorted Charismatics who share a heritage or common beliefs with the Pentecostal movement. If the Holiness movement and Pentecostal/Charismatic Christians were counted together, the total population would be around 600 million.

==Denominations and associations==

Several organizations and programs exist to promote the Holiness movement, plan missions, and promote ecumenism among churches:
* Christian Holiness Partnership
* Interchurch Holiness Convention
* Global Wesleyan Alliance
* Holiness Unto the Lord
* Worldwide Faith Missions
* One Mission Society
* Wesleyan Holiness Consortium
* World Gospel Mission
*Wesleyan Holiness Women Clergy

The Holiness movement led to the formation and further development of several Christian denominations and associations. Below are denominations that substantially adhere to Holiness movement doctrine. Though denominations of the Conservative Holiness movement affirm the same beliefs, they are more strict in practice and are not included here (see list). Holiness Pentecostal bodies are not included, as they affirm a third work of grace—a belief vehemently rejected by the Holiness movement:

===Methodist===
* Association of Independent Methodists
* Bible Missionary Church
* Christ&#x27;s Sanctified Holy Church
* Church of the Nazarene
* Church of Christ (Holiness) U.S.A.
* Church of Daniel&#x27;s Band 
* Church of God by Faith
* Congregational Methodist Church 
* Evangelical Church of North America 
* Evangelical Methodist Church 
* Free Methodist Church
* Global Methodist Church
* God&#x27;s Missionary Church 
* Immanuel General Mission (Japan)
* International Fellowship of Bible Churches
* Kentucky Mountain Holiness Association
* Metropolitan Church Association
* Missionary Methodist Church
* National Association of Wesleyan Evangelicals
* Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church
* Original Church of God
* Pillar of Fire International
* Primitive Methodist Church 
* The Salvation Army
* Southern Congregational Methodist Church
* United Methodist Church (certain districts and local churches, as well as universities)
* The Wesleyan Church

===Anabaptist===
* Apostolic Christian Church (Nazarene)
* Brethren in Christ Church
* Missionary Church (North-Central District and others) 

===Restorationist===
* Church of God (Anderson) 
* Churches of Christ in Christian Union

===Quaker===
* Evangelical Friends Church International-Eastern Region

===Baptist===
* Freewill Baptists (certain congregations) 
* Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God

==Colleges, Bible schools, and universities==

Many institutions of higher learning exist to promote Holiness ideas, as well as to provide a liberal arts education.

===Methodist===
*Ambrose University College
* Allegheny Wesleyan College
* Asbury University
* Azusa Pacific University
* Bible Missionary Institute
* Booth College
* Eastern Nazarene College
* Evangelical Wesleyan Bible Institute
* God&#x27;s Bible School and College
* Greenville University
* Hobe Sound Bible College
* Houghton University
* Central Christian College of Kansas
* Indiana Wesleyan University
* Kentucky Mountain Bible College
* Kingswood University
* John Wesley University
* MidAmerica Nazarene University
* Mount Vernon Nazarene University
* Nazarene Bible College
* Northwest Nazarene University
* Oklahoma Wesleyan University
* Olivet Nazarene University
* Penn View Bible Institute
* Pillar College
* Point Loma Nazarene University
* Roberts Wesleyan University
* Seattle Pacific University
* Southern Nazarene University
* Southern Wesleyan University
* Spring Arbor University
* Trevecca Nazarene University
* Wesley Seminary
* Wesley Biblical Seminary

===Quaker===
* Malone University
* Union Bible College and Academy

===Anabaptist===
* Messiah University
* Warner Pacific University

===Restorationist===
* Anderson University (Indiana)
* Kansas Christian College
* Mid-America Christian University
* Ohio Christian University
* Warner University

==See also==
* Arminianism
* Theosis (Eastern Christian theology)

== References ==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Primary sources===
* McDonald, William and John E. Searles. &quot;The Life of Rev. John S. Inskip, President of the National Association for the Promotion of Holiness&quot; (Chicago: The Christian Witness Co., 1885).
* Smith, Hannah Whitall. &quot;The Unselfishness of God, and How I Discovered It: A Spiritual Autobiography&quot; (New York: Fleming H. Resell Co., 1903).
*


===Further reading===

* Boardman, William E. &quot;The Higher Christian Life&quot;, (Boston: Henry Hoyt, 1858).
* Brown, Kenneth O. Holy Ground, Too, The Camp Meeting Family Tree. Hazleton: Holiness Archives, 1997.
* Brown, Kenneth O. Inskip, McDonald, Fowler: &quot;Wholly And Forever Thine.&quot; (Hazleton: Holiness Archives, 2000.)
* Cunningham, Floyd. T. &quot; Holiness Abroad: Nazarene Missions in Asia. &quot; Pietist and Wesleyan Studies, No. 16. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2003.
* Cunningham, Floyd T. ed. &quot;Our Watchword &amp; Song: The Centennial History of the Church of the Nazarene.&quot; By Floyd T. Cunningham; Stan Ingersol; Harold E. Raser; and David P. Whitelaw. Kansas City, MO: Beacon Hill Press of Kansas City, 2009.
* Dieter, Melvin E. &quot;The Holiness Revival of the Nineteenth Century&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 1996).
* Grider, J. Kenneth. &quot;A Wesleyan-Holiness Theology&quot;, 1994 ().
* Kostlevy, William C., ed. &quot;Historical Dictionary of the Holiness Movement&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2001).
* Kostlevy, William C. &quot;Holy Jumpers: Evangelicals and Radicals in Progressive Era America&quot; (2010) on the influential Metropolitan Church Association in 1890s Chicago excerpt and text search
* Mannoia, Kevin W. and Don Thorsen. &quot;The Holiness Manifesto&quot;, (William B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2008)
* Sanders, Cheryl J. &quot;Saints in Exile: The Holiness-Pentecostal Experience in African American Religion and Culture&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1999)
* Smith, Logan Pearsall, ed. &quot;Philadelphia Quaker: The Letters of Hannah Whitall Smith&quot; (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co., 1950).
* Smith, Timothy L. &quot;Called Unto Holiness: The Story of the Nazarenes—The Formative Years&quot;, (Nazarene Publishing House, 1962).
* Spencer, Carol. Holiness: The Soul Of Quakerism&quot; (Paternoster. Milton Keynes, 2007)
* Stephens, Randall J. The Fire Spreads: Holiness and Pentecostalism in the American South.&quot; (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).
* Thornton, Wallace Jr. &quot; The Conservative Holiness Movement: A Historical Appraisal, 2014 &quot;excerpt and text search
* Thornton, Wallace Jr. &quot;When the Fire Fell: Martin Wells Knapp&#x27;s Vision of Pentecostal and the Beginnings of God&#x27;s Bible School &quot; (Emeth Press, 2014).
* Thornton, Wallace Jr. &quot;From Glory to Glory: A Brief Summary of Holiness Beliefs and Practices&quot;
* Thornton, Wallace Jr. &quot;Radical Righteousness: Personal Ethics and the Development of the Holiness Movement &quot;
* White, Charles Edward. &quot;The Beauty of Holiness: Phoebe Palmer as Theologian, Revivalist, Feminist, and Humanitarian&quot; (Zondervan/Francis Asbury Press, 1986).
==External links==

* Holiness Movement (Conservative Holiness Movement directory)
* Camp Meeting directory - Holiness Movement
* Holiness camp meetings &amp; tent revival announcements
* CHB (Conservative Holiness Movement Internet Radio)
* Holiness history from the Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online
* &quot;The Cleansing Wave&quot;, article from &quot;Christianity Today&quot;
* &quot;Holiness Movement: Dead or Alive&quot;, article by Keith Drury &quot;(CRI Voice)&quot;
* Christian Cyclopedia article on Holiness Churches
* Five Cardinal Elements in the Doctrine of Entire Sanctification</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="4" end="21" title="Holiness movement" label="Holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="27" end="36" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="87" end="96" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="157" end="166" title="Quakers" label="Quakerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="168" end="178" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="184" end="198" title="Restorationism" label="Restorationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="269" end="279" title="born again" label="born again"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790386" start="308" end="311" title="Christian views on sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443774" start="393" end="413" title="second work of grace" label="second work of grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="456" end="476" title="Christian perfection" label="Christian perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443774" start="598" end="618" title="second work of grace" label="second work of grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356065" start="981" end="1005" title="parachurch organizations" label="parachurch organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q906066" start="1114" end="1128" title="church service" label="church service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150253" start="1164" end="1179" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029878" start="1326" end="1339" title="camp meetings" label="camp meetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700766" start="1344" end="1357" title="Tent revival" label="tent revivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="1455" end="1464" title="Born again" label="New Birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942953" start="1556" end="1567" title="Backsliding" label="backsliders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1687" end="1694" title="Modesty#Christianity" label="modesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="1700" end="1711" title="teetotalism" label="teetotalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443774" start="1803" end="1823" title="second work of grace" label="second work of grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="1909" end="1921" title="Salvation (Christianity)" label="regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="1962" end="1974" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="2309" end="2320" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035121" start="2795" end="2809" title="works of piety" label="works of piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060734" start="2814" end="2828" title="works of mercy" label="works of mercy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2883" end="2899" title="Sanctification in Christianity#Methodist" label="growing in grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="3448" end="3470" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Church of the Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="4991" end="5012" title="entire sanctification" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5016" end="5026" title="Christian perfection#Quaker teaching" label="Perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992713" start="5161" end="5182" title="John William Fletcher" label="John William Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q976547" start="5259" end="5287" title="Baptism with the Holy Spirit" label="Baptism with the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="5423" end="5435" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720244" start="5482" end="5500" title="John Swanel Inskip" label="John Swanel Inskip"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="5520" end="5546" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113083" start="6150" end="6166" title="outward holiness" label="outward holiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="6246" end="6255" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705896" start="6324" end="6347" title="testimony of simplicity" label="testimony of simplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q910556" start="6379" end="6402" title="Brethren in Christ Church" label="Holiness River Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878882" start="6407" end="6426" title="Mennonite Brethren in Christ" label="Holiness Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q25035950" start="6456" end="6482" title="nonconformity to the world" label="nonconformity to the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q485823" start="9146" end="9179" title="Church of God (Anderson, Indiana)" label="Church of God (Anderson, Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107880" start="9181" end="9193" title="Daniel Sidney Warner" label="D. S. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="10415" end="10435" title="Christian perfection" label="Christian perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="10811" end="10832" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410331" start="10836" end="10863" title="Missionary Methodist Church" label="Missionary Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="10895" end="10905" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="10915" end="10927" title="Holy Baptism" label="Holy Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="10932" end="10946" title="Holy Communion" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="10969" end="10975" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062048" start="10999" end="11032" title="Central Yearly Meeting of Friends" label="Central Yearly Meeting of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q269778" start="11139" end="11165" title="Apostolic Christian Church (Nazarene)" label="Apostolic Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100801" start="11191" end="11201" title="ordinance (Christianity)" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="11211" end="11220" title="eucharist" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885639" start="11222" end="11234" title="Christian headcovering" label="headcovering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351369" start="11239" end="11250" title="footwashing" label="footwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q107354943" start="11319" end="11336" title="church membership" label="church membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q107404532" start="11350" end="11406" title="Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church" label="Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q485823" start="11522" end="11555" title="Church of God (Anderson, Indiana)" label="Church of God (Anderson, Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="11668" end="11690" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="11779" end="11790" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="11795" end="11804" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="11878" end="11889" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q349070" start="11891" end="11905" title="Charles Wesley" label="Charles Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992713" start="11907" end="11920" title="John William Fletcher" label="John Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="12082" end="12093" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="12097" end="12104" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="12359" end="12385" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q145140" start="12504" end="12525" title="Francis Asbury" label="Bishop Francis Asbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="12531" end="12541" title="Methodism" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="12721" end="12741" title="Christian perfection" label="Christian perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029878" start="12825" end="12837" title="camp meeting" label="camp meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="12846" end="12868" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235038" start="12953" end="12966" title="Phoebe Palmer" label="Phoebe Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739765" start="13833" end="13845" title="Amanda Smith" label="Amanda Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="13865" end="13899" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="13930" end="13949" title="entire sanctification" label="entirely sanctified"/>
<link wikidata="Q18219674" start="14072" end="14085" title="James Caughey" label="James Caughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984059" start="14122" end="14147" title="Wesleyan Methodist Church (United States)" label="Wesleyan Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516561" start="14159" end="14174" title="History of Ontario" label="Ontario, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235038" start="14538" end="14558" title="Phoebe Palmer" label="Phoebe Palmer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160129" start="14628" end="14638" title="Jarena Lee" label="Jarena Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="14646" end="14680" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306155" start="14685" end="14702" title="Julia A. J. Foote" label="Julia A. J. Foote"/>
<link wikidata="Q384125" start="14710" end="14749" title="African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719513" start="14983" end="15002" title="Henry Clay Morrison" label="Henry Clay Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803762" start="15027" end="15066" title="Asbury University" label="Asbury College and Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984059" start="15211" end="15240" title="Wesleyan Methodist Church (United States)" label="Wesleyan Methodist Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560871" start="15263" end="15278" title="Wesleyan Church" label="Wesleyan Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984055" start="15295" end="15334" title="Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection" label="Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588282" start="15343" end="15381" title="Bible Methodist Connection of Churches" label="Bible Methodist Connection of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="15581" end="15602" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="15620" end="15637" title="slavery abolition" label="slavery abolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="15639" end="15653" title="egalitarianism" label="egalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q107404532" start="15698" end="15754" title="Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church" label="Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="15784" end="15800" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886046" start="15817" end="15823" title="Lumbee" label="Lumbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163105" start="16000" end="16030" title="Conservative holiness movement" label="Conservative holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="16226" end="16243" title="Congregational church" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788513" start="16244" end="16256" title="Thomas Upham" label="Thomas Upham"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="16353" end="16361" title="Mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q61359" start="16470" end="16482" title="Johann Arndt" label="Johann Arndt"/>
<link wikidata="Q235098" start="16513" end="16525" title="Jeanne Marie Bouvier de la Motte Guyon" label="Madame Guyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081008" start="16630" end="16694" title="Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God" label="Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102528" start="16700" end="16722" title="Original Church of God or Sanctified Church" label="Original Church of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116842" start="16731" end="16765" title="Church of Christ (Holiness) U.S.A." label="Church of Christ (Holiness) U.S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q5081759" start="16831" end="16850" title="Charles Price Jones" label="Charles Price Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803140" start="17038" end="17047" title="Asa Mahan" label="Asa Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="17072" end="17087" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q532375" start="17093" end="17117" title="Charles Grandison Finney" label="Charles Grandison Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="17122" end="17132" title="Evangelism" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984059" start="17262" end="17281" title="Wesleyan Methodist Church (United States)" label="Wesleyan Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q976547" start="17342" end="17370" title="baptism with the Holy Spirit" label="baptism with the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="17902" end="17914" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579947" start="17915" end="17931" title="William Boardman" label="William Boardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="18209" end="18237" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Religious Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q310439" start="18257" end="18267" title="George Fox" label="George Fox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18287" end="18300" title="Christian perfection#Quaker teaching" label="Perfectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482264" start="18404" end="18418" title="Yearly Meeting" label="Yearly Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062048" start="18432" end="18465" title="Central Yearly Meeting of Friends" label="Central Yearly Meeting of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q537714" start="18491" end="18511" title="Hannah Whitall Smith" label="Hannah Whitall Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747963" start="18785" end="18806" title="Robert Pearsall Smith" label="Robert Pearsall Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366024" start="18910" end="18928" title="Keswick Convention" label="Keswick Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q910556" start="19072" end="19097" title="Brethren in Christ Church" label="Brethren in Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024187" start="19114" end="19137" title="Calvary Holiness Church (Philadelphia)" label="Calvary Holiness Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q142369" start="19175" end="19191" title="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394042" start="19213" end="19227" title="River Brethren" label="River Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125785" start="19240" end="19257" title="Radical Pietistic" label="Radical Pietistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443774" start="19467" end="19487" title="second work of grace" label="second work of grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885639" start="19626" end="19660" title="Christian headcovering" label="wearing of a headcovering by women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200646" start="19662" end="19673" title="plain dress" label="plain dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="19675" end="19685" title="temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351369" start="19687" end="19698" title="footwashing" label="footwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="19704" end="19712" title="Christian pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q119680" start="19725" end="19749" title="Samuel Heinrich Fröhlich" label="Samuel Heinrich Fröhlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q269778" start="19755" end="19792" title="Apostolic Christian Church (Nazarene)" label="Apostolic Christian Church (Nazarene)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="19937" end="19946" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878882" start="20026" end="20043" title="Missionary Church" label="Missionary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531727" start="20093" end="20109" title="General Baptists" label="General Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004785" start="20207" end="20235" title="Holiness Baptist Association" label="Holiness Baptist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081008" start="20262" end="20326" title="Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God" label="Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="20381" end="20399" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029878" start="20579" end="20591" title="camp meeting" label="camp meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q153881" start="20610" end="20630" title="Vineland, New Jersey" label="Vineland, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720244" start="20663" end="20681" title="John Swanel Inskip" label="John Swanel Inskip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109730" start="21172" end="21202" title="Christian Holiness Partnership" label="Christian Holiness Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186830" start="21250" end="21271" title="Manheim, Pennsylvania" label="Manheim, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452931" start="21512" end="21532" title="Round Lake, New York" label="Round Lake, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127693" start="21661" end="21681" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758212" start="22523" end="22543" title="Higher Life movement" label="higher life movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q922620" start="22658" end="22668" title="Broadlands" label="Broadlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="22673" end="22679" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="22695" end="22703" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025076" start="22708" end="22715" title="Keswick, Cumbria" label="Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895878" start="22973" end="22996" title="A. B. Simpson" label="Albert Benjamin Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272897" start="23124" end="23157" title="Christian and Missionary Alliance" label="Christian and Missionary Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q453218" start="23534" end="23549" title="Dwight L. Moody" label="Dwight L. Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="23979" end="23995" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107880" start="24087" end="24099" title="Daniel Sidney Warner" label="D. S. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q485823" start="24167" end="24200" title="Church of God (Anderson, Indiana)" label="Church of God (Anderson, Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="24211" end="24225" title="Restorationism" label="Restorationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443774" start="24511" end="24530" title="second work of grace" label="entirely sanctified"/>
<link wikidata="Q107377483" start="24932" end="24944" title="Edwin Harvey" label="Edwin Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999823" start="24989" end="25019" title="Metropolitan Methodist Mission" label="Metropolitan Methodist Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999823" start="25046" end="25077" title="Metropolitan Church Association" label="Metropolitan Church Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="25089" end="25104" title="communal living" label="communal living"/>
<link wikidata="Q431614" start="25457" end="25472" title="Catherine Booth" label="Catherine Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="25492" end="25506" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309308" start="25748" end="25768" title="Primitive Methodism" label="Primitive Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q314399" start="25813" end="25830" title="George Whitefield" label="George Whitefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193934" start="25967" end="25990" title="Pilgrim Holiness Church" label="Pilgrim Holiness Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22230845" start="25999" end="26017" title="Martin Wells Knapp" label="Martin Wells Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575668" start="26212" end="26247" title="God&amp;#x27;s Bible School and College" label="God&amp;#x27;s Bible School and College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092921" start="26388" end="26407" title="One Mission Society" label="One Mission Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035781" start="26517" end="26537" title="World Gospel Mission" label="World Gospel Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109730" start="26590" end="26640" title="Christian Holiness Partnership" label="National Association for the Promotion of Holiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="27075" end="27096" title="entire sanctification" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888640" start="28686" end="28698" title="Benjamin Franklin Haynes" label="B. F. Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="28840" end="28862" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Church of the Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="29572" end="29580" title="Mainline Protestant" label="Mainline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="29641" end="29662" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984059" start="29668" end="29693" title="Wesleyan Methodist Church (United States)" label="Wesleyan Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="29699" end="29713" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="29722" end="29744" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Church of the Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719513" start="29861" end="29875" title="Henry Clay Morrison" label="H. C. Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645880" start="29910" end="29937" title="Asbury Theological Seminary" label="Asbury Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146522" start="30246" end="30253" title="Christian revival" label="revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q125996410" start="30527" end="30556" title="Holiness Pentecostalism" label="Holiness Pentecostal movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="30825" end="30839" title="Fundamentalist Christianity" label="Fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="30854" end="30874" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126632" start="30969" end="30996" title="Methodist Protestant Church" label="Methodist Protestant Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="31468" end="31474" title="Quakers" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163105" start="31533" end="31563" title="conservative holiness movement" label="conservative holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q158857" start="31586" end="31604" title="Biblical inerrancy" label="Biblical inerrancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11199149" start="31618" end="31625" title="modesty" label="modesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907505" start="31639" end="31669" title="Revival meeting" label="revivalistic worship practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="32300" end="32323" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159974" start="32554" end="32573" title="Confessing Movement" label="Confessing Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q109381571" start="32629" end="32652" title="Global Methodist Church" label="Global Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645880" start="32759" end="32786" title="Asbury Theological Seminary" label="Asbury Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q639174" start="32903" end="32911" title="Legalism (theology)" label="legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="33265" end="33278" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356065" start="33412" end="33431" title="parachurch organization" label="parachurch agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="33814" end="33831" title="postmodernism" label="post-modern world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984052" start="33872" end="33900" title="Wesleyan Holiness Consortium" label="Wesleyan Holiness Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="34234" end="34238" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q109381571" start="34948" end="34971" title="Global Methodist Church" label="Global Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943014" start="35084" end="35102" title="Book of Discipline" label="Book of Discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645880" start="35303" end="35330" title="Asbury Theological Seminary" label="Asbury Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163105" start="35569" end="35599" title="conservative holiness movement" label="conservative holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="35836" end="35847" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="35877" end="35886" title="salvation" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="35890" end="35895" title="Divine grace" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="35919" end="35926" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="35946" end="35953" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="36028" end="36033" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="36068" end="36086" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="36090" end="36111" title="Pietism" label="Pietistic Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="36128" end="36135" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q311231" start="36144" end="36164" title="Philipp Jakob Spener" label="Philipp Jakob Spener"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="36181" end="36196" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q919060" start="36318" end="36326" title="Quietism (Christian philosophy)" label="Quietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="36345" end="36373" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Religious Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="36516" end="36536" title="Christian perfection" label="Christian perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="36555" end="36574" title="Quakerism" label="Quaker Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q310439" start="36576" end="36586" title="George Fox" label="George Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="36639" end="36649" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="36650" end="36661" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q349070" start="36678" end="36692" title="Charles Wesley" label="Charles Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="36726" end="36747" title="Sanctification" label="Entire Sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="36818" end="36831" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344888" start="36839" end="36860" title="First Great Awakening" label="First Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q314399" start="36934" end="36951" title="George Whitefield" label="George Whitefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q313073" start="36953" end="36969" title="Jonathan Edwards (theologian)" label="Jonathan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q814997" start="37016" end="37026" title="Religious conversion" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="37059" end="37081" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q145140" start="37138" end="37152" title="Francis Asbury" label="Francis Asbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q532375" start="37154" end="37168" title="Charles Finney" label="Charles Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q456454" start="37170" end="37183" title="Lyman Beecher" label="Lyman Beecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235038" start="37185" end="37198" title="Phoebe Palmer" label="Phoebe Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907505" start="37314" end="37329" title="revival meeting" label="revival meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q125996410" start="37432" end="37461" title="Holiness Pentecostalism" label="Holiness Pentecostal movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q127273092" start="37533" end="37552" title="third work of grace" label="third work of grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="37618" end="37645" title="Glossolalia" label="speaking in unknown tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443774" start="37773" end="37793" title="second work of grace" label="second work of grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q125996410" start="37980" end="38000" title="Holiness Pentecostal" label="Holiness Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024185" start="38426" end="38454" title="Calvary Holiness Association" label="Calvary Holiness Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430950" start="38459" end="38486" title="International Pentecostal Holiness Church" label="Pentecostal Holiness Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="38741" end="38754" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357705" start="38894" end="38916" title="Apostolic Faith Church" label="Apostolic Faith Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q794392" start="38931" end="38951" title="Azusa Street Revival" label="Azusa Street Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839061" start="39107" end="39117" title="Alma White" label="Alma White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194136" start="39137" end="39158" title="Pillar of Fire Church" label="Pillar of Fire Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193934" start="39794" end="39817" title="Pilgrim Holiness Church" label="Pilgrim Holiness Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109730" start="40346" end="40376" title="Christian Holiness Partnership" label="Christian Holiness Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003768" start="40413" end="40437" title="Global Wesleyan Alliance" label="Global Wesleyan Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092921" start="40492" end="40511" title="One Mission Society" label="One Mission Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984052" start="40514" end="40542" title="Wesleyan Holiness Consortium" label="Wesleyan Holiness Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035781" start="40545" end="40565" title="World Gospel Mission" label="World Gospel Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163105" start="40828" end="40858" title="Conservative holiness movement" label="Conservative Holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40948" end="40952" title="Conservative holiness movement#Denominations" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q125996410" start="40955" end="40975" title="Holiness Pentecostal" label="Holiness Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809851" start="41112" end="41149" title="Association of Independent Methodists" label="Association of Independent Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903102" start="41152" end="41175" title="Bible Missionary Church" label="Bible Missionary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108646" start="41178" end="41214" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s Sanctified Holy Church" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s Sanctified Holy Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="41217" end="41239" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Church of the Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116842" start="41242" end="41276" title="Church of Christ (Holiness) U.S.A." label="Church of Christ (Holiness) U.S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q5116857" start="41279" end="41307" title="Church of Daniel&amp;#x27;s Band" label="Church of Daniel&amp;#x27;s Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116889" start="41311" end="41333" title="Church of God by Faith" label="Church of God by Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160744" start="41336" end="41367" title="Congregational Methodist Church" label="Congregational Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415653" start="41371" end="41406" title="Evangelical Church of North America" label="Evangelical Church of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415719" start="41410" end="41438" title="Evangelical Methodist Church" label="Evangelical Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="41442" end="41463" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q109381571" start="41466" end="41489" title="Global Methodist Church" label="Global Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575722" start="41492" end="41520" title="God&amp;#x27;s Missionary Church" label="God&amp;#x27;s Missionary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004662" start="41524" end="41548" title="Immanuel General Mission" label="Immanuel General Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007308" start="41604" end="41642" title="Kentucky Mountain Holiness Association" label="Kentucky Mountain Holiness Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999823" start="41645" end="41676" title="Metropolitan Church Association" label="Metropolitan Church Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410331" start="41679" end="41706" title="Missionary Methodist Church" label="Missionary Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639981" start="41709" end="41754" title="National Association of Wesleyan Evangelicals" label="National Association of Wesleyan Evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q107404532" start="41757" end="41813" title="Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church" label="Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102528" start="41816" end="41838" title="Original Church of God or Sanctified Church" label="Original Church of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194136" start="41841" end="41869" title="Pillar of Fire International" label="Pillar of Fire International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309308" start="41872" end="41898" title="Primitive Methodist Church" label="Primitive Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="41902" end="41920" title="The Salvation Army" label="The Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569800" start="41923" end="41963" title="Southern Congregational Methodist Church" label="Southern Congregational Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="41966" end="41989" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560871" start="42056" end="42075" title="The Wesleyan Church" label="The Wesleyan Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q269778" start="42096" end="42133" title="Apostolic Christian Church (Nazarene)" label="Apostolic Christian Church (Nazarene)"/>
<link wikidata="Q910556" start="42136" end="42161" title="Brethren in Christ Church" label="Brethren in Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878882" start="42164" end="42181" title="Missionary Church" label="Missionary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q485823" start="42243" end="42267" title="Church of God (Anderson)" label="Church of God (Anderson)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118129" start="42271" end="42308" title="Churches of Christ in Christian Union" label="Churches of Christ in Christian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415681" start="42325" end="42365" title="Evangelical Friends Church International" label="Evangelical Friends Church International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500154" start="42398" end="42414" title="Freewill Baptist" label="Freewill Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081008" start="42443" end="42507" title="Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God" label="Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741870" start="42692" end="42718" title="Ambrose University College" label="Ambrose University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072501" start="42721" end="42747" title="Allegheny Wesleyan College" label="Allegheny Wesleyan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803762" start="42750" end="42767" title="Asbury University" label="Asbury University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583636" start="42770" end="42794" title="Azusa Pacific University" label="Azusa Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903102" start="42797" end="42823" title="Bible Missionary Institute" label="Bible Missionary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943892" start="42826" end="42839" title="Booth College" label="Booth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046576" start="42842" end="42866" title="Eastern Nazarene College" label="Eastern Nazarene College"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044437" start="42869" end="42905" title="Evangelical Wesleyan Bible Institute" label="Evangelical Wesleyan Bible Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575668" start="42908" end="42943" title="God&amp;#x27;s Bible School and College" label="God&amp;#x27;s Bible School and College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604671" start="42946" end="42967" title="Greenville University" label="Greenville University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874998" start="42970" end="42994" title="Hobe Sound Bible College" label="Hobe Sound Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500472" start="42997" end="43016" title="Houghton University" label="Houghton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060545" start="43019" end="43054" title="Central Christian College of Kansas" label="Central Christian College of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023698" start="43057" end="43084" title="Indiana Wesleyan University" label="Indiana Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392309" start="43087" end="43118" title="Kentucky Mountain Bible College" label="Kentucky Mountain Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413788" start="43121" end="43141" title="Kingswood University" label="Kingswood University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500038" start="43144" end="43166" title="John Wesley University" label="John Wesley University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840874" start="43169" end="43199" title="MidAmerica Nazarene University" label="MidAmerica Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924393" start="43202" end="43234" title="Mount Vernon Nazarene University" label="Mount Vernon Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983269" start="43237" end="43259" title="Nazarene Bible College" label="Nazarene Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060132" start="43262" end="43291" title="Northwest Nazarene University" label="Northwest Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369346" start="43294" end="43322" title="Oklahoma Wesleyan University" label="Oklahoma Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088000" start="43325" end="43351" title="Olivet Nazarene University" label="Olivet Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163347" start="43354" end="43379" title="Penn View Bible Institute" label="Penn View Bible Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559831" start="43382" end="43396" title="Pillar College" label="Pillar College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208069" start="43399" end="43429" title="Point Loma Nazarene University" label="Point Loma Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352053" start="43432" end="43459" title="Roberts Wesleyan University" label="Roberts Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904851" start="43462" end="43488" title="Seattle Pacific University" label="Seattle Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570171" start="43491" end="43519" title="Southern Nazarene University" label="Southern Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220742" start="43522" end="43550" title="Southern Wesleyan University" label="Southern Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580375" start="43553" end="43576" title="Spring Arbor University" label="Spring Arbor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838935" start="43579" end="43607" title="Trevecca Nazarene University" label="Trevecca Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984000" start="43610" end="43625" title="Wesley Seminary" label="Wesley Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983850" start="43628" end="43652" title="Wesley Biblical Seminary" label="Wesley Biblical Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744514" start="43669" end="43686" title="Malone University" label="Malone University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24040217" start="43689" end="43720" title="Union Bible College and Academy" label="Union Bible College and Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307047" start="43741" end="43759" title="Messiah University" label="Messiah University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969745" start="43762" end="43787" title="Warner Pacific University" label="Warner Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754216" start="43812" end="43841" title="Anderson University (Indiana)" label="Anderson University (Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364702" start="43844" end="43868" title="Kansas Christian College (Overland Park)" label="Kansas Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840587" start="43871" end="43903" title="Mid-America Christian University" label="Mid-America Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080767" start="43906" end="43931" title="Ohio Christian University" label="Ohio Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969774" start="43934" end="43951" title="Warner University" label="Warner University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13446873" start="43968" end="43979" title="Arminianism" label="Arminianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129863" start="43982" end="44018" title="Theosis (Eastern Christian theology)" label="Theosis (Eastern Christian theology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106238" start="45306" end="45324" title="J. Kenneth Grider" label="Grider, J. Kenneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q93988878" start="45813" end="45831" title="Cheryl J. Sanders" label="Sanders, Cheryl J."/>
<link wikidata="Q1531559" start="47449" end="47496" title="Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online" label="Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q680794" start="47550" end="47568" title="Christianity Today" label="Christianity Today"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261731" wikidata="Q1181131" url="?curid=261731" title="Luis Rodriguez">
<text>Luis Rodriguez may refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
*Luis Rodríguez (producer) (born 1948), Spanish record producer based in Germany
*Luis J. Rodriguez (born 1954), American poet and novelist
*Luis Rodríguez (born 1978), Puerto Rican singer and songwriter known professionally as Luis Fonsi
*Luis Rodriguez, a human character on &quot;Sesame Street&quot;, played by Emilio Delgado

== Sports ==
===Association football (soccer)===
*Luisín Rodríguez (1910–1990) Spanish footballer, player and manager of CD Logroñés
*Luis Rodríguez (Chilean footballer) (born 1961)
*Luis Rodriguez de la Rosa (born 1979), referee in the 2009–10 CONCACAF Champions League group stage 
*Luis Rodríguez (Guatemalan footballer) (born 1982), Guatemalan football player
*Luis Antonio Rodríguez (born 1985), Argentine football player
*Luis Sánchez Rodríguez (born 1988), Mexican footballer
*Luis Rodríguez (footballer, born 1991) (born 1991), Mexican football player
*Luis Eduardo Rodríguez (born 1991), Mexican football player
*Luis Rodríguez (born 1992), member of the Costa Rican team in the 2009 FIFA under-17 world cup
*Luis Rodríguez (Bolivian footballer) (born 1994), Bolivian football left-back
*Luis Rodríguez (footballer, born October 1994), Mexican football midfielder for Chiapas
*Luis Rodríguez (Colombian footballer) (born 1995)

===Other sports===
*Luis Rodriguez Olmo (1919–2017), Puerto Rican baseball player
*Luis Manuel Rodríguez (1937–1996), Cuban boxer
*Luis Rodríguez (Venezuelan boxer) (born 1947), Venezuelan boxer
*Luis Rodríguez (sprinter) (born 1966), Spanish athlete
*Luis Rodríguez (volleyball) (born 1969), Puerto Rican volleyball player
*Luis Rodríguez (baseball) (born 1980), Venezuelan baseball player

== Other ==
*Luis Orlando Rodríguez (1912–1989), Cuban journalist, politician and interior minister and the first commentator of Radio Rebelde
*Luis Rodríguez (astronomer) (born 1948), Mexican astronomer, member of the Colegio Nacional

== See also ==
*Luis Miguel Rodríguez (disambiguation)
*José Luis Rodríguez (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1181131" start="0" end="14" title="Luis Rodriguez" label="Luis Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232924" start="58" end="83" title="Luis Rodríguez (producer)" label="Luis Rodríguez (producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840366" start="139" end="156" title="Luis J. Rodriguez" label="Luis J. Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387726" start="285" end="295" title="Luis Fonsi" label="Luis Fonsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456000" start="315" end="359" title="Sesame Street characters" label="human character on &amp;quot;Sesame Street&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063739" start="437" end="453" title="Luisín Rodríguez" label="Luisín Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574395" start="521" end="556" title="Luis Rodríguez (Chilean footballer)" label="Luis Rodríguez (Chilean footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648844" start="624" end="669" title="2009–10 CONCACAF Champions League group stage" label="2009–10 CONCACAF Champions League group stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840413" start="672" end="710" title="Luis Rodríguez (Guatemalan footballer)" label="Luis Rodríguez (Guatemalan footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251467" start="752" end="774" title="Luis Antonio Rodríguez" label="Luis Antonio Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q20016571" start="815" end="837" title="Luis Sánchez Rodríguez" label="Luis Sánchez Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409083" start="871" end="909" title="Luis Rodríguez (footballer, born 1991)" label="Luis Rodríguez (footballer, born 1991)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20017137" start="948" end="970" title="Luis Eduardo Rodríguez" label="Luis Eduardo Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613799" start="1075" end="1103" title="2009 FIFA U-17 World Cup squads" label="2009 FIFA under-17 world cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20641679" start="1105" end="1141" title="Luis Rodríguez (Bolivian footballer)" label="Luis Rodríguez (Bolivian footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280094" start="1184" end="1230" title="Luis Rodríguez (footballer, born October 1994)" label="Luis Rodríguez (footballer, born October 1994)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105099739" start="1273" end="1310" title="Luis Rodríguez (Colombian footballer)" label="Luis Rodríguez (Colombian footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700944" start="1344" end="1363" title="Luis Rodriguez Olmo" label="Luis Rodriguez Olmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q326667" start="1407" end="1428" title="Luis Manuel Rodríguez" label="Luis Manuel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q60735964" start="1455" end="1488" title="Luis Rodríguez (Venezuelan boxer)" label="Luis Rodríguez (Venezuelan boxer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107724968" start="1520" end="1545" title="Luis Rodríguez (sprinter)" label="Luis Rodríguez (sprinter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701065" start="1576" end="1603" title="Luis Rodríguez (volleyball)" label="Luis Rodríguez (volleyball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266810" start="1649" end="1674" title="Luis Rodríguez (baseball)" label="Luis Rodríguez (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806477" start="1845" end="1858" title="Radio Rebelde" label="Radio Rebelde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1860" end="1887" title="Luis Rodríguez (astronomer)" label="Luis Rodríguez (astronomer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142859" start="1935" end="1951" title="Colegio Nacional (Mexico)" label="Colegio Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q9025247" start="1969" end="2007" title="Luis Miguel Rodríguez (disambiguation)" label="Luis Miguel Rodríguez (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q177062" start="2009" end="2045" title="José Luis Rodríguez (disambiguation)" label="José Luis Rodríguez (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261732" wikidata="Q2063152" url="?curid=261732" title="Paul Williams (saxophonist)">
<text>Paul &quot;Hucklebuck&quot; Williams (July 13, 1915September 14, 2002) was an American jazz and blues saxophonist, bandleader, and songwriter. His record &quot;The Huckle-Buck&quot;, recorded in December 1948, was one of the most successful R&amp;B records of the time. In his &quot;Honkers and Shouters&quot;, Arnold Shaw credited Williams as one of the first to employ the honking tenor saxophone solo that became the hallmark of rhythm and blues and rock and roll in the 1950s and early 1960s.

==Biography==
Williams was born in Lewisburg, Tennessee, and grew up in Bowling Green, Kentucky, before moving with his parents to Detroit, Michigan, at the age of 13. He started learning saxophone and played in school bands before forming his own band, Paul Williams and his Kings of Rhythm, with the trumpeter Lloyd Henderson, in the mid-1930s, and playing in local clubs. The band split up during World War II, and Williams then joined Clarence Dorsey&#x27;s band. He toured with the band, then known as the Sensational Six, until 1945, when he left to join another local band, led by King Porter (born James A. Pope, 1916–1983).

Williams became known for his showmanship in Porter&#x27;s band. He made his first recordings with Porter for the Paradise label in 1947. He attracted the attention of the agent and record producer Teddy Reig and, under Reig&#x27;s tutelage, formed his own band. Credited as the Paul Williams Sextette, they recorded in Detroit for Savoy Records in September 1947, and &quot;Thirty-Five Thirty&quot; (named for Joe Von Battle&#x27;s record shop at 3530 Hastings Street) reached number 8 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; R&amp;B chart (then called the race records chart) in early 1948. Williams followed up its success with three further chart hits released in 1948&quot;The Twister&quot; (which, according to Joel Whitburn, &quot;had a &#x27;rockin&#x27; beat&quot; and &quot;laid the foundation for Hank Ballard&#x27;s &#x27;The Twist&#x27;&quot;); &quot;Waxie Maxie&quot;; and &quot;Walkin&#x27; Around&quot;all featuring the honking tenor sax of Wild Bill Moore.

Williams and his band toured nationally, and his concerts became increasingly popular and riotous. Reig claimed that he taught Williams to perform vigorously, &quot;kicking as he played, bending and dipping, getting down on the floor while blowing that saxophone.&quot; At a rehearsal for a concert, either in Newark or Baltimore, he heard Lucky Millinder and his band playing a tune, originally known as &quot;D&#x27;Natural Blues&quot;, written for Millinder by Andy Gibson. The composition was strongly influenced by &quot;Now&#x27;s the Time&quot;, recorded by Charlie Parker for Savoy Records at a 1945 session produced by Reig. Williams began performing Gibson&#x27;s composition, and at a show in Devon, Pennsylvania, noticed that audience members were performing a new dance, the Hucklebuck, to it. Williams renamed the tune &quot;The Huckle-Buck&quot;, and his recording, made in December 1948 with Reig producing, rapidly rose to the top of the R&amp;B chart. It reached number 1 in March 1949 and stayed in that position for 14 weeks, spending a total of 32 weeks on the chart. It reportedly sold half a million copies and broke sales records.

&quot;The Huckle-Buck&quot; established Williams&#x27;s popularity, and he was billed as Paul &quot;Hucklebuck&quot; Williams for the rest of his career. He had three more R&amp;B chart successes in 1949&quot;House Rocker&quot;, &quot;He Knows How to Hucklebuck&quot;, and &quot;Pop-Corn&quot;but these failed to match the earlier record&#x27;s success. However, his band continued to be popular. The band played on many of Amos Milburn&#x27;s recordings. With Tiny Grimes, Williams co-headlined the first Moondog Coronation Ball, promoted by Alan Freed in Cleveland on March 21, 1952, often claimed to be the first rock and roll concert, and was the only act to perform before the show was abandoned because of the size of the crowd. He also played on many of the nationwide concert tours organised by Freed.

Williams left Savoy Records in 1952 and recorded for several labels thereafter. Band members during the 1950s included Moore, Noble &quot;Thin Man&quot; Watts, the trumpeter Phil Guilbeau, and the singers Danny Cobb, Jumpin&#x27; Jimmy Brown, Joan Shaw and Connie Allen. Williams worked in the Atlantic Records house band, backing singers including Ruth Brown, and performed with musicians including Elmore James and Dave &quot;Baby&quot; Cortez. He was the musical director for Lloyd Price and James Brown in the early 1960s and performed with Otis Redding and Tommy Tucker. He worked as a session musician in New York City before setting up a booking agency in 1968. In 1986, he appeared at a Smithsonian symposium on rhythm and blues at the National Museum of American History. He received the Rhythm and Blues Foundation Pioneer Award in 1992.

Williams died in September 2002, in New York City, at the age of 87.

==Discography==
===Albums===
* &quot;Paul Williams and His Orchestra featuring Noble Wattsthe Hucklebuck&quot; (Saxophonograph, 1981)
* &quot;The Complete Recordings Volume 1 1947–1949&quot; (Blue Moon, 1999)
* &quot;The Complete Recordings 1949–1952Volume 2&quot; (Blue Moon, 1999)
* &quot;The Complete Recordings 1952–1956Volume 3&quot; (Blue Moon, 2001)

With Ruth Brown 
*&quot;Ruth Brown&quot; (Atlantic, 1957)

===Singles===
* &quot;Hastings St. Bounce&quot; / &quot;Way Late&quot; (Savoy 459, 1947)
* &quot;Thirty-Five Thirty&quot; / &quot;Come with Me Baby&quot; (Savoy 661, 1948)
* &quot;Bouncing with Benson&quot; / &quot;Boogie Ride&quot; (Savoy 664, 1948)
* &quot;The Twister, Part 1&quot; / &quot;Part 2&quot; (Savoy 665, 1948)
* &quot;Waxie Maxie&quot; / &quot;Spider Sent Me&quot; (Savoy 670, 1948)
* &quot;Bouncing with Buddy, Part 1&quot; / &quot;Part 2&quot; (Savoy 674, 1948)
* &quot;Walkin&#x27; Around&quot; / (Savoy 680, 1949)
* &quot;The Huckle-Buck&quot; / &quot;Hoppin&#x27; John&quot; (Savoy 683, 1949)
* &quot;House Rocker&quot; / &quot;He Knows How to Hucklebuck&quot; (Savoy 702, 1949)
* &quot;Pop-Corn&quot; / &quot;Free Dice&quot; (Savoy 711, 1949)
* &quot;Cranberries&quot; / &quot;Juice Bug Boogie&quot; (Savoy 721, 1949)
* &quot;What&#x27;s Happening&quot; / &quot;Camp Meeting Bounce&quot; (Savoy 734, 1950)
* &quot;Rye Boogie&quot; / &quot;Weasel Swing&quot; (Savoy 751, 1950)
* &quot;Jeep&#x27;s Blues&quot; / &quot;Paul&#x27;s Boogie&quot; (Savoy 758, 1951)
* &quot;Turtle Rock&quot; / &quot;Blues at Daybreak&quot; (Savoy 773, 1952)
* &quot;Rockin&#x27; Chair Blues&quot; / &quot;Sinners&#x27; Hop, Part 1&quot; (Savoy 814, 1952)
* &quot;Blowin&#x27; the Boogie&quot; / &quot;It&#x27;s All Over Baby&quot; (Savoy 831, 1952)
* &quot;I Need Your Love&quot; / &quot;I&#x27;m So Happy&quot; (Savoy 841, 1952)
* &quot;Hello&quot; / &quot;Rock It Davy Crockett&quot; (Capitol F3205, 1955)
* &quot;You&#x27;re Breaking My Heart No More&quot; / &quot;It&#x27;s Over&quot; (Capitol F3255, 1955)
* &quot;Give It Up&quot; / &quot;Pass the Buck&quot; (Vee Jay VJ234, 1957)
* &quot;Walkin&#x27; the Track&quot; / &quot;Back to Back&quot; (7 Arts S713, 1961)
* &quot;I Don&#x27;t Want to Set the World on Fire&quot; / &quot;I Can&#x27;t Stand It&quot; (Ascot AS2114, 1962)
Sources:

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2063152" start="0" end="4" title="Paul Williams (saxophonist)" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063152" start="11" end="21" title="Paul Williams (saxophonist)" label="Hucklebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063152" start="28" end="36" title="Paul Williams (saxophonist)" label="Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="87" end="91" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="96" end="101" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q21260923" start="160" end="175" title="The Huckle-Buck" label="The Huckle-Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="241" end="248" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795253" start="311" end="322" title="Arnold Shaw (author)" label="Arnold Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557461" start="375" end="382" title="Yakety Sax" label="honking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="383" end="398" title="tenor saxophone" label="tenor saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355638" start="533" end="553" title="Lewisburg, Tennessee" label="Lewisburg, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q694545" start="570" end="593" title="Bowling Green, Kentucky" label="Bowling Green, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="629" end="646" title="Detroit" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="898" end="910" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858255" start="1330" end="1340" title="Teddy Reig" label="Teddy Reig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341612" start="1464" end="1477" title="Savoy Records" label="Savoy Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702830" start="1543" end="1557" title="Joe Von Battle" label="Joe Von Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1632" end="1641" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="1648" end="1661" title="R&amp;amp;B chart" label="R&amp;amp;B chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278966" start="1679" end="1691" title="race records" label="race records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251475" start="1838" end="1851" title="Joel Whitburn" label="Joel Whitburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q726369" start="1929" end="1941" title="Hank Ballard" label="Hank Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541242" start="1955" end="1964" title="The Twist (song)" label="The Twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="2065" end="2074" title="tenor sax" label="tenor sax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570300" start="2078" end="2093" title="Wild Bill Moore" label="Wild Bill Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="2406" end="2412" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="2416" end="2425" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q252474" start="2436" end="2451" title="Lucky Millinder" label="Lucky Millinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747702" start="2560" end="2571" title="Andy Gibson" label="Andy Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073226" start="2622" end="2641" title="Now&amp;#x27;s the Time (composition)" label="Now&amp;#x27;s the Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="2661" end="2675" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267677" start="2800" end="2819" title="Devon, Pennsylvania" label="Devon, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q21260923" start="2935" end="2950" title="The Huckle-Buck" label="The Huckle-Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="3051" end="3064" title="R&amp;amp;B chart" label="R&amp;amp;B chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q474283" start="3676" end="3688" title="Amos Milburn" label="Amos Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375067" start="3713" end="3724" title="Tiny Grimes" label="Tiny Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907707" start="3758" end="3781" title="Moondog Coronation Ball" label="Moondog Coronation Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q453956" start="3795" end="3805" title="Alan Freed" label="Alan Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="3809" end="3818" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="3868" end="3881" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045688" start="4189" end="4221" title="Noble &amp;quot;Thin Man&amp;quot; Watts" label="Noble &amp;quot;Thin Man&amp;quot; Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="4357" end="4373" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q144669" start="4412" end="4422" title="Ruth Brown" label="Ruth Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q356598" start="4463" end="4475" title="Elmore James" label="Elmore James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173408" start="4480" end="4508" title="Dave &amp;quot;Baby&amp;quot; Cortez" label="Dave &amp;quot;Baby&amp;quot; Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="Q958578" start="4542" end="4553" title="Lloyd Price" label="Lloyd Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="4558" end="4569" title="James Brown (musician)" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="4608" end="4620" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441114" start="4625" end="4637" title="Tommy Tucker (singer)" label="Tommy Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="4654" end="4670" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354754" start="4708" end="4722" title="booking agency" label="booking agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="4758" end="4769" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="4783" end="4799" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="4807" end="4842" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q835728" start="4860" end="4887" title="Rhythm and Blues Foundation" label="Rhythm and Blues Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q144669" start="5345" end="5355" title="Ruth Brown" label="Ruth Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095112" start="5364" end="5374" title="Ruth Brown (album)" label="Ruth Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q21260923" start="5939" end="5954" title="The Huckle-Buck" label="The Huckle-Buck"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261737" wikidata="Q20311962" url="?curid=261737" title="Backyard Basketball">
<text>Backyard Basketball is a series of entries into the &quot;Backyard Sports&quot; franchise of video games. The first game was developed by Humongous Entertainment and published by Infogrames for Microsoft Windows and Mac in 2001. Additional games have been released on a variety of consoles, each with different characters and slightly altered gameplay mechanics.

As with the other &quot;Backyard Sports&quot; games, &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; includes professional players as playable characters. The first incarnation included Kevin Garnett and Lisa Leslie. The most recent release includes Stephen Curry as its mascot.

==Gameplay==
&quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; has two primary modes of gameplay: Single Game, which allows the player to select a team to compete against a computer-controlled team, and Season Play, which allows the player to select a team to compete against a series of computer-controlled teams over an 18-game season, including two best-of-three playoff series and a best-of-five championship series should the player achieve a large number of victories. The Single Game mode also allows the player to compete against a second player or to practice using a single character.

Before games can occur, the player has the option to modify a variety of settings. These include court selection, A.I. difficulty (easy, medium, or hard), the presence of certain rules (fouls, fatigue, violations, shot control, and power-ups), sound options (game music, background sounds, and in-game dialogue), controls, and team names. Team modification also involves the customization of jerseys.

The game&#x27;s controls are set to mouse usage by default, capitalizing on a point &amp; click style of gameplay to move characters around. The game is also compatible with keyboards and game pads.

The selection of team members follows one of two settings: First Five Picks, which allows each player to select their team members freely, or Full Draft, which forces each player to select their team members one at a time in an alternating fashion. Each potential team member, including younger versions of Kevin Garnett and Lisa Leslie, is ranked according to five statistics operating on a 1 to 10 scale. These include Inside Shooting (the relative accuracy of the character&#x27;s shot from inside the three-point line), Outside Shooting (the relative accuracy of the character&#x27;s shot from beyond the three-point line), Ballhandling (the relative likelihood that the character will not have the ball stolen or blocked on offense), Defense (the relative likelihood that the character will be able to steal or block the ball on defense), and Quickness (the relative speed at which the character moves along the court). Players also have the option to customize rookie characters with either manually chosen or randomly allocated statistics, as well as heights, skin tones, shooting hands, birthdays, and names. Although rookie characters generally have lower overall statistics compared to pre-rendered players, they have the additional ability to increase all of their statistics by three levels should the player&#x27;s team make the playoffs in Season Play.

Gameplay in &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; is set to a point &amp; click control scheme by default. With three characters on the court at one time, the player clicks at various locations on the court to guide the character with the ball to that location. Clicking on a teammate causes the character to pass the ball to that teammate while clicking the basket (indicated by a basketball icon) causes the character to attempt a shot. If shot control is on, then players have the option to make the shooting character pump fake by clicking rapidly, finally shooting the ball when the click is held down. If shot control is off, then the character will automatically release the shot once the basketball icon is clicked. On defense, the player can switch between characters to control by clicking on them as they run about, guiding the chosen character by clicking the location on the court where he or she should go. If an opposing character is clicked when an &#x27;X&#x27; symbol hovers by them, the character nearest him or her will attempt to steal the ball. If a pair of hands appears near the basket when an opposing character goes to shoot the ball, the nearest character will attempt to block the shot or rebound the ball.

Each quarter of a game lasts approximately three minutes while each overtime period (if necessary) lasts approximately one minute. The longer characters play without rest, the more tired and prone to mistakes (poor shooting and ball-handling) they will be as such, substitutions can be made after any completed play or during a time-out. Characters will recover their energy while on the bench (only two players can stay on the bench at a time). Granted, a character&#x27;s energy will never decrease if the fatigue option is turned off.

Over the course of a game, power-ups may occasionally be rewarded to teams. The majority of these power-ups are useful, such as the flaming ball (which guarantees that the next attempted shot will go in), the tornado (which increases the speed of all characters on the court), the doughnut (which causes the next character who attempts a shot to automatically attempt a slam dunk), and 110% Juice (which provides energy to otherwise tired players if the fatigue option is turned on). Some power-ups, however, provide detrimental effects, such as the icy ball (which makes shots more likely to miss), the stick of butter (which reduces the team&#x27;s ball-handling abilities), and the ice cream truck (which prevents the entire team from moving for a brief period of time).

==Releases==
A month before the release of &quot;Backyard Baseball&quot;, Humongous Entertainment announced &quot;Backyard Soccer&quot; and &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; as follow-up games, with the latter being planned for release in 1999. &quot;Backyard Football&quot; was released in 1999, while &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; was delayed. The game was eventually released for Windows and Macintosh two years later in 2001, featuring Kevin Garnett as the game&#x27;s primary mascot, and Lisa Leslie.

A second &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; installment entitled Backyard Basketball 2004 was released in 2003 for Windows and PlayStation 2 and in 2004 for Game Boy Advance, featuring Tim Duncan as its primary mascot. The PlayStation 2 version was released in Europe under the name of Junior Sports Basketball, although it lacked any license from the NBA, and the Backyard Kids were redubbed with British voice actors.

A third &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; installment with the title Backyard Sports: NBA Basketball 2007 was released for Game Boy Advance in 2006 and for Windows, PlayStation 2, and Nintendo DS in 2007, featuring Paul Pierce as its primary mascot. A planned release for the GameCube was cancelled.

A fourth installment entitled Backyard Sports: NBA Basketball 2015 was released in early 2015 for mobile devices, featuring Stephen Curry as its primary mascot.

A remastered version of the original &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; installment under the title Backyard Basketball &#x27;01 is planned for release on Steam.

==Reception==
In the United States, the debut version of &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; sold 780,000 copies and earned $13.2 million by August 2006, after its release in October 2001. It was the country&#x27;s 15th best-selling computer game between January 2000 and August 2006. Combined sales of all &quot;Backyard Sports&quot; games released between January 2000 and August 2006, including &quot;Backyard Basketball&quot;, had reached 5.3 million units in the United States by the latter date.

&quot;Backyard Basketball&quot; has received low to mixed reviews throughout its multiple releases. Ivan Sulic of &quot;IGN&quot; awarded the original version a score of 6.5 out of 10, complimenting the simplistic gameplay and colorful graphics while lamenting the amount of crashes that the game is susceptible to encountering. Chris Adams of &quot;IGN&quot; awarded the 2007 Nintendo DS version the same score, commenting that the addition of new gameplay modes offered more variety.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17497140" start="58" end="73" title="Backyard Sports series" label="Backyard Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q800120" start="138" end="161" title="Humongous Entertainment" label="Humongous Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q753684" start="179" end="189" title="Infogrames" label="Infogrames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="194" end="211" title="Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="216" end="219" title="Mac (computer)" label="Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q189240" start="534" end="547" title="Kevin Garnett" label="Kevin Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q257980" start="552" end="563" title="Lisa Leslie" label="Lisa Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q352159" start="598" end="611" title="Stephen Curry" label="Stephen Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130476564" start="5769" end="5786" title="Backyard Baseball (1997 video game)" label="Backyard Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q800120" start="5794" end="5817" title="Humongous Entertainment" label="Humongous Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839884" start="5834" end="5849" title="Backyard Soccer" label="Backyard Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839872" start="5969" end="5986" title="Backyard Football" label="Backyard Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="6103" end="6110" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="6115" end="6124" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189240" start="6160" end="6173" title="Kevin Garnett" label="Kevin Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q257980" start="6213" end="6224" title="Lisa Leslie" label="Lisa Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="6351" end="6364" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="6381" end="6397" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193020" start="6409" end="6419" title="Tim Duncan" label="Tim Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="6576" end="6579" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="6827" end="6838" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q121647" start="6858" end="6869" title="Paul Pierce" label="Paul Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="6919" end="6927" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q352159" start="7068" end="7081" title="Stephen Curry" label="Stephen Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="7258" end="7263" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="7885" end="7888" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="8142" end="8153" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261739" wikidata="Q357210" url="?curid=261739" title="Paul Williams">
<text>Paul Williams may refer to:

==Authors==
* Paul Williams (Crawdaddy) (1948–2013), American music and science fiction journalist; founder of &quot;Crawdaddy&quot; and the Philip K. Dick Society 
* Paul Williams (Irish journalist) (born 1964), Irish journalist and non-fiction crime writer
* Paul Williams (English author) (born 1967), British author and consultant on ska music
* Paul L. Williams (author) (born 1944), FBI consultant, journalist
* Paul O. Williams (1935–2009), American science-fiction author and poet

==Films==
* Paul Williams (director) (born 1943), American film and television director
* Paul Andrew Williams (born 1973), British film writer and director
* Paul Williams, Australian actor in the film &quot;Sky Trackers&quot;

==Musicians==
* Paul Williams (saxophonist) (1915–2002), American rhythm and blues saxophonist
* Paul Williams (1934–2016), birth name of soul musician Billy Paul
* Paul Williams (bluegrass musician), American bluegrass and gospel musician
* Paul Williams (composer), English composer and pianist

==Politics==
* Paul Williams (Conservative politician) (1922–2008), British MP for Sunderland South
* Paul Williams (health service manager) (born 1948), NHS Wales
* Paul Williams (Labour politician) (born 1972), British

==Singer/songwriters==
* Paul Williams (The Temptations singer) (1939–1973), founding member of The Temptations
* Paul Williams (English singer) (1940–2019), vocalist for Juicy Lucy, Tempest
* Paul Williams (songwriter) (born 1940), songwriter and film and television actor
* Paul Williams (comedian) (born 1992), New Zealand comedian and singer-songwriter

==Sports==
===Football (association, rugby, and gridiron)===
* Billy Williams (coach) (Paul Beauchamp Williams, 1892–1973), American college football, baseball, basketball coach
* Paul Williams (Canadian football) (born 1947), Canadian football defensive back
* Paul Williams (footballer, born 1962), English, played one match for Chelsea in 1982
* Paul Williams (Northern Ireland footballer) (born 1965), played for Newport County, Sheffield United, Stockport County, West Bromwich Albion, and Rochdale
* Paul Williams (footballer, born 1965), English, played for Charlton Athletic, Sheffield Wednesday, and Crystal Palace
* Paul Williams (footballer, born 1969), English, played for Stockport County, Coventry City, and Plymouth Argyle
* Paul Williams (footballer, born 1970), English, played for Sunderland, Swansea City, and Doncaster Rovers
* Paul Williams (footballer, born 1971), English coach, played for Derby County, Coventry City, and Southampton
* Paul Williams (quarterback) (born 1963), American football player
* Paul Williams (Australian rules footballer) (born 1973), Australian rules footballer
* Paul Williams (wide receiver) (born 1983), for the Houston Texans
* Paul Williams (rugby union player) (born 1983), New Zealand
* Paul Williams (rugby union referee) (born 1985), New Zealand rugby union referee

===Other sports===
* Paul Williams (water polo) (born 1955), Australian Olympic water polo player
* Paul Williams (runner) (born 1956), Canadian
* Paul Williams (basketball) (born 1961), American
* Paul Williams (darts player) (born 1964), English
* Paul Williams (boxer) (born 1981), American professional boxer
* Paul Williams (sprinter) (born 1986), Grenadian

==Others==
* Paul Williams (&quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;), character on &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;
* Paul L. Williams (general) (1894–1968), U.S. general in World War II
* Paul R. Williams (1894–1980), architect in Los Angeles, California
* Paul X. Williams (1908–1994), U.S. federal judge
* Paul S. Williams Jr. (1929-1995), American Army lieutenant general
* Paul Williams (Buddhist studies scholar) (born 1950), at the University of Bristol, UK
* Paul R. Williams (professor of law), peace negotiator
* Paul Williams (bishop) (born 1968), Bishop of Southwell and Nottingham
* Paul Williams (commentator), Australian soccer commentator for SBS and Seven Network

==See also==
* List of people with surname Williams</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q357210" start="0" end="13" title="Paul Williams" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154386" start="43" end="68" title="Paul Williams (Crawdaddy)" label="Paul Williams (Crawdaddy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154384" start="196" end="228" title="Paul Williams (Irish journalist)" label="Paul Williams (Irish journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452843" start="290" end="320" title="Paul Williams (English author)" label="Paul Williams (English author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371598" start="379" end="404" title="Paul L. Williams (author)" label="Paul L. Williams (author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061542" start="447" end="463" title="Paul O. Williams" label="Paul O. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q19517939" start="531" end="555" title="Paul Williams (director)" label="Paul Williams (director)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308381" start="609" end="629" title="Paul Andrew Williams" label="Paul Andrew Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962640" start="728" end="740" title="Sky Trackers" label="Sky Trackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063152" start="764" end="791" title="Paul Williams (saxophonist)" label="Paul Williams (saxophonist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q863212" start="900" end="910" title="Billy Paul" label="Billy Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540276" start="913" end="947" title="Paul Williams (bluegrass musician)" label="Paul Williams (bluegrass musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990362" start="990" end="1014" title="Paul Williams (composer)" label="Paul Williams (composer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154402" start="1061" end="1100" title="Paul Williams (Conservative politician)" label="Paul Williams (Conservative politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154399" start="1148" end="1186" title="Paul Williams (health service manager)" label="Paul Williams (health service manager)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30165049" start="1212" end="1245" title="Paul Williams (Labour politician)" label="Paul Williams (Labour politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q953304" start="1293" end="1331" title="Paul Williams (The Temptations singer)" label="Paul Williams (The Temptations singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629286" start="1382" end="1412" title="Paul Williams (English singer)" label="Paul Williams (English singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q927415" start="1461" end="1487" title="Paul Williams (songwriter)" label="Paul Williams (songwriter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107038706" start="1544" end="1568" title="Paul Williams (comedian)" label="Paul Williams (comedian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148933" start="1689" end="1711" title="Billy Williams (coach)" label="Billy Williams (coach)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441162" start="1806" end="1839" title="Paul Williams (Canadian football)" label="Paul Williams (Canadian football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154396" start="1888" end="1925" title="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1962)" label="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1962)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154387" start="1975" end="2018" title="Paul Williams (Northern Ireland footballer)" label="Paul Williams (Northern Ireland footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154397" start="2132" end="2169" title="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1965)" label="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1965)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154398" start="2252" end="2289" title="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1969)" label="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1969)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365751" start="2366" end="2403" title="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1970)" label="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1970)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154401" start="2474" end="2511" title="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1971)" label="Paul Williams (footballer, born 1971)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18746544" start="2586" end="2613" title="Paul Williams (quarterback)" label="Paul Williams (quarterback)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154382" start="2654" end="2697" title="Paul Williams (Australian rules footballer)" label="Paul Williams (Australian rules footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14951177" start="2741" end="2770" title="Paul Williams (wide receiver)" label="Paul Williams (wide receiver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q542332" start="2809" end="2843" title="Paul Williams (rugby union player)" label="Paul Williams (rugby union player)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60736017" start="2871" end="2906" title="Paul Williams (rugby union referee)" label="Paul Williams (rugby union referee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106913003" start="2974" end="3000" title="Paul Williams (water polo)" label="Paul Williams (water polo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154392" start="3053" end="3075" title="Paul Williams (runner)" label="Paul Williams (runner)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792526" start="3100" end="3126" title="Paul Williams (basketball)" label="Paul Williams (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029909" start="3151" end="3179" title="Paul Williams (darts player)" label="Paul Williams (darts player)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375801" start="3203" end="3224" title="Paul Williams (boxer)" label="Paul Williams (boxer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154407" start="3268" end="3292" title="Paul Williams (sprinter)" label="Paul Williams (sprinter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229465" start="3330" end="3384" title="Paul Williams (The Young and the Restless)" label="Paul Williams (&amp;quot;The Young and the Restless&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14600392" start="3440" end="3466" title="Paul L. Williams (general)" label="Paul L. Williams (general)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154390" start="3511" end="3527" title="Paul R. Williams" label="Paul R. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154502" start="3580" end="3596" title="Paul X. Williams" label="Paul X. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q20020528" start="3631" end="3651" title="Paul S. Williams Jr." label="Paul S. Williams Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3898170" start="3700" end="3740" title="Paul Williams (Buddhist studies scholar)" label="Paul Williams (Buddhist studies scholar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153072" start="3789" end="3824" title="Paul R. Williams (professor of law)" label="Paul R. Williams (professor of law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948624" start="3845" end="3867" title="Paul Williams (bishop)" label="Paul Williams (bishop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130891206" start="3918" end="3945" title="Paul Williams (commentator)" label="Paul Williams (commentator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633281" start="4019" end="4055" title="List of people with surname Williams" label="List of people with surname Williams"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261743" wikidata="Q437248" url="?curid=261743" title="Bob Denard">
<text>Robert Denard (born Gilbert Bourgeaud; 7 April 1929 – 13 October 2007) was a French mercenary. He served as the &quot;de facto&quot; military leader of the Comoros twice with him first serving from 13 May 1978 to 15 December 1989 and again briefly from the 28 September to 5 October in 1995. Sometimes known under the aliases Gilbert Bourgeaud and Saïd Mustapha Mhadjou, he was known for having performed various jobs in support of &quot;Françafrique&quot;—France&#x27;s sphere of influence in its former colonies in Africa—for Jacques Foccart, co-ordinator of President Charles de Gaulle&#x27;s African policy.

Having served with the French Navy in the Algerian War, the ardently anti-communist Denard took part in the Katanga secession effort in the 1960s and subsequently operated in many African countries including Congo, Angola, Rhodesia (today Zimbabwe), and Gabon. Between 1975 and 1995, he participated in four coup attempts in the Comoro Islands. It is widely believed that his adventures had the implicit support of the French state, even after the 1981 election of the French Socialist Party candidate, François Mitterrand, despite moderate changes in France&#x27;s policy in Africa.

Born a Roman Catholic, Denard converted first to Judaism, then to Islam, and finally back to Catholicism again. He was polygamously married seven times, and fathered eight children. Denard had a swashbuckling, larger-than-life image as the South African journalist Al J Venter called him &quot;a warrior king out of Homer&quot; who achieved the dream of every mercenary by conquering the Comoros in 1978, which he ruled via a puppet president until 1989. Venter believed Denard to be the most successful of the mercenaries in Africa, and certainly one of the best known.

== Early career ==
After having served with the French Navy as a Quartermaster in the Fusiliers marins during the First Indochina War and in French Algeria, Denard served as a colonial policeman in Morocco from 1952 to 1957. He worked as a demonstrator for washing machines in Paris. In 1954, he was convicted of an assassination plot against Prime Minister Pierre Mendès-France, a left-wing member of the Radical-Socialist Party who was negotiating the end of the Indochina War and withdrawal from Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria, and served 14 months in prison. An adamant anti-communist, Denard then took part in many anti-colonialist conflicts, simultaneously on his own behalf and on that of the French state. Once he was freed from jail, he worked for the French secret services during the war in Algeria.

He began his mercenary career, which was to span three decades, in Katanga, probably in December 1961 when he and other foreign mercenaries were brought in by the leader of the mercenaries in Katanga, Roger Faulques. Denard fought there until the secessionist movement led by Moise Tshombe collapsed in January 1963. Then, Denard and his men moved to Portuguese Angola.

In mid-1963 he was in North Yemen, which was then in the middle of a civil war between a Nasserist government and royalist tribesmen. The royalists were supported by the Western European and Saudi Arabia governments. The French and British sponsored a number of mercenaries to train the royalist volunteers in military techniques, and Denard was among those who joined the Imam al-Badr, leader of the royalists.

After about eighteen months Denard returned to the Congo to take employment under Moise Tshombe who was now the prime minister of the central government in Leopoldville from July 1964 till October 1965 when he was dismissed by President Joseph Kasa-Vubu. Denard served for two years in the Congo battling Simba rebels supporters of the late Congolese leader Patrice Lumumba, who had been murdered in Katanga in 1961 after having been overthrown by rival politicians and severely tortured while in transit. The Simba rebels were backed by the Chinese and Cubans, including Che Guevara while the central government were tacitly backed by the United States and Belgium. Denard was in charge of his own unit of French mercenaries called (&quot;the awful ones&quot;). He became famous after rescuing white civilians encircled by rebels in Stanleyville (modern Kisangani) in 1963. From June 1965 he had the Polish mercenary commander Rafał Gan-Ganowicz under his orders on a one-year contract during the quelling of the Simba rebellion. Denard then supported an attempted secessionist revolt on behalf of Tshombe by Katangan separatists in July 1966.

A year later Denard sided with Katangan separatists and Belgian mercenaries led by Jean Schramme and Jerry Puren in a revolt in eastern Congo to restore Moise Tshombe to power known as the Mercenaries Revolt. The rebels were soon bottled up in Bukavu. Denard was wounded in the initial rising and flew out with a group of more seriously wounded men to Rhodesia. In January 1968 he invaded Katanga with a force of a hundred men on bicycles in an attempt to create a diversion for a breakout from Bukavu.

Denard was involved in mercenary activity in Biafra during the Nigerian civil war during the late 1960s. From 1968 to 1978 he was employed supporting the government in Gabon and was available to carry out military actions on behalf of the French government in Africa. He may have been involved in a raid against Guinea in 1970. He was involved in a failed coup attempt in Benin (, or Operation Shrimp), against Mathieu Kérékou, the president of the People&#x27;s Republic of Benin, in 1977. Although Jacques Foccart denied knowledge of the attempted coup after its failure, he did recognize that it had been backed-up by Gnassingbé Eyadéma (Togo), Houphouet-Boigny (Ivory Coast), Omar Bongo (Gabon) and Hassan II (Morocco), all allies of France.

Denard is known to have participated in conflicts in Rhodesia with 7 Independent Company, Rhodesia Regiment in 1977, Iran, Nigeria, Angola, Zaire and the Comoros, the last-named nation having been subject to more than twenty &quot;coups d&#x27;état&quot; in the past decades. For most of his career Denard had the quiet backing of France and the French secret service which wished to maintain French influence over its ex-colonies.

== The Comoros ==

He was most active in the Comoros, making four separate attempts to overthrow the government of this small island group. On orders from Jacques Foccart, he ousted the first president, Ahmed Abdallah, who had just unilaterally proclaimed the Comoros&#x27; independence on 6 July 1975. Ahmed Abdallah was replaced by Ali Soilih.

He then failed at a coup in Benin in 1977 and carried out some operations in Rhodesia from 1977 to 1978 as part of the Rhodesian Army&#x27;s short-lived French-speaking unit, 7 Independent Company. With the support of the Rhodesian government, he returned to the Comoros with 43 men on 13 May 1978 and carried out a coup against president Ali Soilih, who had turned toward socialist policies. Soilih was killed under mysterious circumstances on 29 May 1978. The official story that Soilih was &quot;shot while trying to escape&quot; is not generally believed. Helped by Denard, Ahmed Abdallah took the presidency back. For eleven years (1978 to 1989), Denard headed Abdallah&#x27;s 500-strong presidential guard and had strong influence and business interests in the archipelago, marrying and converting to Islam and eventually becoming a citizen of the country. He adopted the Islamic name &quot;Said Mustapha Mhadjou&quot; upon his conversion.

The Comoros also served as his logistic base for military operations in Mozambique and Angola. He was then supported by Paris, as the Comoros provided France for a base to get around the embargo imposed on South Africa because of its government&#x27;s policy of apartheid. Denard accumulated considerable holdings in the Comoros, composed of hotels, lands, and the presidential guard. According to Xavier Renou, author of a book on private military contractors, Denard foresaw the transition between traditional mercenaries to contemporary private military contractors, creating a small army during his stay in the Comoros in the 1980s.

=== 1989 coup and subsequent trial ===

In 1989, fearing a probable coup d&#x27;état, president Ahmed Abdallah signed a decree ordering the Presidential Guard, led by Denard, to disarm the armed forces. Shortly after the signing of the decree, a military officer allegedly entered president Abdallah&#x27;s office and shot him, injuring Denard at the same time. A few days later, Denard agreed to leave the Comoros after meeting French businessman Jean-Yves Ollivier, and was evacuated to South Africa by French paratroopers.

Denard then waited in the Médoc region, in France, for his trial for the murder of president Ahmed Abdallah in 1989. With his lieutenant Dominique Malacrino, he had to face charges in May 1999 for his role in the 1989 coup, in which, according to the French prosecution, president Ahmed Abdallah was killed on the orders of Denard because he was about to remove Denard as head of the presidential guard. The prosecution said Ahmed Abdallah was shot on orders from Denard during a faked attack on his palace on the night of 26 November 1989. But a few days before the trial, Abdallah&#x27;s family dropped their suit, and finally Denard and Dominique Malacrino were acquitted because of lack of evidence. The Comoros experienced its twentieth coup attempt since independence on the day that the trial began. 

Afterward, president Mohamed Taki Abdulkarim declared that he refused Denard&#x27;s return to the Comoros.

=== 1995 coup and subsequent trial ===

On the night of 27 September 1995 Denard launched a fourth coup &quot;Operation Kaskari&quot;, in the Comoros. Denard landed on the Comoros with 33 men in Zodiac inflatable boats in an attempted coup against president Said Mohamed Djohar, Abdallah&#x27;s successor. On 4 October, in accordance with an agreement between France and the Comoros, the French army put an end to the attempt. The French government sent an expeditionary force to capture Denard and his mercenaries. Despite having over 300 armed Comorians ready to fight and having machine gun posts set up, Denard surrendered without a shot being fired. Denard was brought back to France by the French DGSE intelligence agency and spent ten months in a Paris jail. At his trial a number of former Gaullist politicians, including Charles Pasqua, spoke on his behalf.

== Later trials and death ==
In 2001, Guido Papalia, Italian attorney of Verona, prosecuted Denard for having tried to recruit mercenaries in the far-right Italian movement (through Franco Nerozzi) in order to make a coup against Colonel Azali Assoumani, the current president, also opposed to his return to the Comoros.

On 9 March 2006, attorney Olivier Bray asked for five years of prison for the 1995 coup d&#x27;état against Said Mohamed Djohar under the code-name &quot;Eskazi&quot;, and sentences between one and four years for his 26 accomplices. During the three-week-long trial, Denard and his accomplices tried to convince the court that they had acted with implicit support of French authorities. Dominique Malacrino talked about the &quot;numerous phone calls of Jacques Foccart, then responsible for the African office at the Elysée palace&quot; to Denard. Emmanuel Pochet, another suspect, declared that Denard had &quot;support from senior officers of the special forces of the DGSE&quot;, the French external intelligence agency. Olivier Feneteau, another suspect, declared that he had belonged in the past to the &quot;action service&quot; of the DGSE. On 9 March, Denard&#x27;s lawyer presented declarations by former president Djohar, who had stated, during an interview to Comorian newspaper &quot;Kashkazi&quot; at the end of October 2005, that his security chief, Captain Rubis, a French officer that the French authorities had recommended to him, &quot;was aware of the coup&quot;.

In June 2006 Denard, who by then was suffering from Alzheimer&#x27;s, was found guilty of &quot;belonging to a gang who conspired to commit a crime&quot;, and was given a five-year suspended jail term. During the trial, the role of the French secret services in the 1995 coup against Saïd Djohar was recognized, but not deemed sufficient to discharge the mercenaries of their guilt. However, the knowledge of the French authorities of the attempted coup was one of the reasons given by the Court to abstain from ordering a firm prison sentence. During his trial in 2006 before the Court of Appeal, a former head of the foreign intelligence service explicitly stated that &quot;When special services are unable to undertake certain kinds of undercover operation, they use parallel structures. This was the case of Bob Denard.&quot; In July 2007, he was sentenced by the Court of Appeal to four years in prison (three of them suspended). However, he never served his sentence for health reasons.

His death was announced by his sister on 14 October 2007. In 2011, his story was the basis of the film &quot;Mister Bob.&quot;

==Religious beliefs==
Born a Catholic, Denard converted to Judaism in Morocco, then to Islam in the Comoros, and finally back to Catholicism. His funeral took place at the Paris church of Saint-François Xavier.

== See also ==
*History of Comoros

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*Samantha Weinberg: &quot;Last of the pirates; in search of Bob Denard&quot;. London, 1994. 
*Christopher Othen: &quot;Katanga 1960–63; Mercenaries, Spies and the African Nation that Waged War on the World&quot;. London 2015 

==External links==
* More on the 1995 Azalee Operation
* More on the 1989 coup (BBC)
* Africa Comoros mercenary cleared of assassination (19 May 1999) (BBC)
* Condolence book of Bob Denard (Hungarian)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q437248" start="0" end="13" title="Bob Denard" label="Robert Denard"/>
<link wikidata="Q437248" start="20" end="37" title="Bob Denard" label="Gilbert Bourgeaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="84" end="93" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="156" end="163" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q437248" start="326" end="343" title="Bob Denard" label="Gilbert Bourgeaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q437248" start="348" end="369" title="Bob Denard" label="Saïd Mustapha Mhadjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624041" start="438" end="450" title="Françafrique" label="Françafrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="498" end="513" title="French colonial empire" label="former colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q462077" start="528" end="543" title="Jacques Foccart" label="Jacques Foccart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="571" end="588" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="636" end="647" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="655" end="667" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="682" end="696" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148907" start="721" end="728" title="State of Katanga" label="Katanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q618399" start="821" end="826" title="Republic of the Congo (Léopoldville)" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="828" end="834" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="836" end="844" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="852" end="860" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="867" end="872" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634740" start="942" end="956" title="Comoro Islands" label="Comoro Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q930869" start="1061" end="1074" title="1981 French presidential election" label="1981 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="1082" end="1104" title="French Socialist Party" label="French Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="1116" end="1135" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="1317" end="1329" title="Polygamy" label="polygamously"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704091" start="1463" end="1474" title="Al J Venter" label="Al J Venter"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="1818" end="1829" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1835" end="1848" title="Quartermaster#French" label="Quartermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q474386" start="1856" end="1872" title="Fusiliers marins" label="Fusiliers marins"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="1884" end="1903" title="First Indochina War" label="First Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="1911" end="1925" title="French Algeria" label="French Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1968" end="1975" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q314265" start="2128" end="2148" title="Pierre Mendès-France" label="Pierre Mendès-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542710" start="2176" end="2199" title="Radical Party (France)" label="Radical-Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="2224" end="2227" title="Geneva Conference (1954)" label="end"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="2235" end="2248" title="First Indochina War" label="Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="2269" end="2276" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="2278" end="2285" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="2290" end="2297" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="2342" end="2356" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896265" start="2529" end="2551" title="French secret services" label="French secret services"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="2563" end="2577" title="Algerian War" label="war in Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148907" start="2647" end="2654" title="State of Katanga" label="Katanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438948" start="2781" end="2795" title="Roger Faulques" label="Roger Faulques"/>
<link wikidata="Q334830" start="2856" end="2869" title="Moise Tshombe" label="Moise Tshombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="2931" end="2948" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Portuguese Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q580188" start="2973" end="2984" title="Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen" label="North Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q521199" start="3020" end="3029" title="North Yemen Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="3040" end="3046" title="Nasser" label="Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="3142" end="3154" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q711230" start="3324" end="3336" title="Muhammad al-Badr" label="Imam al-Badr"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="3415" end="3420" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334830" start="3446" end="3459" title="Moise Tshombe" label="Moise Tshombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="3520" end="3532" title="Kinshasa" label="Leopoldville"/>
<link wikidata="Q206048" start="3601" end="3617" title="Joseph Kasa-Vubu" label="Joseph Kasa-Vubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q161672" start="3722" end="3737" title="Patrice Lumumba" label="Patrice Lumumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="3936" end="3947" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="4022" end="4029" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q146723" start="4219" end="4228" title="Kisangani" label="Kisangani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302909" start="4292" end="4310" title="Rafał Gan-Ganowicz" label="Rafał Gan-Ganowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346653" start="4593" end="4606" title="Jean Schramme" label="Jean Schramme"/>
<link wikidata="Q334830" start="4663" end="4676" title="Moise Tshombe" label="Moise Tshombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416407" start="4699" end="4717" title="Kisangani Mutinies" label="Mercenaries Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q222279" start="4754" end="4760" title="Bukavu" label="Bukavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="4862" end="4870" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="5059" end="5065" title="Biafra" label="Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="5182" end="5187" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="5386" end="5391" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206719" start="5425" end="5440" title="Mathieu Kérékou" label="Mathieu Kérékou"/>
<link wikidata="Q862701" start="5463" end="5494" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Benin" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="5635" end="5653" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q214407" start="5662" end="5678" title="Houphouet-Boigny" label="Houphouet-Boigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q172083" start="5694" end="5704" title="Omar Bongo" label="Omar Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="5717" end="5726" title="Hassan II" label="Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="5814" end="5822" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818366" start="5828" end="5868" title="7 Independent Company (Rhodesia)" label="7 Independent Company, Rhodesia Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="5878" end="5882" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="5884" end="5891" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="5893" end="5899" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="5901" end="5906" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="5915" end="5922" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896265" start="6107" end="6128" title="French secret service" label="French secret service"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="6239" end="6246" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q462077" start="6349" end="6364" title="Jacques Foccart" label="Jacques Foccart"/>
<link wikidata="Q401076" start="6397" end="6411" title="Ahmed Abdallah" label="Ahmed Abdallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q878868" start="6528" end="6538" title="Ali Soilih" label="Ali Soilih"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="6569" end="6574" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818366" start="6716" end="6737" title="7 Independent Company (Rhodesia)" label="7 Independent Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q109019274" start="6857" end="6861" title="1978 Comorian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7348" end="7353" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="7560" end="7570" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="7675" end="7682" title="embargo" label="embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="7750" end="7759" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057214" start="7920" end="7948" title="private military contractors" label="private military contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15067271" start="8574" end="8592" title="Jean-Yves Ollivier" label="Jean-Yves Ollivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435049" start="8679" end="8684" title="Médoc" label="Médoc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8790" end="8809" title="Dominique Malacrino" label="Dominique Malacrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q888837" start="9483" end="9506" title="Mohamed Taki Abdulkarim" label="Mohamed Taki Abdulkarim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354640" start="9680" end="9697" title="Operation Azalee" label="Operation Kaskari"/>
<link wikidata="Q218139" start="9765" end="9788" title="Zodiac Group" label="Zodiac inflatable boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q888465" start="9828" end="9847" title="Said Mohamed Djohar" label="Said Mohamed Djohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335827" start="10273" end="10277" title="Directorate-General for External Security" label="DGSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="10368" end="10376" title="Gaullist" label="Gaullist"/>
<link wikidata="Q725609" start="10400" end="10414" title="Charles Pasqua" label="Charles Pasqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="10511" end="10517" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10620" end="10634" title="Franco Nerozzi" label="Franco Nerozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q515602" start="10676" end="10691" title="Azali Assoumani" label="Azali Assoumani"/>
<link wikidata="Q462077" start="11214" end="11229" title="Jacques Foccart" label="Jacques Foccart"/>
<link wikidata="Q188190" start="11278" end="11291" title="Elysée palace" label="Elysée palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q335827" start="11432" end="11436" title="DGSE" label="DGSE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11757" end="11765" title="Kashkazi" label="Kashkazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="11997" end="12013" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000944" start="12526" end="12541" title="Court of Appeal (France)" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316944" start="13049" end="13059" title="Mister Bob" label="Mister Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q526293" start="13256" end="13277" title="Saint-François Xavier des Missions étrangères" label="Saint-François Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512031" start="13296" end="13314" title="History of Comoros" label="History of Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q768038" start="13353" end="13370" title="Samantha Weinberg" label="Samantha Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13446" end="13463" title="Christopher Othen" label="Christopher Othen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261744" wikidata="Q557435" url="?curid=261744" title="Earl Bostic">
<text>Eugene Earl Bostic (April 25, 1913 – October 28, 1965) was an American alto saxophonist. Bostic&#x27;s recording career was diverse, his musical output encompassing jazz, swing, jump blues and the post-war American rhythm and blues style, which he pioneered. He had a number of popular hits such as &quot;Flamingo&quot;, &quot;Harlem Nocturne&quot;, &quot;Temptation&quot;, &quot;Sleep&quot;, &quot;Special Delivery Stomp&quot;, and &quot;Where or When&quot;, which all showed off his characteristic growl on the horn. He was a major influence on John Coltrane.

== Career ==
Bostic was born in 1913 in Tulsa, Oklahoma. In his youth, he played the clarinet in school and saxophone with the local Boy Scouts troop. He turned professional at the age of 18 when he joined Terence Holder&#x27;s &quot;Twelve Clouds of Joy&quot;. Bostic made his first recording with Lionel Hampton in October 1939, with Charlie Christian, Clyde Hart and Big Sid Catlett. Before that, he performed with Fate Marable on New Orleans riverboats. Bostic graduated from Xavier University in New Orleans. He worked with territory bands as well as Arnett Cobb, Hot Lips Page, Rex Stewart, Don Byas, Charlie Christian, Thelonious Monk, Edgar Hayes, Cab Calloway, and other jazz luminaries. In 1938, and in 1944, Bostic led the house band at Smalls Paradise. While playing at Small&#x27;s Paradise, he doubled on guitar and trumpet. During the early 1940s, he was a well-respected regular at the famous jam sessions held at Minton&#x27;s Playhouse. He formed his own band in 1945 and made the first recordings under his own name for the Majestic label. He turned to rhythm and blues in the late 1940s. His biggest hits were &quot;Temptation&quot;, &quot;Sleep&quot;, &quot;Flamingo&quot;, &quot;You Go to My Head&quot; and &quot;Cherokee&quot;. At various times, his band included Keter Betts, Jaki Byard, Benny Carter, John Coltrane, Teddy Edwards, Benny Golson, Blue Mitchell, Tony Scott, Cliff Smalls, Charles Thompson, Stanley Turrentine, Tommy Turrentine, and other musicians who rose to prominence, especially in jazz.

Bostic&#x27;s King album entitled &quot;Jazz As I Feel It&quot; (1963) featured Shelly Manne on drums, Joe Pass on guitar and Richard &quot;Groove&quot; Holmes on organ. Bostic recorded &quot;A New Sound&quot; about one month later, again featuring Holmes and Pass. These recordings allowed Bostic to stretch out beyond the three-minute limit imposed by the 45 RPM format. Bostic was pleased with the sessions, which highlight his total mastery of the blues, but they also foreshadowed musical advances that were later evident in the work of John Coltrane and Eric Dolphy.

He wrote arrangements for Paul Whiteman, Louis Prima, Lionel Hampton, Gene Krupa, Artie Shaw, Hot Lips Page, Jack Teagarden, Ina Ray Hutton, and Alvino Rey.

His songwriting hits include &quot;Let Me Off Uptown&quot;, performed by Anita O&#x27;Day and Roy Eldridge, and &quot;Brooklyn Boogie&quot;, which featured Louis Prima and members of the Brooklyn Dodgers.

Bostic&#x27;s signature hit, &quot;Flamingo&quot; was recorded in 1951 and remains a favorite among followers of Carolina Beach Music in South Carolina, North Carolina and Virginia.

In 1953, Bostic and his Orchestra performed for the famed ninth Cavalcade of Jazz concert held at Wrigley Field in Los Angeles which was produced by Leon Hefflin, Sr. on June 7. Also featured that day were Roy Brown and his Orchestra, Don Tosti and His Mexican Jazzmen, Shorty Rogers, Nat &quot;King&quot; Cole with Velma Middleton, and Louis Armstrong and his All Stars.

During the early 1950s, Bostic lived with his wife in Addisleigh Park in St. Albans, Queens, in New York City, where many other jazz stars made their home. After that, he moved to Los Angeles, where he concentrated on writing arrangements after suffering a heart attack. He opened his own R&amp;B club in Los Angeles, known as the Flying Fox.

==Death==
Bostic died on October 28, 1965, from a heart attack in Rochester, New York, while performing with his band. He was buried in Southern California&#x27;s Inglewood Park Cemetery on November 2, 1965. Honorary pallbearers at the funeral included Slappy White and Louis Prima. Today he rests under a simple black slate grave marker inscribed with his name, birth/death dates, and a solo saxophone, located not far from such other musical luminaries as Chet Baker, Ray Charles, and Ella Fitzgerald, who was born exactly four years after Earl. Bostic was inducted into the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame in 1993.

== Style and influence ==
Bostic was influenced by Sidney Bechet and (according to James Moody) John Coltrane was in turn influenced by Bostic. Coltrane told &quot;Down Beat&quot; magazine in 1960 that Bostic &quot;showed me a lot of things on my horn. He has fabulous technical facilities on his instrument and knows many a trick.&quot; Moody mentioned that &quot;Bostic knew his instrument inside out, back to front and upside down.&quot; If one listens carefully to Bostic&#x27;s fabulous stop time choruses and his extended solo work, the roots of Coltrane&#x27;s &quot;sheets of sound&quot; become clear.

Bostic&#x27;s early jazz solos bear similarity to Benny Carter&#x27;s long flowing lines. Other influences on Bostic include European concert music, bebop and the sounds associated with his Oklahoma roots. Bostic admitted that he was interested in selling records and he went as far as to write out his popular solos note for note in order to please his admiring fans during concerts. Nonetheless, Bostic was always ready to improvise brilliantly during his live performances.

Bostic&#x27;s virtuosity on the saxophone was legendary, and is evident on records such as &quot;Up There in Orbit&quot;, &quot;Earl&#x27;s Imagination&quot;, &quot;Apollo Theater Jump&quot;, &quot;All On&quot;, &quot;Artistry by Bostic&quot;, &quot;Telestar Drive&quot;, &quot;Liza&quot;, &quot;Lady Be Good&quot; and &quot;Tiger Rag&quot;. He was famous as a peerless jammer who held his own against Charlie Parker. The alto saxophonist Lou Donaldson recalled seeing Parker get burned by Bostic during one such jam session at Minton&#x27;s. Donaldson said that Bostic &quot;was the greatest saxophone player I ever knew. Bostic was down at Minton&#x27;s and Charlie Parker came in there. They played &#x27;Sweet Georgia Brown&#x27; or something and he gave Charlie Parker a saxophone lesson. Now you&#x27;d see him, we&#x27;d run up there and think that we&#x27;re going to blow him out, and he&#x27;d make you look like a fool. Cause he&#x27;d play three octaves, louder, stronger and faster.&quot; Art Blakey remarked that &quot;Nobody knew more about the saxophone than Bostic, I mean technically, and that includes Bird. Working with Bostic was like attending a university of the saxophone. When Coltrane played with Bostic, I know he learned a lot.&quot; Victor Schonfield pointed out that &quot;...his greatest gift was the way he communicated through his horn a triumphant joy in playing and being, much like Louis Armstrong and only a few others have done.&quot; He was able to control the horn from low A without using his knee up into the altissimo range years before other saxophonists dared to stray. Bostic played melodies in the altissimo range with perfect execution. He could play wonderfully in any key at any tempo over any changes. Benny Golson, who called Bostic &quot;the best technician I ever heard in my life,&quot; mentioned that &quot;He could start from the bottom of the horn and skip over notes, voicing it up the horn like a guitar would. He had circular breathing before I even knew what circular breathing was – we&#x27;re talking about the early 50s. He had innumerable ways of playing one particular note. He could double tongue, triple tongue. It was incredible what he could do, and he helped me by showing me many technical things.&quot; Bostic used a Beechler mouthpiece with a tenor saxophone reed on his Martin Committee model alto sax.

Bostic was a master of the blues and he used this skill in a variety of musical settings. Although he recorded many commercial albums, some notable jazz-based exceptions on the King label include &quot;Bostic Rocks Hits of the Swing Age&quot;, &quot;Jazz As I Feel It&quot; and &quot;A New Sound&quot;. Compositions such as &quot;The Major and the Minor&quot; and &quot;Earl&#x27;s Imagination&quot; display a solid knowledge of harmony. In 1951, Bostic successfully toured with Dinah Washington on the R&amp;B circuit. Bostic was always well dressed and articulate during interviews. His live performances provided an opportunity for a departure from his commercial efforts and those who witnessed these shows remember him driving audiences into a frenzy with dazzling technical displays. Always the consummate showman, he appeared on the &quot;Soupy Sales&quot; TV show and danced the &quot;Soupy Shuffle&quot; better than Soupy while playing the saxophone.

During the late 1940s, Bostic changed his style in a successful attempt to reach a wider audience. The new sound incorporated his unmistakable rasp or growl, shorter lines than in his jazz-based recordings, emphasis on a danceable back beat and a new way of wringing &quot;...the greatest possible rhythmic value from every note and phrase.&quot; Bostic showed off the new approach in his hit &quot;Temptation&quot;, which reached the Top Ten of the R&amp;B chart during the summer of 1948. The addition of Gene Redd on vibes in 1950 rounded out the Bostic sound and he used the vibes on his major hits such as &quot;Flamingo&quot; in 1951. The 1956 version of &quot;Where or When&quot; features Bostic growling through the mid-range of the instrument behind a heavy backbeat and loud bass and it is a marked departure from his approach to the same tune recorded on Gotham in 1947 which showed off his sweet &quot;singing&quot; in the upper register with barely audible percussion. Bostic proved that saxophone instrumentals could climb the hit charts and other saxists with hits including Boots Randolph and Stanley Turrentine have acknowledged his influence.

In February 1959, Bostic was voted No. 2 jazz alto sax in the Playboy jazz poll over leading saxists including Cannonball Adderley and Sonny Stitt. He recorded an inimitable version of &quot;All The Things You Are&quot; released on the Playboy label. In August 1959, he performed at the famous Playboy Jazz Festival in Chicago on the same bill as the major jazz stars of the time. 

Bostic discussed his approach to improvising in an interview with Kurt Mohr. &quot;Of course I am maybe one of the few musicians who like simple recurring melody patterns and in all my playing I try to keep a basic melody line in my mind and attempt to develop meaningful inversions and variations...I like the basic blues... The blues has it all; basic rhythmic quality, genuine lyric content, essential and basic chord structure and maybe above all else, personality. Blues and jazz are inseparable.&quot;

Bostic&#x27;s recording career was diverse and it included small group swing-based jazz, big band jazz, jump blues, organ-based combos and a string of commercial successes.

==Discography==
===Albums===
Sources:
* &quot;Earl Bostic and His Alto Sax, Volume 1&quot;, King 295-64 [10&quot; LP] (1953); reissued as 295–76 with 2 extra tracks in 1954.
* &quot;Earl Bostic and His Alto Sax, Volume 2&quot;, King 295-65 [10&quot; LP] (1953); reissued as 295–77 with 2 extra tracks in 1954.
* &quot;Earl Bostic and His Alto Sax, Volume 3&quot;, King 295-66 [10&quot; LP] (1953); reissued as 295–78 with 2 extra tracks in 1954.
* &quot;Earl Bostic and His Alto Sax, Volume 4&quot;, King 295-72 [10&quot; LP] (1953); reissued as 295–79 with 2 extra tracks in 1954.
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays The Old Standards&quot;, King 295-95 [10&quot; LP] (1955); reissued as 295–103, re-titled &quot;Earl Bostic and His Alto Sax, Volume 5&quot;
* &quot;(Dance to) The Best of Bostic&quot;, King 500 (1956)
* &quot;Earl Bostic for You&quot;, King 503 (1956)
* &quot;Alto-Tude&quot;, King 515 (1956)
* &quot;Dance Time&quot;, King 525 (1956)
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Dance with Earl Bostic&quot;, King 529 (1956)
* &quot;Invitation to Dance with Bostic&quot;, King 547 (1957)
* &quot;C&#x27;mon and Dance with Earl Bostic&quot;, King 558 (1958)
* &quot;Bostic Rocks (Hits of the Swing Age)&quot;, King 571 (1958)
* &quot;Bostic Showcase of Swinging Dance Tunes&quot;, King 583 (1958)
* &quot;Alto Magic in Hi-Fi (A Dance Party with Bostic)&quot;, King 597 (1958)
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays Sweet Tunes of the Fantastic 50s&quot;, King 602 (1958)
* &quot;Dance Music From the Bostic Workshop&quot;, King 613 (1959)
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays Sweet Tunes of the Roaring &#x27;20s&quot;, King 620 (1959)
* &quot;Earl Bostic &amp; His Big Band Play Sweet Tunes of the Swinging &#x27;30s&quot;, King 632 (1959)
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays Sweet Tunes of the Sentimental 40s&quot;, King 640 (1959)
* &quot;Musical Pearls by Bostic&quot;, King 662 (1959)
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays the Hit Tunes of the Big Broadway Shows&quot;, King 705 (1960)
* &quot;Earl Bostic by Popular Demand&quot;, King 786 (1962)
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays Bossa Nova&quot;, King 827 (1963)
* &quot;Songs of the Fantastic 50s, Vol. 2&quot;, King 838 (1963)
* &quot;Jazz As I Feel It&quot; (featuring Richard &quot;Groove&quot; Holmes), King 846 (1963)
* &quot;The Best of Earl Bostic, Volume 2&quot;, King 881 (1964)
* &quot;A New Sound by Earl Bostic&quot; (featuring Richard &quot;Groove&quot; Holmes), King 900 (1964)
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays the Great Hits of 1964&quot;, King 921 (1964)
* &quot;Memorial to Earl Bostic: 24 Tunes That Earl Loved the Most!&quot;, King 947 (1966) [2LP]
* &quot;Harlem Nocturne&quot;, King 1048 (1969)
* &quot;14 Original Greatest Hits&quot;, King/Gusto 5010X (1977)
* &quot;27 Saloon Songs&quot;, Diplomat DS-2407 [2LP]
* &quot;The Earl of Bostic&quot;, Grand Prix KS-404
* &quot;Wild, Man!&quot;, Grand Prix KS-416
* &quot;Sax &quot;O&quot; Boogie&quot;, Oldie Blues OL-8007 (1984)
* &quot;Blows a Fuse&quot;, Charly R&amp;B CRB-1091 (1985); reissued on CD as Charly R&amp;B CD-CHARLY-241 (1991) with 4 extra tracks

===CD compilations===
* &quot;Flamingo (Charly R&amp;B Masters, Vol.16)&quot;, Charly CDRB-16 (1996)
* &quot;The Chronological Earl Bostic 1945–1948&quot;, Classics &#x27;Blues &amp; Rhythm Series&#x27; 5005 (2001)
* &quot;The Chronological Earl Bostic 1948–1949&quot;, Classics &#x27;Blues &amp; Rhythm Series&#x27; 5022 (2002)
* &quot;The Chronological Earl Bostic 1949–1951&quot;, Classics &#x27;Blues &amp; Rhythm Series&#x27; 5039 (2002)
* &quot;The Chronological Earl Bostic 1952–1953&quot;, Classics &#x27;Blues &amp; Rhythm Series&#x27; 5093 (2004)
* &quot;The Chronological Earl Bostic 1954–1955&quot;, Classics &#x27;Blues &amp; Rhythm Series&#x27; 5179 (2007)
* &quot;Flamingo&quot;, Proper (PROPERPAIRS) PVCD-100 (2002) [2CD]
* &quot;Magic Bostic 1944–1952 (Jazz Archives No. 209)&quot;, EPM Musique 160402 (2003)
* &quot;The Very Best of Earl Bostic&quot;, Collectables COL-2886 (2004)
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays Flamingo&quot;, ASV/Living Era CDAJA-5635 (2006)
* &quot;Earl Bostic Plays Jazz Standards&quot;, Definitive DRCD-11295 (2006)
* &quot;The Earl Bostic Story&quot;, Proper PROPERBOX-112 (2006) [4-CD box set]
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Ball Tonight!&quot;, Rev-Ola CRREV-163 (2006)
* &quot;The Earl Bostic Collection 1939-59&quot;, Acrobat ADDCD-3131 (2015) [2CD]
* &quot;Four Classic Albums&quot;, Avid AMSC-1210 (2016) [2CD] — includes all of the tracks from the albums &quot;Dance Time&quot;, &quot;Let&#x27;s Dance With Earl Bostic&quot;, &quot;Alto Magic in Hi-Fi (A Dance Party with Bostic)&quot;, and &quot;Dance Music from the Bostic Workshop&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*Marty Jourard on Earl Bostic
*Earl Bostic: Up There In Orbit</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q557435" start="0" end="18" title="Earl Bostic" label="Eugene Earl Bostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="165" end="169" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="171" end="176" title="swing music" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515757" start="178" end="188" title="jump blues" label="jump blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="215" end="231" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457276" start="299" end="319" title="Flamingo (song)" label="&amp;quot;Flamingo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658561" start="327" end="342" title="Harlem Nocturne" label="Harlem Nocturne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350117" start="356" end="366" title="Temptation (Nacio Herb Brown and Arthur Freed song)" label="Temptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980709" start="439" end="452" title="Where or When" label="Where or When"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="547" end="560" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="603" end="608" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="696" end="706" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="847" end="856" title="sound recording and reproduction" label="recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q313525" start="862" end="876" title="Lionel Hampton" label="Lionel Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q356490" start="899" end="916" title="Charlie Christian" label="Charlie Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103642" start="918" end="928" title="Clyde Hart (pianist)" label="Clyde Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q720654" start="933" end="948" title="Big Sid Catlett" label="Big Sid Catlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q723116" start="981" end="993" title="Fate Marable" label="Fate Marable"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="997" end="1008" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q863970" start="1009" end="1018" title="riverboat" label="riverboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q390087" start="1043" end="1060" title="Xavier University of New Orleans" label="Xavier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q693360" start="1119" end="1130" title="Arnett Cobb" label="Arnett Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344717" start="1132" end="1145" title="Hot Lips Page" label="Hot Lips Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q765531" start="1147" end="1158" title="Rex Stewart" label="Rex Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239006" start="1160" end="1168" title="Don Byas" label="Don Byas"/>
<link wikidata="Q356490" start="1170" end="1187" title="Charlie Christian" label="Charlie Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="1189" end="1204" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283920" start="1206" end="1217" title="Edgar Hayes" label="Edgar Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="1219" end="1231" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486832" start="1311" end="1326" title="Smalls Paradise" label="Smalls Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="1472" end="1483" title="jam session" label="jam session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814151" start="1493" end="1516" title="Minton&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Minton&amp;#x27;s Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886050" start="1606" end="1614" title="Majestic Records" label="Majestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="1683" end="1687" title="hit record" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350117" start="1699" end="1709" title="Temptation (1933 song)" label="Temptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457276" start="1742" end="1750" title="Flamingo (song)" label="Flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q753614" start="1764" end="1781" title="You Go to My Head" label="You Go to My Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070310" start="1798" end="1806" title="Cherokee (Ray Noble song)" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739880" start="1850" end="1861" title="Keter Betts" label="Keter Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346401" start="1863" end="1873" title="Jaki Byard" label="Jaki Byard"/>
<link wikidata="Q356715" start="1875" end="1887" title="Benny Carter" label="Benny Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="1889" end="1902" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q322308" start="1904" end="1917" title="Teddy Edwards" label="Teddy Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q121535" start="1919" end="1931" title="Benny Golson" label="Benny Golson"/>
<link wikidata="Q885774" start="1933" end="1946" title="Blue Mitchell" label="Blue Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q954242" start="1948" end="1958" title="Tony Scott (musician)" label="Tony Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132763" start="1960" end="1972" title="Cliff Smalls" label="Cliff Smalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q725415" start="1974" end="1990" title="Charles Thompson (jazz)" label="Charles Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q638824" start="1992" end="2010" title="Stanley Turrentine" label="Stanley Turrentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q328349" start="2012" end="2028" title="Tommy Turrentine" label="Tommy Turrentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q246618" start="2175" end="2187" title="Shelly Manne" label="Shelly Manne"/>
<link wikidata="Q320883" start="2198" end="2206" title="Joe Pass" label="Joe Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q366538" start="2221" end="2254" title="Richard Holmes (organist)" label="Richard &amp;quot;Groove&amp;quot; Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q367508" start="2655" end="2666" title="Eric Dolphy" label="Eric Dolphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q470182" start="2695" end="2708" title="Paul Whiteman" label="Paul Whiteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q367447" start="2710" end="2721" title="Louis Prima" label="Louis Prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q313525" start="2723" end="2737" title="Lionel Hampton" label="Lionel Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q319980" start="2739" end="2749" title="Gene Krupa" label="Gene Krupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q320065" start="2751" end="2761" title="Artie Shaw" label="Artie Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344717" start="2763" end="2776" title="Hot Lips Page" label="Hot Lips Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q504485" start="2778" end="2792" title="Jack Teagarden" label="Jack Teagarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q531823" start="2794" end="2808" title="Ina Ray Hutton" label="Ina Ray Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q432562" start="2814" end="2824" title="Alvino Rey" label="Alvino Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q234413" start="2900" end="2916" title="Anita O&amp;#x27;Day" label="Anita O&amp;#x27;Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q376146" start="2921" end="2933" title="Roy Eldridge" label="Roy Eldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="3014" end="3030" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875789" start="3146" end="3166" title="Carolina Beach Music" label="Carolina Beach Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="3170" end="3184" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="3186" end="3200" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="3205" end="3213" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067899" start="3280" end="3297" title="Cavalcade of Jazz" label="Cavalcade of Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297716" start="3314" end="3327" title="Wrigley Field (Los Angeles)" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q62709531" start="3365" end="3382" title="Leon Hefflin, Sr." label="Leon Hefflin, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q588392" start="3422" end="3431" title="Roy Brown (blues musician)" label="Roy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293621" start="3451" end="3460" title="Don Tosti" label="Don Tosti"/>
<link wikidata="Q722303" start="3486" end="3499" title="Shorty Rogers" label="Shorty Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="3501" end="3526" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q532894" start="3532" end="3547" title="Velma Middleton" label="Velma Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="3553" end="3568" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q62295" start="3662" end="3680" title="St. Albans, Queens" label="St. Albans, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="3999" end="4018" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645215" start="4096" end="4119" title="Inglewood Park Cemetery" label="Inglewood Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538732" start="4186" end="4198" title="Slappy White" label="Slappy White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274" start="4391" end="4401" title="Chet Baker" label="Chet Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="4403" end="4414" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="4420" end="4435" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082256" start="4510" end="4536" title="Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame" label="Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q313519" start="4598" end="4611" title="Sidney Bechet" label="Sidney Bechet"/>
<link wikidata="Q962310" start="4630" end="4641" title="James Moody (saxophonist)" label="James Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253128" start="4711" end="4720" title="Down Beat" label="Down Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="5307" end="5312" title="bebop" label="bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="5583" end="5592" title="Musical improvisation" label="improvise"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="6038" end="6052" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q723821" start="6075" end="6088" title="Lou Donaldson" label="Lou Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q311715" start="6638" end="6648" title="Art Blakey" label="Art Blakey"/>
<link wikidata="Q441739" start="7187" end="7196" title="altissimo" label="altissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q121535" start="7389" end="7401" title="Benny Golson" label="Benny Golson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205870" start="7614" end="7632" title="circular breathing" label="circular breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820764" start="7787" end="7815" title="tonguing" label="double tongue, triple tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742077" start="8193" end="8203" title="King Records (USA)" label="King label"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="8445" end="8452" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q229322" start="8495" end="8511" title="Dinah Washington" label="Dinah Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915318" start="8862" end="8873" title="Soupy Sales" label="Soupy Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q105873119" start="9843" end="9849" title="Gotham Records" label="Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q781767" start="10067" end="10081" title="Boots Randolph" label="Boots Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q638824" start="10086" end="10104" title="Stanley Turrentine" label="Stanley Turrentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="10201" end="10208" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110477" start="10250" end="10269" title="Cannonball Adderley" label="Cannonball Adderley"/>
<link wikidata="Q502311" start="10274" end="10285" title="Sonny Stitt" label="Sonny Stitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410072" start="10330" end="10352" title="All The Things You Are" label="All The Things You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742077" start="11297" end="11301" title="King Records (United States)" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655560" start="12931" end="12965" title="Sweet Tunes of the Sentimental 40s (album)" label="Sweet Tunes of the Sentimental 40s"/>
<link wikidata="Q366538" start="13364" end="13397" title="Richard &amp;quot;Groove&amp;quot; Holmes" label="Richard &amp;quot;Groove&amp;quot; Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13655652" start="14057" end="14068" title="Oldie Blues" label="Oldie Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086379" start="14112" end="14118" title="Charly Records" label="Charly"/>
<link wikidata="Q96142581" start="14375" end="14383" title="Chronological Classics" label="Classics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261746" wikidata="Q678140" url="?curid=261746" title="List of municipalities of the Brussels-Capital Region">
<text>The 19 municipalities of the Brussels-Capital Region are the political subdivisions of Belgium&#x27;s central region. The government of each municipality is responsible for the handling of local level duties, such as law enforcement and the upkeep of schools and roads within its borders. Municipal administration is also conducted by a mayor, a council, and an executive.

In 1831, Belgium was divided into 2,739 municipalities, including 20 within the current Brussels-Capital Region (which at that time did not exist). In 1841, a 21st and 22nd municipality were created when Berchem-Sainte-Agathe formally separated from neighbouring Koekelberg and Jette-Ganshoren split into Jette and Ganshoren. Since then, three municipalities have been merged with the City of Brussels: Laeken, Haren, and Neder-Over-Heembeek, in 1921. Unlike most of the municipalities in Belgium, the ones located in the Brussels-Capital Region were not merged with others during mergers occurring in 1964, 1970, and 1975. However, many territorial changes have occurred, predominantly between the City of Brussels and its neighbouring municipalities.

The largest and most populous of the municipalities is the City of Brussels, covering with 176,545 inhabitants. The least populous is Koekelberg with 21,609 inhabitants, and the smallest in area is Saint-Josse-ten-Noode, which is only and also has the highest population density, at . Watermael-Boitsfort has the lowest population density, at .

==List==
The names of the municipalities are given in the two official languages of the Brussels-Capital Region: French and Dutch.


== See also ==

* List of municipalities of Belgium
* Municipalities with language facilities

==References==
== External links ==

* Brussels-Capital Region. &quot;Centre d&#x27;Informatique pour la Région Bruxelloise&quot; (Brussels Regional Informatics Center)
* Interactive map of the 19 Communes (Municipalities) of Brussels</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="7" end="21" title="municipalities" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="29" end="52" title="Brussels-Capital Region" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="87" end="94" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110" end="116" title="Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium#Regions" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q272272" start="578" end="599" title="Berchem-Sainte-Agathe" label="Berchem-Sainte-Agathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219244" start="637" end="647" title="Koekelberg" label="Koekelberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="652" end="667" title="Jette-Ganshoren" label="Jette-Ganshoren"/>
<link wikidata="Q241918" start="679" end="684" title="Jette" label="Jette"/>
<link wikidata="Q366552" start="689" end="698" title="Ganshoren" label="Ganshoren"/>
<link wikidata="Q239" start="759" end="775" title="City of Brussels" label="City of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q730506" start="777" end="783" title="Laeken" label="Laeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q672888" start="785" end="790" title="Haren, Belgium" label="Haren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645721" start="796" end="815" title="Neder-Over-Heembeek" label="Neder-Over-Heembeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q493522" start="845" end="870" title="municipalities in Belgium" label="municipalities in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q219244" start="1262" end="1272" title="Koekelberg" label="Koekelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q272243" start="1326" end="1347" title="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode" label="Saint-Josse-ten-Noode"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1388" end="1406" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q272262" start="1413" end="1432" title="Watermael-Boitsfort" label="Watermael-Boitsfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1587" end="1593" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1598" end="1603" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606337" start="1625" end="1658" title="List of municipalities of Belgium" label="List of municipalities of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q737681" start="1661" end="1700" title="Municipalities with language facilities" label="Municipalities with language facilities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261749" wikidata="Q115782" url="?curid=261749" title="GRU (Russian Federation)">
<text>The Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, formerly the Main Intelligence Directorate, and still commonly known by its previous abbreviation GRU, is the foreign military intelligence agency of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation. The GRU controls the military intelligence service and maintains its own special forces units.

Unlike Russia&#x27;s other security and intelligence agenciessuch as the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR), the Federal Security Service (FSB), and the Federal Protective Service (FSO)whose heads report directly to the president of Russia (see Intelligence agencies of Russia), the director of the GRU is subordinate to the Russian military command, reporting to the Minister of Defence and the Chief of the General Staff.

The directorate is reputedly Russia&#x27;s largest foreign-intelligence agency, and is distinguished among its counterparts for its willingness to execute riskier &quot;complicated, high stakes operations&quot;. According to unverified statements by Stanislav Lunev, a defector from the GRU, in 1997 the agency deployed six times as many agents in foreign countries as the SVR, and commanded some 25,000 Spetsnaz troops.

==History==
===Origins and early history===

The first Russian body for military intelligence dates from 1810, in the context of the Napoleonic Wars raging across Europe, when War Minister Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly proposed to Emperor Alexander I of Russia the formation of the Expedition for Secret Affairs under the War Ministry (); two years later, it was renamed the Special Bureau ().

In 1815, the Bureau became the First Department under the General Chief of Staff. In 1836, the intelligence functions were transferred to the Second Department under the General Chief of Staff. After many name-changes through the years, in April 1906, the Military intelligence was carried out by the Fifth Department under the General Chief of Staff of the War Ministry.

The GRU&#x27;s first predecessor in Soviet Russia was established by the secret order signed on 5 November 1918 by Jukums Vācietis, the first commander-in-chief of the Red Army (RKKA), and by Ephraim Sklyansky, deputy to Leon Trotsky, the civilian leader of the Red Army. (Since 2006, the Russian Federation has officially observed the date of 5 November as the professional holiday of military intelligence in Russia.) The military human intelligence service thus established was originally known as the Registration Agency (&quot;Registrupravlenie&quot;, or &quot;Registrupr&quot;; ) of the Field Headquarters of the Revolutionary Military Council of the Republic; Simon Aralov was its first head. Its early history was marked by a series of reorganisations influenced by the Soviet-Polish War, the consolidation and restablisation of the Soviet Union, and the general reorganisation of the Red Army; this included changes to its name, status, and responsibilities.

The first head of the Fourth Directorate was Yan Karlovich Berzin, who remained in the post from March 1924 until April 1935 (in 1938, he was arrested and executed as a Trotskyite during the Stalinist purges). Military intelligence was known for its fierce independence from the rival &quot;internal intelligence organizations&quot;, such as the NKVD, and later KGB; however, public statements of Soviet military intelligence veterans state the Fourth Directorate, and later GRU, had always been operationally subordinate to the KGB. Military intelligence was headquartered in a small and nondescript complex west of the Kremlin, whereas the NKVD was in the very centre of Moscow, next to the building that housed People&#x27;s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs at the bottom of Kuznetsky Most. Consequently, Soviet military intelligence came to be known in Soviet diplomats&#x27; cant as &quot;distant neighbours&quot; () as opposed to the &quot;near neighbours&quot; of the NKVD/KGB.

===Cold War===
The GRU was created under its current name and form by Joseph Stalin in February 1942, less than a year after the invasion of the Soviet Union by Nazi Germany. From April 1943 the GRU handled human intelligence exclusively outside the USSR. In addition to operations against the Axis powers, GRU is credited with having infiltrated the British nuclear weapon programme and up to 70 American government and scientific institutions.

During the Cold War, the GRU, like many of its Western rivals, maintained &quot;rezidenturas&quot;, or resident spies, worldwide; these included both &quot;legal&quot; agents, based at Soviet embassies with official diplomatic cover, and &quot;illegal&quot; officers without cover. It also maintained a signals intelligence (SIGINT) station in Lourdes, Cuba and other Soviet-bloc countries. Though less well known than the KGB, with which it shared a fierce rivalry, GRU is known to have been involved in several high-profile episodes; this included opening backchannel negotiations with the U.S. government during the Cuban Missile Crisis and contributing to the Profumo scandal that partly contributed to the fall of a British administration. GRU was distinguished for its &quot;closer ties with revolutionary movements and terrorist groups, greater experience with weapons and explosives, and even tougher training for recruits&quot;; new recruits were allegedly shown footage of a traitorous officer being fed into a crematorium alive.

The existence of the GRU was not publicized during the Soviet era, though it was mentioned in the 1931 memoirs of the first OGPU defector, Georges Agabekov, and described in detail in the 1939 autobiography, &quot;I Was Stalin&#x27;s Agent,&quot; by Walter Krivitsky, the most senior Red Army intelligence officer ever to defect. GRU became widely known in Russia, and outside narrow confines of the Western intelligence community, during &quot;perestroika&quot;, due partly to the writings of &quot;Viktor Suvorov&quot; (Vladimir Rezun), a GRU officer who defected to Great Britain in 1978 and wrote about his experiences in the Soviet military and intelligence services. According to Suvorov, even the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the country&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; leader, needed to undergo a security screening to enter GRU headquarters.

===Post-Soviet period===
Following the dissolution of the USSR in December 1991, the GRU continued as an important part of Russia&#x27;s intelligence services, especially since it was the only one to more or less maintain operational and institutional continuity: the KGB had been dissolved after aiding a failed coup in 1991 against the then Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev. It is now succeeded by the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) and the Federal Security Service (FSB).

Evidencing its growing strategic profile, in 2006 the GRU moved to a new headquarters complex at , which cost 9.5 billion rubles to build and incorporates 70,000 square meters. In April 2009, President Dmitry Medvedev fired then-GRU head Valentin Korabelnikov, who had headed the GRU since 1997, reportedly over Korabelnikov&#x27;s objections to proposed reforms. Pursuant to these reforms, the following year, the official name of the unit was changed from &quot;GRU&quot; to the &quot;Main Directorate of the Russian General Staff&quot;, or &quot;G.U.&quot;; however, &quot;GRU&quot; continues to be commonly used in media.
The GRU underwent severe reductions in funding and personnel following the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, during which it failed to discover the more advanced anti-aircraft weapons obtained by Georgia. However, it continued to play a key role in several Russian operations, including in Russia&#x27;s intervention in eastern Ukraine in 2014 and the subsequent annexation of Crimea. GRU agents were also implicated in numerous cyberwarfare operations across the West, including in the U.S., France, and Germany. Many of its successes took place during the tenure of Igor Sergun, who headed the service from late 2011 until his death in early January 2016. Sergun&#x27;s sudden death shortly after the restoration of the GRU&#x27;s influence led to speculations of foul play by Russian adversaries.

The tenure of Sergun&#x27;s successor, Igor Korobov, was marked by what some news media construed as multiple high-profile setbacks, such as the thwarted 2016 coup d&#x27;état attempt in Montenegro, the failed 2018 Salisbury poisoning, and an unprecedented number of disclosed GRU agents. Korobov died on 21 November 2018, &quot;after a serious and prolonged illness&quot;, according to the official Defence Ministry statement. His death provoked speculations and unverified reports of him having fallen ill in October that year following a harsh dressing-down from President Vladimir Putin. However, former CIA station-chief Daniel Hoffman cautioned in 2017 that some of the Russian intelligence&#x27;s recent operations that appeared to be botched might have been intended for discovery. Similarly, in 2019, Eerik-Niiles Kross, a former Estonian intelligence official, opined that GRU&#x27;s apparent sloppiness &quot;has become part of the psychological warfare. It&#x27;s not that they have become that much more aggressive. They want to be felt. It&#x27;s part of the game.&quot;

On 2 November 2018, while marking the GU&#x27;s 100th anniversary, President Putin proposed restoring the agency&#x27;s former name: Главное разведывательное управление (GRU).

==Organizational structure==
===1997 organization===
The GRU is organized into numerous directorates, directions, and sections. According to the data available in open sources in 1997, the structure of the Main Directorate consists of at least 12 known directorates and several other auxiliary departments.

* The First Directorate is responsible for intelligence in Europe.
* The Second Directorate is geographically responsible for the Western Hemisphere.
* The Third Directorate is geographically responsible for Asia.
* The Fourth Directorate is geographically responsible for Africa and the Middle East.
* The Fifth Directorate is responsible for military operations intelligence, including naval and air force intelligence.
* The Sixth Directorate is responsible for signals intelligence (SIGINT) and space intelligence. It uses over 20 different types of aircraft, a fleet of 60 SIGINT collection vessels, satellites, and ground stations to collect signals intelligence. Together with FAPSI, the GRU operates SIGINT collection facilities in over 60 diplomatically protected facilities throughout the world. These agencies also operate ground collection facilities within former Soviet states&#x27; territory.
* The Seventh Directorate is responsible specifically for NATO.
* The Eighth Directorate deals with special purpose administration.
* The Ninth Directorate is responsible for military technology.
* The Tenth Directorate is the department of war economics.
* The Eleventh Directorate is the department of strategic doctrines and arms.
* The Twelfth Directorate is responsible for information warfare.

===2020 organization===
The American Congressional Research Service, based on interviews with various experts, gives the following organization of the GRU, although it acknowledges that the organization&#x27;s true structure is &quot;a closely guarded secret.&quot;

4 Regional Directorates:
* First Directorate: European Union
* Second Directorate: North and South America, the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand
* Third Directorate: Asia
* Fourth Directorate: Africa

11 Mission-Specific Directorates:
* Fifth Directorate: Operational Intelligence
* Sixth Directorate: Electronic/Signals intelligence
** GRU cyber capabilities, Unit 26165 (allegedly the hacking group Fancy Bear/APT28/STRONTIUM), and Unit 74455 (allegedly the Sandworm Team)
* Seventh Directorate: NATO
* Eighth Directorate: Russian Spetsnaz (special forces)
* Ninth Directorate: Military technology
* Tenth Directorate: Military economy
* Eleventh Directorate: Strategic doctrine
* Twelfth Directorate: Information Operations (separate from American information operations)
* Space Intelligence Directorate
* Operational and Technical Directorate
* External Relations Department

===Units===
====Unit 26165====

Unit 26165, also known as Fancy Bear, STRONTIUM, and APT28, is a cyber operations/hacking group. Unit 26165 was originally created during the Cold War as the 85th Main Special Service Center, responsible for military intelligence cryptography. The Netherlands has accused Unit 26165 of also being involved in the attempted 2018 OPCW hack and targeting its investigation into the 2014 downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 (MH17), for which the Dutch investigation blames pro-Russian Ukrainian separatists armed with surface-to-air missiles by Russia.

====Unit 29155====

Unit 29155 is tasked with foreign assassinations and other covert activities aimed at destabilizing European countries. The Unit is thought to have operated in secret since at least 2008, though its existence only became publicly known in 2019. It is commanded by Maj. Gen. and based at the headquarters of the 161st Special Purpose Specialist Training Center in eastern Moscow. Its membership included decorated veterans from the Soviet war in Afghanistan and Russia&#x27;s most recent series of wars in Chechnya and Ukraine. It has been linked to the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea, the 2015 poisonings of Bulgarian arms dealer Emilian Grebev (also spelled Emilyan), the 2016 Montenegro coup attempt, and the poisoning of Russian defector Sergei Skripal. Unit 29155 operatives have also been tracked to Switzerland during the time (early 2018) other GRU units hacked the World Anti-Doping Agency (then investigating state-sponsored doping by Russian Olympians) and attempted to hack the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (then investigating the Douma chemical attack by Russia-backed Bashar al-Assad and evidence in the Skripal case). Spain has also investigated the travel of Unit 29155 member Denis Sergeev (who has also used the name Sergei Fedotov) to Barcelona in 2017 around the time of the 2017 Catalan independence referendum. The unit is also accused of being behind the alleged Russian bounty program where Taliban militants were paid to kill American troops, although the program&#x27;s existence is uncertain, unproven, and unverified.
&lt;br&gt;
The FBI, CISA, and NSA concluded that cyber actors linked to the GRU&#x27;s 161st Specialist Training Center (Unit 29155) had conducted cyber operations targeting global entities for espionage, sabotage, and reputational harm since at least 2020. Starting on 13 January 2022, these actors deployed the WhisperGate malware against several Ukrainian organizations. The advisory detailed the tactics and techniques used by Unit 29155 and offered further analysis of WhisperGate.

====Unit 35555====
Unit 35555 is a socio-psychological research laboratory linked to supporting Wagner and other private military companies.

====Unit 54777====

Unit 54777, alternately called the 72nd Special Service Center, is one of the GRU&#x27;s primary psychological warfare capabilities. Unit 54777 retains several front organizations, including InfoRos and the Institute of the Russian Diaspora. The unit originated from Soviet GLAVPUR (&quot;Glavnoye Politicheskoye Upravlenie&quot;, or the Main Political Department) and was created in early 1990s and notably employed colonel Aleksandr Viktorovich Golyev, whose memoirs were published in 2020 along with other GRU documents. In the 1990s, the unit focused on pro-Soviet disinformation in newly split republics such as Lithuania and Chechnya. In later years the unit covered a broad range of activities from running NGOs targeting Russian expatriates in Western countries (InfoRos, Institute of the Russian Diaspora, World Coordinating Council of Russian Compatriots Living Abroad, Foundation for Supporting and Protecting the Rights of Compatriots Living Abroad) and manipulating public opinion in Russia and abroad in preparation for armed conflicts such as in Georgia, Donbas or Syria.

====Unit 74455====

Unit 74455, also known as the Sandworm Team or the Main Center for Technologies, used various fictitious online identities (DCLeaks and Guccifer 2.0) to coordinate the release of the politically sensitive stolen documents with WikiLeaks for &quot;maximum political impact&quot; starting on the eve of the 2016 Democratic National Convention. Its guilt has been reported by American media and a Senate Intelligence Committee investigation. In October 2020, the United States Department of Justice indicted six Unit 74455 GRU officers for multiple cyberattacks, including the December 2015 Ukraine power grid cyberattack, the 2017 Macron e-mail leaks, the 2017 NotPetya attacks, the 2018 Winter Olympics hack (for which the GRU attempted to frame North Korea), several 2018 attacks on Skripal case investigators, and a 2018–2019 cyberattack campaign against Georgian media and the Georgian Parliament.

===SATCOM===
Since the mid-1970s the GRU has maintained a satellite communications interception post near Andreyevka, located approximately from Spassk-Dalny, Primorsky Krai.

==GRU illegals==
According to a Western assessment of the GRU seen by Reuters in the autumn of 2018, the GRU had a long-running program to run &quot;illegal&quot; spies, i.e. those who work without diplomatic cover and who live under an assumed identity in foreign countries for years. The assessment said: &quot;It plays an increasingly important role in Russia&#x27;s development of Information Warfare (both defensive and offensive). It is an aggressive and well-funded organization which has the direct support ofand access toPresident Vladimir Putin, allowing freedom in its activities and leniency with regards to diplomatic and legislative scrutiny.&quot;

The United States alleges that the GRU, as well as the SVR (its civilian foreign intelligence counterpart), makes use of both legal (intelligence officers with diplomatic protection/official government roles) and illegal operatives.

The &quot;Havana syndrome,&quot; which affected U.S. diplomats and spies worldwide, was possibly linked to GRU’s Unit 29155, as reported by the Insider. Symptoms included migraines and dizziness. Investigations suggested incidents might have occurred as early as 2016, with potential prior events in Frankfurt, Germany. The U.S. Congress passed the Havana Act in 2021 to provide aid to affected personnel and families.

==Special Forces of the Main Directorate==

Commonly known as the &quot;Spetsnaz GRU&quot;, it was formed in 1949. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Spetsnaz GRU remained intact as part of the Russian GRU until 2010, when it was reassigned to other agencies. In 2013, however, the decision was reversed and Spetsnaz GRU units were reassigned to GRU divisions and placed under GRU authority again.

==Education==
GRU officers train at a Ministry of Defence military academy at 50 Narodnoe Opolchenie Street, with intelligence agents receiving additional training at the Cherepovets Higher Military School of Radio Electronics. The A.F. Mozhaysky Military-Space Academy has also been used to train GRU officers.

==Activities by country==
According to the Federation of American Scientists: &quot;Though sometimes compared to the US Defense Intelligence Agency, [the GRU&#x27;s] activities encompass those performed by nearly all joint US military intelligence agencies as well as other national US organizations. The GRU gathers human intelligence through military attaches and foreign agents. It also maintains significant signals intelligence (SIGINT) and imagery reconnaissance (IMINT) and satellite imagery capabilities.&quot; Soviet GRU Space Intelligence Directorate had put more than 130 SIGINT satellites into orbit. GRU and KGB SIGINT network employed about 350,000 specialists.

===Austria===
On 9 November 2018 Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz said that a 70-year-old retired army colonel, identified only as &quot;Martin M.&quot; was believed to have spied for Russia for years. The officer in question, whose name was not disclosed and who might have been approached under a false flag, was reported to have been engaged in selling official secrets to his GRU handlers from 1992 until September 2018. In July 2019, Austria&#x27;s Ministry of the Interior confirmed that the colonel&#x27;s handler was a Moscow-born GRU officer Igor Egorovich Zaytsev, a Russian national, for whom an international arrest warrant had been issued.

===Bulgaria===
An investigation by Bellingcat and &quot;Capital&quot; identified GRU officer Denis Vyacheslavovich Sergeev (using the alias Sergey Vyacheslavovich Fedotov) as a suspect in the 2015 poisoning of Bulgarian arms dealer Emiliyan Gebrev (&quot;Емилиян Гебрев&quot;) in Sofia, following an attack that mirrored the techniques used in the poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal. That attack has been specifically tied to Unit 29155. Three individuals were charged in absentia by the Bulgarians in January 2020.

In March 2021, six Bulgarian nationals alleged to be members of a GRU spy ring operating in Bulgaria were arrested in Sofia.

===Canada===
The GRU received intelligence from Jeffrey Delisle of the Royal Canadian Navy, leading to the expulsion of several Russian Embassy staffers, including the defence attaché to Ottawa.

===Colombia===
In December 2020, Migración Colombia confirmed the expulsion of two Russian diplomats accused of espionage. One of the assailants was identified as Aleksandr Nikolayevich Belousov who, according to the National Intelligence Directorate of Colombia, is a GRU officer that had been credited by the Russian Embassy in Bogotá as a secretary. Nikolayevich, along with an SVR officer, had reportedly tried to gather intelligence on the country&#x27;s electricity infrastructure on behalf of Venezuela&#x27;s Maduro government.

===Czech Republic===

On 17 April 2021, the Czech Republic announced its intelligence agencies had concluded that GRU officers, namely members of Russian military intelligence GRU&#x27;s unit 29155, were involved in two massive ammunition depot explosions in Vrbetice (part of Vlachovice), near the Czech-Slovak border, in October 2014. The explosions killed two persons and &quot;inflicted immense material damage, seriously endangered and disrupted the lives of many local residents&quot;, according to the Czech prime minister.

===Estonia===
In 2007, Deniss Metsavas, a Lasnamäe-born member of the Estonian Land Forces, was targeted with a honey trapping operation while visiting Smolensk. He was subsequently blackmailed into providing information to GRU handlers. His father, Pjotr Volin, was also recruited by GRU agents as leverage against Deniss, and would serve as a courier for classified information.

In May 2017, Russian citizen Artem Zinchenko was convicted of spying on Estonia for the GRU. In 2018, Zinchenko was traded back to Russia in exchange for Raivo Susi, an Estonian imprisoned for espionage. In 2022, Zinchenko fled Russia to seek asylum in Estonia, citing personal opposition to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

On 5 September 2018, Major Deniss Metsavas and Pjotr Volin were charged with giving classified information to the GRU The two were convicted in February 2019.

===Finland===
In September 2018, Finnish police ran a large scale operation against numerous sites owned by Airiston Helmi Oy company that over years accumulated land plots and buildings close to nationally significant key straits, ports, oil refineries and other strategic locations as well as two Finnish Navy vessels. The security operation was run in parallel in multiple locations, involving Finnish National Bureau of Investigation, local police, Tax Administration, Border Guard, and Finnish Defence Forces. During the operation, a no-fly zone was declared over Turku Archipelago where key objects were located. While official cause given for the raid was multi-million euro money laundering and tax fraud, media speculated that the company had been a cover for GRU preparing infrastructure for a surprise attack on Finnish locations in case of a conflict situation.

===France===
Viktor Ilyushin, a GRU operative working as an Air Force deputy attaché, was expelled from France in 2014 for attempted espionage of the staff of François Hollande.

In August 2015, a GRU unit posing as Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant supporters called CyberCaliphate took TV5Monde offline for approximately 18 hours.

GRU&#x27;s APT – Fancy Bear used fake Facebook accounts to pose as associates of Emmanuel Macron&#x27;s campaign staff, with the goal of interfering with the 2017 French presidential election. Georgy Petrovich Roshka, a member of the GRU&#x27;s Unit 26165 was involved in the theft of Macron&#x27;s emails, and subsequent distribution via WikiLeaks.

In December 2019, &quot;Le Monde&quot; reported that the joint effort by British, Swiss, French and U.S. intelligence agencies had discovered an apparent &quot;rear base&quot; of GRU in southeastern France, which was presumably used by GRU for the clandestine operations carried out throughout Europe. Investigators had identified 15 agents – all of them members of GRU&#x27;s Unit 29155 – who visited Haute-Savoie in the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, region of France from 2014 to 2018, including Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov, who are believed to be behind the poisoning of the former GRU colonel and British double agent Sergei Skripal in Salisbury in 2018.

===Georgia===
During the 2006 Georgian–Russian espionage controversy, four officers working for the GRU Alexander Savva, Dmitry Kazantsev, Aleksey Zavgorodny and Alexander Baranov were arrested by the Counter-Intelligence Department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia and were accused of espionage and sabotage. This spy network was managed from Armenia by GRU Colonel Anatoly Sinitsin. A few days later the arrested officers were handed over to Russia through the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).

Spetsnaz GRU unit No. 48427, an airborne unit, participated in the Russo-Georgian War.

===Germany===
The 2015 Bundestag hack was attributed by German intelligence to the GRU. In 2020, Germany issued an arrest warrant for Dmitry Badin, a GRU officer and Unit 26165/Fancy Bear member also accused of involvement in the 2015–2016 DNC hacks in the United States, alleging he played a leading role in the Bundestag hack.

In 2018, German officials reported a key data network used by the Chancellery, ministries, and Parliament had been breached. German media attributed the attack to a Russian Government-sponsored hacking group, either Snake/Ouroborus or Fancy Bear.

In February 2021, Germany charged German citizen Jens F., a worker whose company maintained Bundestag electrical equipment, with espionage, accusing him of providing the building&#x27;s floor plans to GRU operatives in the Russian embassy in 2017. The suspect was a former army officer allegedly linked to the Stasi in the 1980s.

In September 2021, the German foreign ministry warned Russia against the continuation of a pre-election cyberattack campaign targeting German legislators, claiming it had &quot;reliable information&quot; linking the Ghostwriter group behind the attacks to the GRU. The prosecutor general later opened an investigation into the affair.

===Japan===
In 1980, Yukihisa Miyanaga was arrested for providing military secrets from the Defense Agency to Colonel Yuriy N. Koslov, stationed at the Soviet Embassy. 1st Lt. Eiichi Kashii and Warrant Officer Tsunetoshi Oshima were also arrested for passing secrets to Miyanaga.

In September 2000, Japan expelled Captain Viktor Bogatenkov, a military attaché at the Russian Embassy in Tokyo, on allegations of espionage. Bogatenkov was a GRU agent who received classified information from Shigehiro Hagisaki (萩嵜 繁博), a researcher at the National Institute for Defense Studies.

===Latvia===
In early 2018, an investigation by Russian opposition site Mbk.media alleged then-first secretary of the Russian Embassy in Latvia Roman Tatarka was a GRU operative and former classmate of Anatoly Chepiga.

In October 2018, Latvia&#x27;s Constitution Protection Bureau accused Russia of conducting a years-long phishing campaign targeting &quot;state institutions, including the foreign and defense sectors.&quot;

===Lithuania===
In 2012, GRU officer Sergey Moiseyenko recruited Lithuanian Air Force officer Sergej Pusin to conduct espionage on Lithuanian and NATO military operations. Pusin additionally passed personal files on various military officers. Moiseyenko was arrested in 2014 and sentenced to 10.5 years in prison, but was pardoned and returned to Russia by President Nausėda as part of a trilateral prisoner exchange with Norway and Russia in 2019.

===Mexico===
In March 2022, General Glen VanHerck of United States Northern Command testified that &quot;the largest portion of the GRU members is in Mexico right now&quot; seeking &quot;opportunities to...influence [and access the] U.S.&quot; Mexican President López Obrador downplayed the allegation, emphasizing Mexican sovereignty and stating his country &quot;[did not] get involved in [espionage].&quot;

===Moldova===
In June 2017, Moldova expelled five Russian GRU operatives with diplomatic cover from the Russian Embassy in Chișinău, as they were believed to be attempting to recruit fighters from Gagauzia to fight in the ongoing conflict with Ukraine. Russian Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Grigory Karasin rejected the allegations.

===Montenegro===
The two Russian nationals indicted by Montenegrin prosecution as the organisers of the attempted coup d&#x27;état in Montenegro in October 2016 are believed to be GRU officers. One of them, Eduard Vadimovich Shishmakov (&quot;Shirokov&quot;) had been officially identified as GRU in October 2014, when Shishmakov, who then held the position of a deputy military attaché at the Russian embassy in Poland, was declared persona non grata by the Polish government.

===The Netherlands and Switzerland===
In mid-September 2018 the Swiss press reported that two men allegedly working for the GRU had been arrested in The Hague, the Netherlands in the spring that year, after the Salisbury poisoning incident, for planning to hack the computer systems of the Spiez Laboratory, a Swiss institute analyzing chemical weapon attacks for the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). In early October 2018, the government of the Netherlands announced they had arrested four GRU operatives on 13 April: Aleksei Morenets, Evgenii Serebriakov, Oleg Sotnikov, and Aleksey Minin. The Russians allegedly attempted to launch a major &quot;close access&quot; cyberattack against the headquarters of the OPCW in the Hague and also intended to travel onwards to the Spiez laboratory in Switzerland, which was testing Novichok samples from Salisbury at the time. Investigation conducted by open-source intelligence outlets in the aftermath of the Dutch government&#x27;s revelations that used Russian road police databases led to identification of further 305 GRU officers whose private cars were registered at GRU headquarters in Moscow. GRU officer Denis Vyacheslavovich Sergeev has also been documented as operating in Geneva and Lausanne.

====Alleged attempt to infiltrate International Criminal Court====

In June 2022, the Dutch AIVD stated that GRU intelligence officer Sergey Vladimirovich Cherkasov, under the alias of Viktor Muller Ferreira, was denied entry to the Netherlands after arriving for an internship with the International Criminal Court. The AIVD described Cherkasov as a deep-cover illegal, publishing a document he is alleged to have written in 2010 reminding himself of his cover identity. As Ferreira, Cherkasov is alleged to have attended university in the United States and Republic of Ireland, building a cover identity for years as a Brazilian national with an interest in international affairs. AIVD head described the attempted infiltration as a &quot;long-term, multi-year GRU operation that cost a lot of time, energy and money,&quot; calling it a &quot;high-level threat.&quot;

===Norway===
In December 2020, the Norwegian Police Security Service (PST) stated that hackers linked to Fancy Bear and the GRU&#x27;s 85th Special Services Center (GTsSS) were likely responsible for a breach of the Storting&#x27;s email system earlier in the year. The Russian Embassy in Norway denied the claims.

In October 2022, the PST arrested and charged Russian citizen Mikhail Valerievich Mikushin with &quot;illegal espionage against state secrets.&quot; Mikushin had posed as a Brazilian academic named Jose Assis Giammaria and was, at the time of his arrest, researching Norwegian Arctic policy and hybrid threats at the University of Tromsø. Bellingcat investigator Christo Grozev identified Mikushin as a GRU colonel while the Russian embassy in Norway denied any knowledge of Mikushin, calling his arrest a part of &quot;spy mania.&quot;

===Poland===
In June 2014, Poland expelled Russian deputy military attaché Eduard Shishmakov (alias Eduard Shirokov) and three other Russian citizens accused of spying over a 2014 wiretap scandal involving the publication of wiretapped conversations between senior Polish officials. Shishmakov, an accused GRU operative, later became a key suspect in the 2016 Montenegrin coup allegations.

In October 2014, Poland arrested two alleged GRU spies. Polish Lt. Col. Zbigniew J. worked for the GRU for &quot;several years&quot; feeding information on unit morale and troop movements while lawyer-lobbyist Stanisław Szypowski influenced governmental circles and sought a job in the Economy Ministry while providing information on the energy sector. Both met with GRU operatives under official cover in Warsaw and were monitored by Polish counterintelligence.

In July 2019, a Warsaw court sentenced former Economy Ministry employee Marek W. to three years in prison for passing classified information on the energy sector to the GRU from 2015 to 2016.

In May 2020, Polish journalists, supported by former intelligence officials, accused the GRU of conducting a 700-email bomb threat campaign against Polish schools as part of a hybrid warfare strategy. Polish and Russian intelligence services did not comment on the accusations.

In March 2022, the Polish Internal Security Agency (ABW) arrested reporter Pablo Gonzalez, whom they identified as &quot;an agent of the [GRU],&quot; as he planned to cross the Polish-Ukrainian border. Gonzalez, a Spanish citizen of Russian origin, was found with two passports of different names and detained on suspicion of espionage. The ABW accused Gonzalez of &quot;[carrying] out activities for Russia using his journalistic status&quot; and traveling to worldwide zones of conflict and political instability.

In January 2023, Warsaw authorities arrested a Russian and a Belarusian national. The SKW, Poland&#x27;s military counterintelligence agency, accused the pair of spying on Polish military facilities for the GRU since 2017.

===Qatar===
On 13 February 2004, in Doha, two Russian men assassinated Zelimkhan Yandarbiyev, an exiled leader of Chechen rebels and former President of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, in a car-bombing. Yandarbiyev&#x27;s son was also killed. Anatoly V. Belashkov and Vasily A. Bogachyov, thought to be GRU members, were found guilty of the murder by a Qatari criminal court, which said the men had acted under direct orders from the Russian leadership. A third suspected GRU agent, posted as first secretary of the Russian Embassy in Qatar, was arrested but released to his diplomatic immunity. Those sentenced were sent to Russia to serve their sentences but disappeared shortly after.

===Russia===
Dmitry Kozak and Vladislav Surkov, members of the Vladimir Putin administration, reportedly served in the GRU. Two Chechens, Said-Magomed Kakiev and former warlord Sulim Yamadayev were commanders of Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad (&quot;East&quot; and &quot;West&quot;) that were controlled by the GRU. The battalions each included close to a thousand fighters until their disbandment in 2008.

Approximately 300 commandos, intelligence officers and other GRU personnel died during the fighting in Chechnya.

GRU detachments from Chechnya were transferred to Lebanon independently of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon after the 2006 Lebanon War.

GRU officers have also been accused of creating criminal death squads.

===Slovakia===
In early 2022, Slovakia arrested four Slovak nationals described as a &quot;Russian spying network [seeking] information about NATO and Ukraine.&quot; Two were charged with spying and bribery, with Slovak authorities alleging undercover GRU officers at the Russian Embassy paid tens of thousands of euros for the &quot;highly sensitive&quot; information about Slovakia, the Slovak military, and NATO. The men charged were a Slovak military academy rector and disinformation blogger; the other two were released without charge.

===Slovenia===
In January 2023, the Slovenian Intelligence and Security Agency arrested and charged two individuals in Ljubljana with espionage on behalf of the GRU and using false documents. Both were reportedly operating under assumed identities with ties to Argentina. Media variously described those charged as either a husband and wife or two men.

===Spain===
According to reporting by Bellingcat, &quot;El País&quot; and the Civica Media Foundation, the Audiencia Nacional is investigating a GRU group known as Unit 29155 and its operations in Spain. GRU members Denis Sergeev, Alexey Kalinin and Mikhail Opryshko are reported to have been operating in Barcelona around the time of the 2017 Catalan independence referendum.

===Sweden===
In late 2021, Swedish authorities arrested brothers Peyman and Payam Kia for aggravated espionage on behalf of the GRU. Peyman had worked with the Swedish Security Service and Swedish Armed Forces; both brothers were jailed in January 2023.

In late 2022, elite police arrested Russian-born Swedish citizen Sergey Skvortsov, accusing him of nearly 10 years of &quot;gross illegal intelligence activities against Sweden and against a foreign power&quot; (later identified as the United States) on behalf of the GRU. Skvortsov reportedly worked to illegally transfer Western technology to Russia.

===Syria===
The Sixth Directorate was responsible for maintaining the Center S covert listening post in Syria prior to its loss to the Free Syrian Army in 2014. The Sixth Directorate also operates a signals intelligence listening post at Hmeimim Air Base near Latakia.

In 2015 GRU special forces soldiers have reportedly appeared in Aleppo and Homs. GRU officials have also visited Qamishli, near the border with Turkey.

===Turkey===
In 2018 the Turkish government published CCTV videos from assassination of a Chechen commander Abdulvahid Edelgiriev, who was killed in 2015 in Istanbul, claiming the perpetrator was the same person as Anatoliy Chepiga (&quot;Ruslan Boshirov&quot;) from Skripal assassination in UK.

===Ukraine===
The Spetsnaz GRU were involved in the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and in the war in Donbas. During the November 2018, Kerch Strait incident, the GRU&#x27;s Unit 54777 sent text messages to Ukrainian men in the border region calling on them to report for military service.

News media and private cybersecurity firms allege that the GRU hacked the computer networks of Ukrainian energy company Burisma, a key player in the 2020 Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory.

Spetsnaz GRU are involved in the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. Their first reported casualty was Captain Alexey Gluschak, killed in action in Mariupol on 8 March.

===United Kingdom===
In September 2018 the Crown Prosecution Service formally named two Russian nationals, Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov (the names used by the men when entering the UK), as suspected perpetrators of the assassination attempt of the former GRU officer Sergei Skripal and his daughter in March 2018. As part of the charge announcement Scotland Yard released a detailed track of the individuals&#x27; 48 hours in the UK. This covered their arrival in the UK at Gatwick Airport, trip to Salisbury the day before the attack, trip to Salisbury on the day of the attack and return to Moscow via Heathrow Airport. The two men stayed both nights in the City Stay Hotel on Bow Road, East London and Novichok agent was found in their room after police sealed it off on 4 May 2018. British Prime Minister Theresa May told the Commons the same day that the suspects were part of the G.U. intelligence service (formerly known as GRU) and the assassination attempt was not a rogue operation and was &quot;almost certainly&quot; approved at a senior level of the Russian state.

As a side effect of the Skripal poisoning investigation, Russian and Western media reported conclusions made by open-source intelligence outlets that claimed that GRU operatives were issued Russian foreign travel passports with certain characteristics that would allow their tentative identification. Through further research, in the autumn of 2018, &quot;Boshirov&quot; was publicly exposed as Anatoliy Chepiga, a decorated GRU officer, and &quot;Petrov&quot; as Alexander Mishkin.

===United States===
GRU officer Stanislav Lunev, who defected to the U.S. in 1992 while he was posted in Washington under the cover of a TASS news agency correspondent, in the 1990s publicized his claims that small nuclear weapons that could be fit into a knapsack or a briefcase or suitcase had been secretly pre-positioned in the U.S. and other countries around the world to be used for sabotage by Russia&#x27;s agents in the event of war. U.S. Congressman Curt Weldon pursued these claims publicly while admitting that they had been found largely spurious by the FBI. Searches of the areas identified by Lunev – who admitted he had never planted any weapons in the US – have been conducted, &quot;but law-enforcement officials have never found such weapons caches, with or without portable nuclear weapons&quot;.

====Electoral interference====


On 29 December 2016 the White House sanctioned the nine entities and individuals, including the GRU as well as the FSB, for their alleged activities to disrupt and spread disinformation during the 2016 US presidential election. In addition, the United States State Department also declared 35 Russian diplomats and officials &quot;persona non grata&quot; and denied Russian government officials access to two Russian-owned installations in Maryland and New York. On 13 July 2018, an indictment to several GRU Staffers was issued. GRU Unit 26165 and Unit 74455 are alleged to be behind the DCLeaks website, and were indicted for obtaining access and distributing information from data about 500,000 voters from a state election board website as well as the email accounts of John Podesta, Hillary Clinton, and volunteers and employees of the United States Presidential Campaign of Hillary Clinton, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and the Democratic National Committee (DNC). According to information leaked by Reality Winner, the GRU attempted to hack the voting machine manufacturer VR Systems, as well as local election officials.

In July 2018 Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein released an indictment returned by a grand jury charging twelve GRU officers with conspiring to interfere in the 2016 elections.

According to Microsoft VP Tom Burt, a GRU-run group dubbed Strontium (alternatively known as APT28, Sofacy, and Pawn Storm, and Fancy Bear) has been engaged in spear phishing attacks against at least three campaigns in the 2018 midterm elections.

On 19 November 2021, the Coordinating Council of Russian Compatriots in the United States (CCORC) or (KCOPC) closed and on 9 March 2022 Elena Branson was accused of working as a foreign agent by the FBI.

===Yemen===
In August 2024, &quot;Middle East Eye&quot;, citing a US official, reported that personnel of GRU were stationed in Houthi-controlled parts of Yemen to assist the militia&#x27;s attacks on merchant ships during the Israel–Hamas war.

==Directors==
The Head of the Russian Military Intelligence is a military officer. He is the primary military intelligence adviser to the Russian Minister of Defense and to the Chief of the Russian General Staff and to a certain extent also answers to the President of Russia if ordered so.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Active measures
* Farewell Dossier
* Intelligence Directorate of the Main Staff of the Russian Navy
* Leopold Trepper, an organizer of the Soviet spy ring Rote Kapelle (Red Orchestra) prior to World War II
* Nuclear suitcase bomb
* Office of Strategic Services
* Pavel Sudoplatov
* SMERSH
* Vatutinki
* Viktor Suvorov
* Vulkan files leak

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Bowen, Andrew S. (2020) Russian Military Intelligence: Background and Issues for Congress . Congressional Research Service. Washington, D.C.
* Suvorov, Viktor (1984). Inside Soviet Military Intelligence.
* Suvorov, Viktor (1986). Inside the Aquarium.
* Suvorov, Viktor (1988). Spetsnaz: The Inside Story of the Soviet Special Forces.

==External links==
* in the Russian Ministry of Defense website
* Story by Daniel Turovsky, translation by Kevin Rothrock. 6 November 2018, [[Category:GRU| ]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115782" start="4" end="87" title="GRU (Russian Federation)" label="Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115782" start="102" end="131" title="GRU (Russian Federation)" label="Main Intelligence Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q115782" start="187" end="190" title="GRU (Russian Federation)" label="GRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="207" end="228" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914820" start="243" end="256" title="General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="264" end="276" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="284" end="302" title="Russia" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885502" start="369" end="397" title="Spetsnaz GRU" label="its own special forces units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382069" start="427" end="461" title="Intelligence agencies of Russia" label="security and intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q863254" start="473" end="501" title="Foreign Intelligence Service (Russia)" label="Foreign Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q58792" start="513" end="537" title="Federal Security Service" label="Federal Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391331" start="553" end="579" title="Federal Protective Service (Russia)" label="Federal Protective Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="620" end="639" title="president of Russia" label="president of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382069" start="645" end="676" title="Intelligence agencies of Russia" label="Intelligence agencies of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17287317" start="768" end="787" title="Minister of Defence (Russia)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315169" start="796" end="822" title="Chief of the General Staff (Russia)" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031961" start="1075" end="1090" title="Stanislav Lunev" label="Stanislav Lunev"/>
<link wikidata="Q277188" start="1229" end="1237" title="Spetsnaz" label="Spetsnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1380" end="1395" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473208" start="1423" end="1435" title="Ministry of War of the Russian Empire" label="War Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q157632" start="1436" end="1468" title="Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly" label="Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="1489" end="1510" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q707040" start="2133" end="2148" title="Jukums Vācietis" label="Jukums Vācietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="2160" end="2178" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="2186" end="2194" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990775" start="2210" end="2227" title="Ephraim Sklyansky" label="Ephraim Sklyansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="2239" end="2251" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2380" end="2400" title="Public holidays in Russia#List of other public holidays, commemorative and professional days" label="professional holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937824" start="2451" end="2469" title="human intelligence" label="human intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636506" start="2685" end="2697" title="Simon Aralov" label="Simon Aralov"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="2796" end="2813" title="Soviet-Polish War" label="Soviet-Polish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q609509" start="3032" end="3052" title="Yan Karlovich Berzin" label="Yan Karlovich Berzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="3156" end="3166" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyite"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="3178" end="3194" title="Great Purge" label="Stalinist purges"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="3272" end="3319" title="secret police" label="&amp;quot;internal intelligence organizations&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="3333" end="3337" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="3349" end="3352" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="3701" end="3747" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Soviet Union)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244876" start="3765" end="3779" title="Kuznetsky Most" label="Kuznetsky Most"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005" start="3867" end="3871" title="Cant (language)" label="cant"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="4043" end="4056" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="4102" end="4146" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="invasion of the Soviet Union by Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4431" end="4439" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752823" start="4494" end="4518" title="Resident spy" label="&amp;quot;rezidenturas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="4627" end="4652" title="Official cover" label="official diplomatic cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="4658" end="4677" title="Non-official cover" label="&amp;quot;illegal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="4687" end="4700" title="Non-official cover" label="without cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="4723" end="4743" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027536" start="4753" end="4771" title="Lourdes SIGINT Station" label="station in Lourdes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="4788" end="4809" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Soviet-bloc countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="5039" end="5059" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401251" start="5084" end="5099" title="Profumo affair" label="Profumo scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18363484" start="5585" end="5589" title="OGPU" label="OGPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056514" start="5600" end="5616" title="Georges Agabekov" label="Georges Agabekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q924883" start="5711" end="5727" title="Walter Krivitsky" label="Walter Krivitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="5869" end="5891" title="United States Intelligence Community" label="intelligence community"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="5906" end="5917" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q130786" start="5961" end="5975" title="Viktor Suvorov" label="Viktor Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q130786" start="5983" end="5997" title="Vladimir Rezun" label="Vladimir Rezun"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6030" end="6043" title="United Kingdom" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="6165" end="6225" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="6381" end="6404" title="dissolution of the USSR" label="dissolution of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="6648" end="6667" title="Soviet coup attempt of 1991" label="failed coup in 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="6702" end="6719" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q863254" start="6748" end="6776" title="Foreign Intelligence Service (Russia)" label="Foreign Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q58792" start="6791" end="6815" title="Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation" label="Federal Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q23530" start="7026" end="7041" title="Dmitry Medvedev" label="Dmitry Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630429" start="7062" end="7083" title="Valentin Korabelnikov" label="Valentin Korabelnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="7530" end="7548" title="Russo-Georgian War" label="Russo-Georgian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="7731" end="7757" title="Russian military intervention in Ukraine (2014–present)" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="7804" end="7824" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="annexation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4417188" start="8009" end="8020" title="Igor Sergun" label="Igor Sergun"/>
<link wikidata="Q22453451" start="8281" end="8293" title="Igor Korobov" label="Igor Korobov"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669298" start="8396" end="8425" title="Montenegrin coup plot" label="2016 coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="8429" end="8439" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415393" start="8452" end="8476" title="Poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal" label="2018 Salisbury poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="8818" end="8832" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735691" start="9052" end="9070" title="Eerik-Niiles Kross" label="Eerik-Niiles Kross"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="9185" end="9206" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="10157" end="10176" title="military operations" label="military operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="10278" end="10298" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400115" start="10497" end="10502" title="FAPSI" label="FAPSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="10779" end="10783" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476218" start="10962" end="10975" title="War economy" label="war economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q911036" start="11100" end="11119" title="information warfare" label="information warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="11159" end="11189" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="11435" end="11449" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="11472" end="11477" title="North America" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="11482" end="11495" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11501" end="11515" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11517" end="11526" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="11532" end="11543" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="11565" end="11569" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="11592" end="11598" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097873" start="11655" end="11679" title="Operational Intelligence" label="Operational Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="11701" end="11711" title="ELINT" label="Electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="11712" end="11732" title="Signals intelligence" label="Signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="11740" end="11758" title="Cyberwarfare" label="cyber capabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q20757678" start="11800" end="11810" title="Fancy Bear" label="Fancy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686357" start="11811" end="11814" title="Advanced persistent threat" label="APT"/>
<link wikidata="Q100605916" start="11859" end="11872" title="Sandworm (hacker group)" label="Sandworm Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="11897" end="11901" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q277188" start="11932" end="11940" title="Spetsnaz" label="Spetsnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="11942" end="11956" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q329864" start="11979" end="11998" title="Military technology" label="Military technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140224" start="12061" end="12079" title="Military doctrine" label="Strategic doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q911036" start="12103" end="12125" title="Information warfare" label="Information Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18600568" start="12150" end="12172" title="information operations" label="information operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="12377" end="12393" title="Cyberwarfare" label="cyber operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487" start="12394" end="12407" title="Hacker" label="hacking group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12454" end="12462" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="12520" end="12541" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="12542" end="12554" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="12560" end="12571" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="12640" end="12644" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q17374096" start="12707" end="12734" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17" label="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12757" end="12776" title="Malaysia Airlines Flight 17#Criminal investigation" label="Dutch investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15871713" start="12784" end="12817" title="2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine" label="pro-Russian Ukrainian separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="12829" end="12852" title="surface-to-air missiles" label="surface-to-air missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="13323" end="13341" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="war in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29269" start="13360" end="13378" title="First Chechen War" label="most recent series"/>
<link wikidata="Q120843" start="13382" end="13398" title="Second Chechen War" label="wars in Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="13403" end="13410" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="13438" end="13471" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="2014 Russian annexation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18621601" start="13482" end="13491" title="poisoning" label="poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="13496" end="13504" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="13506" end="13517" title="arms dealer" label="arms dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669298" start="13561" end="13589" title="2016 Montenegrin coup allegations" label="2016 Montenegro coup attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415393" start="13599" end="13643" title="Poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal" label="poisoning of Russian defector Sergei Skripal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="13693" end="13704" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q749394" start="13761" end="13785" title="World Anti-Doping Agency" label="World Anti-Doping Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q44013763" start="13806" end="13849" title="Doping in Russia" label="state-sponsored doping by Russian Olympians"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="13877" end="13929" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q51629486" start="13954" end="13975" title="Douma chemical attack" label="Douma chemical attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="13993" end="14008" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Bashar al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="14044" end="14049" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="14165" end="14174" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q27145747" start="14206" end="14242" title="2017 Catalan independence referendum" label="2017 Catalan independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q96744589" start="14297" end="14319" title="Russian bounty program" label="Russian bounty program"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="14326" end="14333" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205058" start="14477" end="14481" title="Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency" label="CISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="14487" end="14490" title="National Security Agency" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="15204" end="15225" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="15267" end="15286" title="front organizations" label="front organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370144" start="15381" end="15388" title="GLAVPUR" label="GLAVPUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="15694" end="15715" title="Dissolution_of_the_Soviet_Union" label="newly split republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27918681" start="16339" end="16346" title="DCLeaks" label="DCLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401849" start="16351" end="16363" title="Guccifer 2.0" label="Guccifer 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="16442" end="16451" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156276" start="16520" end="16555" title="2016 Democratic National Convention" label="2016 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q502239" start="16609" end="16638" title="United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence" label="Senate Intelligence Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="16675" end="16710" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25440050" start="16789" end="16833" title="December 2015 Ukraine power grid cyberattack" label="December 2015 Ukraine power grid cyberattack"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814471" start="16839" end="16863" title="2017 Macron e-mail leaks" label="2017 Macron e-mail leaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23670513" start="16869" end="16890" title="Petya (malware)" label="2017 NotPetya attacks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16896" end="16921" title="2018 Winter Olympics opening ceremony#Hacking of computer systems" label="2018 Winter Olympics hack"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="16960" end="16971" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071928" start="17042" end="17053" title="cyberattack" label="cyberattack"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="17071" end="17079" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417210" start="17094" end="17113" title="Parliament of Georgia" label="Georgian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="17174" end="17198" title="satellite communications" label="satellite communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q196446" start="17261" end="17273" title="Spassk-Dalny" label="Spassk-Dalny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341" start="17275" end="17289" title="Primorsky Krai" label="Primorsky Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="17362" end="17369" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="17482" end="17506" title="Non-official cover" label="without diplomatic cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17960" end="17973" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q863254" start="18011" end="18014" title="Foreign Intelligence Service (Russia)" label="SVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="18082" end="18087" title="Official cover" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885502" start="18682" end="18694" title="Spetsnaz GRU" label="Spetsnaz GRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="18739" end="18770" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146492" start="19071" end="19090" title="Ministry of Defence (Russia)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025301" start="19265" end="19302" title="A.F. Mozhaysky Military-Space Academy" label="A.F. Mozhaysky Military-Space Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q762201" start="19389" end="19422" title="Federation of American Scientists" label="Federation of American Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q612276" start="19466" end="19493" title="Defense Intelligence Agency" label="Defense Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538117" start="19663" end="19681" title="HUMINT" label="human intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="19780" end="19786" title="SIGINT" label="SIGINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654126" start="19816" end="19821" title="IMINT" label="IMINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262885" start="20076" end="20090" title="Sebastian Kurz" label="Sebastian Kurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q420474" start="20324" end="20334" title="false flag" label="false flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q358589" start="20479" end="20503" title="Ministry of the Interior (Austria)" label="Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q22938621" start="20714" end="20724" title="Bellingcat" label="Bellingcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034634" start="20735" end="20742" title="Capital (Bulgarian newspaper)" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q80636201" start="20772" end="20801" title="Denis Vyacheslavovich Sergeev" label="Denis Vyacheslavovich Sergeev"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="20959" end="20964" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415393" start="21027" end="21064" title="poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal" label="poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal"/>
<link wikidata="Q70389486" start="21108" end="21118" title="Unit 29155" label="Unit 29155"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="21317" end="21322" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175948" start="21373" end="21388" title="Jeffrey Delisle" label="Jeffrey Delisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="21396" end="21415" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="21512" end="21518" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164965" start="21554" end="21572" title="Migración Colombia" label="Migración Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19694750" start="21738" end="21771" title="National Intelligence Directorate (Colombia)" label="National Intelligence Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863254" start="21902" end="21905" title="Foreign Intelligence Service (Russia)" label="SVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q58132" start="22038" end="22044" title="Nicolas Maduro" label="Maduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q70389486" start="22245" end="22255" title="unit 29155" label="unit 29155"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535024" start="22317" end="22325" title="Vrbetice" label="Vrbetice"/>
<link wikidata="Q915966" start="22335" end="22345" title="Vlachovice (Zlín District)" label="Vlachovice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017526" start="22632" end="22640" title="Lasnamäe" label="Lasnamäe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370395" start="22660" end="22680" title="Estonian Land Forces" label="Estonian Land Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893705" start="22702" end="22716" title="honey trapping" label="honey trapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="22742" end="22750" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001775" start="23088" end="23094" title="Prisoner exchange" label="traded"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="23215" end="23221" title="Right of asylum" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="23268" end="23300" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="24497" end="24514" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="24554" end="24590" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138163" start="24629" end="24637" title="TV5Monde" label="TV5Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q20757678" start="24692" end="24702" title="Fancy Bear" label="Fancy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="24713" end="24721" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="24756" end="24771" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020999" start="24833" end="24866" title="2017 French presidential election" label="2017 French presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="25014" end="25023" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="25050" end="25058" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q70389486" start="25403" end="25413" title="Unit 29155" label="Unit 29155"/>
<link wikidata="Q12751" start="25428" end="25440" title="Haute-Savoie" label="Haute-Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338206" start="25448" end="25468" title="Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes" label="Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="25470" end="25476" title="Regions of France" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q57083945" start="25516" end="25532" title="Alexander Mishkin" label="Alexander Petrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q56753726" start="25537" end="25552" title="Anatoliy Chepiga" label="Ruslan Boshirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415393" start="25584" end="25597" title="Poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal" label="the poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742411" start="25649" end="25663" title="Sergei Skripal" label="Sergei Skripal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629322" start="25712" end="25755" title="2006 Georgian–Russian espionage controversy" label="2006 Georgian–Russian espionage controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="25987" end="25996" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="26001" end="26009" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="26164" end="26223" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885502" start="26226" end="26238" title="Spetsnaz GRU" label="Spetsnaz GRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="26293" end="26311" title="Russo-Georgian War" label="Russo-Georgian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="26337" end="26346" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q20757678" start="26491" end="26501" title="Fancy Bear" label="Fancy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q26036932" start="26544" end="26563" title="Democratic National Committee cyber attacks" label="2015–2016 DNC hacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q317027" start="26710" end="26721" title="German Chancellery" label="Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q836838" start="27115" end="27130" title="Embassy of Russia, Berlin" label="Russian embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="27202" end="27207" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034" start="27253" end="27269" title="Federal Foreign Office" label="foreign ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071928" start="27327" end="27338" title="cyberattack" label="cyberattack"/>
<link wikidata="Q106241431" start="27439" end="27450" title="Ghostwriter (hacker group)" label="Ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q449319" start="27492" end="27510" title="Public Prosecutor General (Germany)" label="prosecutor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194572" start="28050" end="28068" title="Shigehiro Hagisaki" label="Shigehiro Hagisaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q152503" start="28211" end="28214" title="Mikhail Khodorkovsky" label="Mbk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28234" end="28249" title="Diplomatic rank#Bilateral diplomacy" label="first secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q56753726" start="28341" end="28356" title="Anatoly Chepiga" label="Anatoly Chepiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="28463" end="28471" title="phishing" label="phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091526" start="28632" end="28652" title="Lithuanian Air Force" label="Lithuanian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="28713" end="28717" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="28889" end="28895" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268379" start="28934" end="28941" title="Gitanas Nausėda" label="Nausėda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001775" start="28966" end="28983" title="prisoner exchange" label="prisoner exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="28989" end="28995" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q77881330" start="29053" end="29066" title="Glen D. VanHerck" label="Glen VanHerck"/>
<link wikidata="Q980409" start="29070" end="29100" title="United States Northern Command" label="United States Northern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q318508" start="29279" end="29292" title="López Obrador" label="López Obrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="29456" end="29463" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="29506" end="29522" title="Official cover" label="diplomatic cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="29551" end="29559" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="29625" end="29633" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="29658" end="29679" title="Russian military intervention in Ukraine (2014–present)" label="conflict with Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4214210" start="29724" end="29739" title="Grigory Karasin" label="Grigory Karasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669298" start="29871" end="29897" title="Montenegrin coup plot" label="attempted coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="30201" end="30218" title="persona non grata" label="persona non grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="30226" end="30232" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="30395" end="30404" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415393" start="30457" end="30485" title="Poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal" label="Salisbury poisoning incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422902" start="30536" end="30552" title="Spiez Laboratory" label="Spiez Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="30614" end="30666" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q826629" start="31098" end="31106" title="Novichok agent" label="Novichok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059178" start="31170" end="31194" title="open-source intelligence" label="open-source intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="31502" end="31508" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="31513" end="31521" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866011" start="31616" end="31620" title="General Intelligence and Security Service" label="AIVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="31811" end="31839" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="31886" end="31893" title="Non-official cover" label="illegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="32083" end="32102" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175066" start="32430" end="32463" title="Norwegian Police Security Service" label="Norwegian Police Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q20757678" start="32500" end="32510" title="Fancy Bear" label="Fancy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="32611" end="32619" title="Storting" label="Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787582" start="32978" end="33001" title="Arctic policy of Norway" label="Norwegian Arctic policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q279724" start="33028" end="33048" title="University of Tromsø" label="University of Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q22938621" start="33050" end="33060" title="Bellingcat" label="Bellingcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q104420787" start="33074" end="33088" title="Christo Grozev" label="Christo Grozev"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="33283" end="33291" title="Persona non grata" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q302691" start="33307" end="33323" title="military attaché" label="military attaché"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33424" end="33444" title="Wprost#Role in the 2014 government bugging scandal" label="2014 wiretap scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669298" start="33604" end="33637" title="2016 Montenegrin coup allegations" label="2016 Montenegrin coup allegations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294828" start="33926" end="33942" title="Ministry of Economy (Poland)" label="Economy Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588975" start="33978" end="33991" title="Energy in Poland" label="energy sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="34028" end="34042" title="official cover" label="official cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="34046" end="34052" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588975" start="34252" end="34265" title="Energy in Poland" label="energy sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953349" start="34473" end="34487" title="hybrid warfare" label="hybrid warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q392540" start="34602" end="34626" title="Internal Security Agency (Poland)" label="Internal Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q600742" start="35179" end="35182" title="Military Counterintelligence Service (Poland)" label="SKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="35207" end="35226" title="counterintelligence" label="counterintelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="35353" end="35357" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808525" start="35375" end="35409" title="Assassination of Zelimkhan Yandarbiyev" label="assassinated Zelimkhan Yandarbiyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q210036" start="35431" end="35445" title="Chechen Republic of Ichkeria" label="Chechen rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241280" start="35457" end="35502" title="President of Ichkeria" label="President of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11244" start="35509" end="35520" title="Car bomb" label="car-bombing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35812" end="35827" title="Diplomatic rank#Bilateral diplomacy" label="first secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="35854" end="35859" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q753022" start="35894" end="35913" title="diplomatic immunity" label="diplomatic immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q714330" start="36021" end="36033" title="Dmitry Kozak" label="Dmitry Kozak"/>
<link wikidata="Q548164" start="36038" end="36054" title="Vladislav Surkov" label="Vladislav Surkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="36071" end="36085" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023670" start="36146" end="36165" title="Said-Magomed Kakiev" label="Said-Magomed Kakiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="36177" end="36184" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q718173" start="36185" end="36200" title="Sulim Yamadayev" label="Sulim Yamadayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985930" start="36220" end="36255" title="Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad" label="Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121444" start="36450" end="36470" title="intelligence officer" label="intelligence officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="36556" end="36564" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="36585" end="36592" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="36614" end="36653" title="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon" label="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="36664" end="36680" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="2006 Lebanon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438715" start="36740" end="36752" title="death squads" label="death squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q116249968" start="36996" end="37006" title="Non-official cover" label="undercover"/>
<link wikidata="Q500707" start="37144" end="37159" title="Slovak Armed Forces" label="Slovak military"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442610" start="37334" end="37376" title="Slovenian Intelligence and Security Agency" label="Slovenian Intelligence and Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="37417" end="37426" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22938621" start="37690" end="37700" title="Bellingcat" label="Bellingcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="37708" end="37715" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q758822" start="37759" end="37777" title="Audiencia Nacional" label="Audiencia Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q70389486" start="37816" end="37826" title="GRU Unit 29155" label="Unit 29155"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="37958" end="37967" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q27145747" start="37991" end="38027" title="2017 Catalan independence referendum" label="2017 Catalan independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331110" start="38190" end="38214" title="Swedish Security Service" label="Swedish Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q783911" start="38219" end="38239" title="Swedish Armed Forces" label="Swedish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711545" start="38709" end="38717" title="Center S" label="Center S"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="38743" end="38748" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q858819" start="38774" end="38790" title="Free Syrian Army" label="Free Syrian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q21582584" start="38877" end="38893" title="Khmeimim (air base)" label="Hmeimim Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q200030" start="38899" end="38906" title="Latakia" label="Latakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="38973" end="38979" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="38984" end="38988" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212757" start="39022" end="39030" title="Qamishli" label="Qamishli"/>
<link wikidata="Q56753726" start="39277" end="39293" title="Anatoliy Chepiga" label="Anatoliy Chepiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885502" start="39377" end="39389" title="Special Forces of the Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces" label="Spetsnaz GRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="39411" end="39457" title="annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335075" start="39469" end="39482" title="War in Donbas (2014–2022)" label="war in Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q59199697" start="39510" end="39531" title="Kerch Strait incident" label="Kerch Strait incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="39564" end="39577" title="Text messaging" label="text messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="39665" end="39675" title="News media" label="News media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="39688" end="39701" title="cybersecurity" label="cybersecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="39739" end="39756" title="computer networks" label="computer networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912790" start="39785" end="39792" title="Burisma" label="Burisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q100804812" start="39819" end="39850" title="Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory" label="Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="39886" end="39918" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111017791" start="39996" end="40007" title="Siege of Mariupol" label="in Mariupol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="40064" end="40089" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742411" start="40296" end="40310" title="Sergei Skripal" label="Sergei Skripal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="40503" end="40518" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="40633" end="40649" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030891" start="40708" end="40716" title="Bow Road" label="Bow Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q826629" start="40734" end="40748" title="Novichok agent" label="Novichok agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059178" start="41220" end="41244" title="open-source intelligence" label="open-source intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q56753726" start="41503" end="41519" title="Anatoliy Chepiga" label="Anatoliy Chepiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q57083945" start="41572" end="41589" title="Alexander Mishkin" label="Alexander Mishkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031961" start="41624" end="41639" title="Stanislav Lunev" label="Stanislav Lunev"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="41981" end="41989" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="42035" end="42051" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145362" start="42052" end="42063" title="Curt Weldon" label="Curt Weldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="42467" end="42478" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="42640" end="42669" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 US presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="42688" end="42718" title="United States State Department" label="United States State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="42774" end="42791" title="persona non grata" label="persona non grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="42883" end="42891" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="42896" end="42904" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q27918681" start="43032" end="43039" title="DCLeaks" label="DCLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290476" start="43217" end="43229" title="John Podesta" label="John Podesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255587" start="43344" end="43387" title="Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee" label="Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q26084484" start="43397" end="43426" title="2016 Democratic National Committee email leak" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q30145314" start="43469" end="43483" title="Reality Winner" label="Reality Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q56062836" start="43543" end="43553" title="VR Systems" label="VR Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356240" start="43630" end="43644" title="Rod Rosenstein" label="Rod Rosenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456918" start="43741" end="43750" title="Foreign electoral intervention" label="interfere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="43788" end="43797" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43935" end="43957" title="Phishing#CITEREFrajput2023" label="spear phishing attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892468" start="43998" end="44020" title="2018 United States elections" label="2018 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q18085829" start="44262" end="44277" title="Middle East Eye" label="Middle East Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042087" start="44356" end="44362" title="Houthi movement" label="Houthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="44383" end="44388" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q123285238" start="44403" end="44443" title="Red Sea crisis" label="militia&amp;#x27;s attacks on merchant ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="44455" end="44471" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146492" start="44612" end="44639" title="Ministry of Defense (Russia)" label="Russian Minister of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315169" start="44651" end="44685" title="Chief of the General Staff (Russia)" label="Chief of the Russian General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="44730" end="44749" title="President of Russia" label="President of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q422886" start="44793" end="44808" title="Active measures" label="Active measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167310" start="44811" end="44827" title="Farewell Dossier" label="Farewell Dossier"/>
<link wikidata="Q91074195" start="44830" end="44892" title="Intelligence Directorate of the Main Staff of the Russian Navy" label="Intelligence Directorate of the Main Staff of the Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q511399" start="44895" end="44910" title="Leopold Trepper" label="Leopold Trepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="44932" end="44938" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="44939" end="44942" title="spy" label="spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170155" start="44948" end="44960" title="Red Orchestra (spy)" label="Rote Kapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="44986" end="44998" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q169059" start="45009" end="45022" title="suitcase bomb" label="suitcase bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="45025" end="45053" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q462207" start="45056" end="45072" title="Pavel Sudoplatov" label="Pavel Sudoplatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q158363" start="45075" end="45081" title="SMERSH" label="SMERSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192" start="45084" end="45093" title="Vatutinki" label="Vatutinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q130786" start="45096" end="45110" title="Viktor Suvorov" label="Viktor Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q117349286" start="45113" end="45130" title="Vulkan files leak" label="Vulkan files leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146492" start="45542" end="45569" title="Russian Ministry of Defense" label="Russian Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45589" end="45604" title="Daniel Turovsky" label="Daniel Turovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q18340732" start="45621" end="45635" title="Kevin Rothrock" label="Kevin Rothrock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261750" wikidata="Q726440" url="?curid=261750" title="Chuck Willis">
<text>Harold &quot;Chuck&quot; Willis (January 31, 1926 – April 10, 1958) was an American blues, rhythm and blues, and rock and roll singer and songwriter. His biggest hits, &quot;C. C. Rider&quot; (1957) and &quot;What Am I Living For&quot; (1958), both reached No.1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; R&amp;B chart. He was known as The King of the Stroll for his performance of the 1950s dance the stroll.

==Life and career==
Willis was born in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1926. He was spotted at a talent contest by Atlanta radio disc jockey Zenas Sears, who became his manager and helped him to sign with Columbia Records in 1951. After one single, Willis began recording on a Columbia subsidiary, Okeh. During his stay at Okeh, he established himself as a popular R&amp;B singer and songwriter, performing material that he wrote himself. In 1956, he moved to Atlantic Records where he had immediate success with &quot;It&#x27;s Too Late&quot;, &quot;Juanita&quot; and &quot;Love Me Cherry&quot;.

His most successful recording was &quot;C.C. Rider&quot;, which topped the US &quot;Billboard&quot; R&amp;B chart in 1957 and also crossed over and sold well in the pop market. Jerry Wexler said it was Willis&#x27;s surprising idea to &quot;do an old standard&quot; instead of one of his own songs. &quot;C.C. Rider&quot; was a remake of a twelve-bar blues, performed by Ma Rainey in Atlanta before Willis was born. Its relaxed beat, combined with a mellow vibraphone backing and chorus, inspired the emergence of the popular dance, The Stroll. When performing on stage Willis and his group would do this step side to side. Dick Clark played &quot;C. C. Rider&quot; on American Bandstand, and &quot;The Stroll&quot; became a popular dance. Willis&#x27;s follow-up was &quot;Betty and Dupree&quot;, another &quot;stroll&quot; song and a similar &quot;old standard&quot;, which also did well. Wexler said that Dick Clark used &quot;Betty and Dupree&quot; on American Bandstand to accompany &quot;The Stroll,&quot; and that is how Willis became known as &quot;King of The Stroll.&quot; Willis&#x27; single &quot;Going to the River&quot;, a song by Dave Bartholomew and Fats Domino, was a prototype for his &quot;stroll&quot; sound, reaching No.4 on the R&amp;B chart.

Willis performed wearing a turban (a gimmick suggested to him by his friend Screamin&#x27; Jay Hawkins) and was also known as the &quot;Sheik of Shake.&quot; In the early 1950s he hosted and performed on a weekly Saturday night television show in Atlanta, which featured guest artists such as Ray Charles and Sam Cooke who were passing through town. Zenas Sears said that Willis was a better songwriter than a performer, but also said, &quot;On the TV show ... Chuck would do five or six different numbers every week. He moved very well, he handled himself very well and put everyone at ease.&quot; He was a solid, if not spectacular, performer on the road as well, and &quot;was one of the few artists who would treat a band properly,&quot; according to Roy Gaines, who was Willis&#x27;s bandleader and guitarist.

==Songwriting==
Willis approached songwriting with painstaking craftsmanship and the result was literate, soulful and melancholy. He did not introduce a song in the studio until it was a polished product and fully worked out in his mind. He used a variety of methods. Zenas Sears said Willis would drive around in the car singing into a reel-to-reel tape recorder. Sears said, &quot;If he&#x27;d lived he would have been recognized for that [his songwriting].&quot; Roy Gaines recalled, &quot;He&#x27;d lock up in a hotel room and wouldn&#x27;t see anyone for 3-4 days or a week. When he wrote &#x27;It&#x27;s Too Late,&#x27; he was in his room for a week.&quot;

Ruth Brown, who toured with Willis, said he would write on yellow legal pads. Brown said, &quot;I asked him, because he had such a good song going, I said, &#x27;Chuck, why don&#x27;t you write me a tune? And he did. He wrote, &quot;Oh What a Dream&quot;.&#x27;&quot; Jerry Wexler said Willis would bring a full set of lyrics into the studio and then work out the arrangements with the band. Zenas Sears said, &quot;[N]o one helped him with his songs. He always wrote a great deal.&quot;

==Death==
Willis had suffered from stomach ulcers for many years. He was known to drink a lot. During surgery in Chicago, Willis died of peritonitis on April 10, 1958, at the age of 32.

His death occurred while at the peak of his career, just after the release of his last single, &quot;What Am I Living For&quot;, backed by &quot;Hang Up My Rock and Roll Shoes&quot;. &quot;Hang Up My Rock &amp; Roll Shoes&quot; was actually the A-side of the single but, upon his death, &quot;What Am I Living For&quot; became the more popular of the two songs. &quot;What Am I Living For&quot; sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc. It was also the top R&amp;B disc of 1958. This was the first rock and roll record released in stereo, &quot;engineered by Tom Dowd of Atlantic Records&quot;.

When Willis died, he owed a lot of money to the US government, because, according to Zenas Sears, &quot;he paid the band out of his own pocket without ever deducting taxes. ... When he died, his wife had the house, she had the fur coats and the Cadillac, but there was no money.&quot;

==Influence==
An early Okeh hit, &quot;Don&#x27;t Deceive Me (Please Don&#x27;t Go)&quot; became his most widely covered song with versions by Ruth Brown, Little Richard, Screamin&#x27; Jay Hawkins, James Brown, and Delaney and Bonnie. It was also used as the title of an episode of &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot; (Season 7, episode 13, 2011).

His hit, the blues ballad &quot;It&#x27;s Too Late&quot; was covered by other artists, including Otis Redding, Roy Orbison, Buddy Holly and the Crickets, Ted Taylor (1969 single), Freddie King, Derek and the Dominos and the Jerry Garcia Band. In 2005, Redding&#x27;s version was heavily sampled by Kanye West on &quot;Late Registration&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Gone&quot;.

Elvis Presley covered &quot;I Feel So Bad&quot; and &quot;C. C. Rider&quot; The Five Keys and Peaches and Herb had hits with &quot;Close Your Eyes&quot;, and Ruth Brown and Conway Twitty had hits with &quot;Oh What a Dream&quot;.

The Band covered &quot;Hang Up My Rock and Roll Shoes&quot; on their 1972 live album &quot;Rock of Ages&quot;.

Willis&#x27;s cousin was Chick Willis.

==Discography==
===Singles===
===Albums===
===Compilation albums===
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q726440" start="0" end="6" title="Chuck Willis" label="Harold"/>
<link wikidata="Q726440" start="13" end="18" title="Chuck Willis" label="Chuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q726440" start="25" end="31" title="Chuck Willis" label="Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="84" end="89" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="91" end="107" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="113" end="126" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022445" start="174" end="185" title="See See Rider" label="C. C. Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q56628964" start="209" end="229" title="What Am I Living For" label="What Am I Living For"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="275" end="284" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="291" end="304" title="R&amp;amp;B chart" label="R&amp;amp;B chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q726440" start="322" end="344" title="Chuck Willis" label="The King of the Stroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767048" start="384" end="394" title="the stroll" label="the stroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="436" end="452" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484397" start="483" end="497" title="talent contest" label="talent contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="591" end="607" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="648" end="657" title="sound recording and reproduction" label="recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757254" start="684" end="688" title="Okeh Records" label="Okeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="846" end="862" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614688" start="905" end="923" title="It&amp;#x27;s Too Late (Chuck Willis song)" label="It&amp;#x27;s Too Late"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022445" start="1024" end="1034" title="See See Rider" label="C.C. Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1068" end="1077" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="1084" end="1091" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="1092" end="1097" title="record chart" label="chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q537722" start="1161" end="1173" title="Jerry Wexler" label="Jerry Wexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089987" start="1324" end="1340" title="twelve-bar blues" label="twelve-bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q239533" start="1355" end="1364" title="Ma Rainey" label="Ma Rainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q206987" start="1441" end="1451" title="vibraphone" label="vibraphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767048" start="1517" end="1527" title="The Stroll" label="The Stroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q366563" start="1608" end="1618" title="Dick Clark" label="Dick Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q463447" start="1653" end="1671" title="American Bandstand" label="American Bandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q118942723" start="2093" end="2111" title="Going to the River" label="Going to the River"/>
<link wikidata="Q920288" start="2129" end="2145" title="Dave Bartholomew" label="Dave Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q209586" start="2150" end="2161" title="Fats Domino" label="Fats Domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q455754" start="2326" end="2352" title="Screamin&amp;#x27; Jay Hawkins" label="Screamin&amp;#x27; Jay Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="2543" end="2554" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q295919" start="2559" end="2568" title="Sam Cooke" label="Sam Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445773" start="3005" end="3015" title="Roy Gaines" label="Roy Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q144669" start="3730" end="3740" title="Ruth Brown" label="Ruth Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080561" start="3963" end="3978" title="Oh What a Dream" label="Oh What a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="4254" end="4267" title="stomach ulcer" label="stomach ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="4356" end="4367" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="4849" end="4858" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="4954" end="4960" title="Stereophonic sound" label="stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="5418" end="5425" title="cover version" label="covered"/>
<link wikidata="Q144669" start="5448" end="5458" title="Ruth Brown" label="Ruth Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q82222" start="5460" end="5474" title="Little Richard" label="Little Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q455754" start="5476" end="5502" title="Screamin&amp;#x27; Jay Hawkins" label="Screamin&amp;#x27; Jay Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="5504" end="5515" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183865" start="5521" end="5539" title="Delaney and Bonnie" label="Delaney and Bonnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="5594" end="5613" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q966438" start="5664" end="5676" title="blues ballad" label="blues ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614688" start="5683" end="5701" title="It&amp;#x27;s Too Late (Chuck Willis song)" label="It&amp;#x27;s Too Late"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="5712" end="5719" title="cover version" label="covered"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="5748" end="5760" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="5762" end="5773" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143703" start="5775" end="5803" title="The Crickets" label="Buddy Holly and the Crickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453755" start="5805" end="5815" title="Ted Taylor (singer)" label="Ted Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q436209" start="5831" end="5843" title="Freddie King" label="Freddie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q724406" start="5845" end="5866" title="Derek and the Dominos" label="Derek and the Dominos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535082" start="5875" end="5892" title="Jerry Garcia Band" label="Jerry Garcia Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="5949" end="5959" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130097" start="5969" end="5986" title="Late Registration" label="Late Registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="6019" end="6032" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977133" start="6047" end="6060" title="I Feel So Bad (Chuck Willis song)" label="I Feel So Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022445" start="6077" end="6088" title="C. C. Rider" label="C. C. Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411379" start="6095" end="6108" title="The Five Keys" label="The Five Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q634476" start="6113" end="6129" title="Peaches and Herb" label="Peaches and Herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084957" start="6150" end="6165" title="Close Your Eyes (Chuck Willis song)" label="Close Your Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q144669" start="6177" end="6187" title="Ruth Brown" label="Ruth Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q82250" start="6192" end="6205" title="Conway Twitty" label="Conway Twitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080561" start="6226" end="6241" title="Oh What a Dream" label="Oh What a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q600344" start="6250" end="6258" title="The Band" label="The Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q682635" start="6341" end="6353" title="Rock of Ages (The Band album)" label="Rock of Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096161" start="6387" end="6399" title="Chick Willis" label="Chick Willis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261755" wikidata="Q1282036" url="?curid=261755" title="VPRO">
<text>The VPRO (stylized vpro; originally an acronym for &quot;Vrijzinnig Protestantse Radio Omroep&quot;, lit. &#x27;Liberal Protestant Radio Broadcaster&#x27;, nowadays known as &quot;Omroepvereniging VPRO&quot;) is a Dutch public broadcaster that is a member of the Dutch public broadcasting system. The VPRO presents itself as a progressive broadcaster and mainly produces profound and liberal programs.

The VPRO was founded on May 29, 1926 by the liberal Protestant pillar. The liberal Protestants wanted a radio broadcaster that would express the liberal Protestant sound. With this, the VPRO became one of the many broadcasters that the Netherlands had.

The VPRO made a cultural shift in the late 1960s and was transformed into a progressive broadcaster. With this statement, they departed from the previous, more Protestant image. Since then, the VPRO has made many artistic and liberal programs. In the 1980s, the number of members of the VPRO grew and since the 1990s the VPRO has become an established broadcaster.

Since 2016, the VPRO has entered into a partnership with the humanist broadcaster HUMAN. In 2022, the collaborative organization VPRO-HUMAN was founded. The broadcasters are still independent, but they work together in some areas.

Like all public broadcasters in the Netherlands, VPRO does not have its own television channel. VPRO often cooperates with foreign broadcasters such as WDR, the BBC, and Arte.

== History ==

In the 1920s, the first radio broadcasting companies were established in the Netherlands. These broadcasting companies were divided into pillars, in which each religious and ideological group had its own facilities, including its own radio broadcasting company. A small pillorized group in the Netherlands were the liberal Protestants, who were followers of liberal Protestantism and believed that people should allow their Christian faith to be strongly determined by an undogmatic attitude, in which freedom of thought and belief based on one&#x27;s own insights is central. This group of Protestants were a minority within the Protestant pillar in the Netherlands, but they did want the opportunity to make their voices heard. That is why the Vrijzinnig Protestantse Radio Omroep (V.P.R.O.) was founded on May 29, 1926 by the Central Committee for Liberal Protestantism. What distinguished the broadcaster from the Protestant broadcaster N.C.R.V. (founded in 1925) was that the programming of the V.P.R.O. was based on humanism and liberal Protestantism, which meant that there was a &#x27;general&#x27; programming.

The V.P.R.O. had a hard time in its early years. Because the V.P.R.O. was founded later than the other broadcasters, the broadcaster had little airtime and had to change channels often. This changed in the early 1930s, when the Zendtijdbesluit came into effect. The Zendtijdbesluit was introduced by the Dutch government to fairly distribute radio airtime among the broadcasters. As a result, the V.P.R.O. received more airtime than it had previously. At the same time, the V.P.R.O. strongly opposed the pillorized broadcasting system in the Netherlands. They were in favour of a national broadcaster. But because there was no support for this idea among the other broadcasters and politicians, the V.P.R.O. decided to adhere to the Zendtijdbesluit and remained an independent broadcaster.

=== VPRO during WWII ===
On March 9, 1941, the V.P.R.O. and the other radio broadcasters were closed down by the German occupiers and replaced by the Rijksradio Omroep, which broadcast national socialist propaganda. Before that, the V.P.R.O. was able to continue broadcasting its programs from 1940 to 1941. This was because the radio broadcasters, including the V.P.R.O., did what the German occupiers wanted from the start, to prevent their broadcaster from being closed down. For example, the V.P.R.O. had to submit its programming to a censorship committee, which determined what would and would not be included in the broadcast, and the broadcaster also dismissed Jewish employees, in order to meet the wishes of the Germans. In addition, the V.P.R.O. broadcasting guide contained bad things about Jews. According to the V.P.R.O., it did this because of the liberalism that the broadcaster was pursuing. The broadcaster believed that everyone should have a say, including national socialists. Despite the obedience, the V.P.R.O. was dissolved in 1941. The Rijksradio Omroep took over part of the broadcaster&#x27;s programming. In 1947, the V.P.R.O. was re-established after the government had made a failed attempt to form a national broadcaster.
=== 1950s to present ===
In 1951, television was introduced in the Netherlands. The broadcasting companies A.V.R.O, K.R.O, N.C.R.V and V.A.R.A were the first broadcasting companies to start broadcasting on television, and together they founded the Nederlandse Televisie Stichting (NTS). The V.P.R.O became a member of the NTS in 1952 and has also been making television programs since then.

The V.P.R.O. underwent a cultural shift in the late 1960s. Due to the change in mentality that arose in the Netherlands in the 1960s, a new generation of programme makers joined the broadcaster who were supporters of the flower power movement. They managed to convince the broadcaster&#x27;s board and the members of the V.P.R.O. to distance themselves from Protestantism and to become a progressive broadcaster. The name of the broadcaster was changed to VPRO, which meant that the broadcaster distanced itself from the original abbreviation.

In 1984, the VPRO achieved B status, because the broadcaster had enough members (in the Netherlands, a public broadcaster must have enough members for airtime). Partly due to the amendment of the Omroepwet, the VPRO was able to grow into a large, established broadcaster. This was because the broadcaster gained many members, which allowed it to achieve A status in 1991.

In 2010, the public broadcasters in the Netherlands had to make cutbacks due to the policy of the Rutte I cabinet. Because less money was given to the broadcasters, some broadcasters decided to work together or merge. In 2011, the VPRO was in talks with the AVRO about a possible merger of both broadcasters. In 2011, VPRO announced that it did not want to merge with AVRO, because it wanted to remain independent. Since 2016, VPRO has been working with humanist broadcaster Omroep HUMAN. Since 2016, the broadcasters have been producing radio and television programs together. In 2021, VPRO and HUMAN decided to work together in the collaborative organization VPRO-HUMAN. In 2022, VPRO-HUMAN was recognized by Minister Arie Slob of Education and Culture.
== Television and radio programs ==
Since the 1970s, the VPRO has been making innovative programs. What makes the programs special is that the program makers could use a lot of artistic and expressive freedom. This ideal fits the profile of the VPRO, which likes to present itself as a broadcaster that makes many stimulating and free programs.
=== Television ===
In 1967, the VPRO made the youth program &quot;Hoepla&quot;. The program was taken off the air after three episodes, because there were complaints about a broadcast in which model Phil Bloom read the Dutch newspaper Trouw naked. It was the first time that female nudity was seen on Dutch television.

From 1970 to 1990, artist Wim T. Schippers made many absurdist programs at the VPRO, which were also very controversial. A well-known example of such a program is the &quot;Fred Haché Show&quot;, which was broadcast by the VPRO from 1971 to 1972. The program often discussed taboo subjects, such as sex and religion, and satirically ridiculed subjects such as the Dutch royal family. The program regularly caused controversy. For example, in 1972 the program makers received many threatening letters because many people found the broadcast in which Queen Juliana was peeling Brussels sprouts distasteful.

Another well-known VPRO program maker was the duo Van Kooten en De Bie. The duo made many programs for the broadcaster from 1974 to 1998, in which they created satire through sketches and characters. Their best-known program is &quot;Keek op de Week&quot; (1988 – 1993). The television program covered the current affairs of the past week, through satirical commentary and sketches. What also made the program unique was that the program used a chroma key, which made it seem as if Van Kooten en De Bie were talking to their own characters via the screen. The VPRO is also known for its satirical programs. In addition to the programs by Van Kooten en De Bie, other well-known satirical programs are the absurdist &quot;Jiskefet&quot; and the late-night talk show &quot;Zondag met Lubach&quot;.

Since 1984, the VPRO had sufficient funding to produce children&#x27;s programmes. In VPRO children&#x27;s programming, children were taken seriously, and the focus shifted more to the child&#x27;s soul. Programmes such as &quot;Rembo &amp; Rembo&quot;, &quot;Villa Achterwerk&quot; and &quot;Theo &amp; Thea&quot; are examples of such programmes. The VPRO also produced many documentaries for children that were also about children, such as the documentary &quot;Anders dan Anders&quot; (1997 – 1999), about children growing up in special circumstances.

Since 1988, the VPRO has produced the programme &quot;VPRO Zomergasten&quot;, in which a guest is interviewed for three hours and shows fragments to form his ideal television evening. The programme is broadcast every summer and has had the spin-off &quot;Wintergasten&quot; since 2020, in which international guests are interviewed.

Since 2002, the VPRO has broadcast the programme &quot;VPRO Tegenlicht&quot;. The documentary programme often deals with political, economic and scientific themes. One of their best-known documentaries is &quot;Wiki&#x27;s Waarheid&quot;, which examines how reliable Wikipedia is.

From 2008 to 2021, the VPRO produced the journalistic program &quot;Metropolis&quot;. The program shows the world through the eyes of local journalists, who search for answers to universal questions and themes in their own city or country. Since 2022, Omroep HUMAN has broadcast the program.

=== Radio ===

On the radio, the VPRO produced many journalistic programs, which were regularly made in an experimental and improvisational manner. Themes that were regularly discussed were sex and the royal family. A well-known VPRO program on the radio is &quot;Marathoninterview&quot;, in which a guest is interviewed for three hours. This format was later also used for the television program &quot;Zomergasten&quot;. The journalistic programs of the VPRO are mainly broadcast on NPO Radio 1.

In addition, the VPRO mainly focuses on alternative, pop and modern music. This started in the radio programs of Wim Noordhoek and Jan Donkers, among others. The music programs of the VPRO are broadcast on the radio on NPO 3FM (modern music) and on NPO Klassiek (classical music).

In 1998, the pop music platform 3voor12 was founded. 3voor12 is broadcast by the VPRO on radio station NPO 3FM. In addition, the platform has an extensive website on which interviews, album reviews and festival reports appear.

== List of VPRO television and radio programs ==

Here is an overview of well-known VPRO television and radio programs::

=== Television programs ===

* 24 uur met... (2008 – 2016)
* Achterwerk in de kast (1980 – 1990)
* Andere Tijden (2000 – present)
* Boeken (2005 – present)
* Buitenhof (1995 – present)
* Draadstaal (2007 – 2009)
* De Fred Haché Show (1971 – 1972)
* Hier is... Adriaan van Dis (1983 – 1992)
* Hoepla (1967)
* Jiskefet (1990 – 2005)
* Keek op de Week (1988 – 1993)
* Metropolis (2008 – 2021)
* Van Oekel&#x27;s Discohoek (1974 – 1975)
* Rembo &amp; Rembo (1987 – 1997)
* Tegenlicht (2002 – present)
* Theo &amp; Thea (1985 – 1989)
* Vrije Geluiden (2001 – 2019)
* Wintergasten (2005 – present)
* Villa Achterwerk (1984 – 2014)
* Zomergasten (1988 – present)
* Zondag met Lubach (2014 – 2021)

=== Radio programs ===

* 3voor12 (1998 – present)
* Argos (1992 – present)
* Bureau Buitenland (2022 – present)
* De Avonden (1995 – 2013)
* Een Uur Cultuur (2023 – present)
* Een uur Ischa (1974 – 1995)
* Marathoninterview (1986 – present)
* Nooit meer slapen (2014 – present)
* OVT (1992 – present)
* Radio Bergeijk (2001 – 2007)
* Ronflonflon (1984 – 1991)

==Logos==
Lex Barten designed the first logo for the VPRO in 1926: the four letters as two pairs under each other, with a transmission mast and round transmission beams. Jan Bons designed a logo with a modest word mark based on Helvetica letters in 1966. In 1971, Jaap Drupsteen designed the next logo for the VPRO: an American-looking vignette with large, elegant letters in soft shapes, inspired by the Coca-Cola logo. After ten years, it was Willem van den Berg who, in response to the previous logo, created a visual mark in 1981 with razor-sharp letters on an equally sharp V-shadow. This logo was in use for 28 years. On 24 August 2010, the VPRO introduced its current design. Design agency Thonik, which was responsible for the design, also gave the logo numerous appearances. In 2021, the logo was renewed to the current logo.
== Trivia ==

* Since 1981, the VPRO has used a fragment of the song &quot;Here Is the News&quot; by Electric Light Orchestra as a station call.
* For a long time, the VPRO concluded their programming with a piece of music by Jakob Klaasse, which was whistled by Jan Tromp.
* Every year, the VPRO broadcasts the television recordings of the Pinkpop Festival in co-production with NTR and BNNVARA.
* Due to its foundation in 1926, the VPRO is the oldest public broadcaster in the Netherlands within the Dutch public broadcasting system.

==See also==
*Nederlandse Publieke Omroep (NPO)
*Pillarization
*AI Song Contest

==References==
==External links==
* YouTube: Dutch / English</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1282036" start="4" end="8" title="VPRO" label="VPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282036" start="19" end="23" title="VPRO" label="vpro"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="214" end="219" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="220" end="238" title="Public broadcasting" label="public broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q301203" start="263" end="295" title="Dutch public broadcasting system" label="Dutch public broadcasting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="447" end="465" title="Liberal Christianity" label="liberal Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="1084" end="1092" title="Humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360808" start="1105" end="1110" title="Humanistische Omroep" label="HUMAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q203453" start="1407" end="1410" title="Westdeutscher Rundfunk" label="WDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1416" end="1419" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073" start="1425" end="1429" title="Arte" label="Arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="1762" end="1781" title="Liberal Christianity" label="liberal Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345841" start="2388" end="2396" title="Nederlandse Christelijke Radio Vereniging" label="N.C.R.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q706454" start="3472" end="3488" title="Netherlands in World War II" label="German occupiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="3544" end="3573" title="Nazism" label="national socialist propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049478" start="4646" end="4690" title="Television in the Netherlands" label="television was introduced in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691183" start="4719" end="4726" title="AVRO" label="A.V.R.O"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016159" start="4728" end="4733" title="Katholieke Radio Omroep" label="K.R.O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771108" start="4747" end="4754" title="Omroepvereniging VARA" label="V.A.R.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515393" start="4860" end="4891" title="Nederlandse Omroep Stichting" label="Nederlandse Televisie Stichting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254661" start="5225" end="5237" title="flower power" label="flower power"/>
<link wikidata="Q168828" start="6020" end="6035" title="First Rutte cabinet" label="Rutte I cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360808" start="6397" end="6409" title="Humanistische Omroep" label="Omroep HUMAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q658258" start="6642" end="6651" title="Arie Slob" label="Arie Slob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089938" start="7089" end="7095" title="Hoepla" label="Hoepla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255436" start="7222" end="7232" title="Phil Bloom" label="Phil Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789749" start="7258" end="7263" title="Trouw" label="Trouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q354241" start="7369" end="7385" title="Wim T. Schippers" label="Wim T. Schippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238617" start="7510" end="7537" title="De Fred Haché Show" label="&amp;quot;Fred Haché Show&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="7642" end="7645" title="Human sexuality" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="7650" end="7658" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="7707" end="7725" title="Dutch royal family" label="Dutch royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q154946" start="7892" end="7905" title="Juliana of the Netherlands" label="Queen Juliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q150463" start="7918" end="7934" title="Brussels sprout" label="Brussels sprouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148719" start="7999" end="8019" title="Van Kooten en De Bie" label="Van Kooten en De Bie"/>
<link wikidata="Q262155" start="8394" end="8404" title="chroma key" label="chroma key"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="8536" end="8545" title="Satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655610" start="8719" end="8736" title="Zondag met Lubach" label="Zondag met Lubach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330424" start="9349" end="9377" title="Zomergasten" label="&amp;quot;VPRO Zomergasten&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300619" start="9684" end="9711" title="Backlight (TV program)" label="&amp;quot;VPRO Tegenlicht&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543832" start="9846" end="9866" title="The Truth According to Wikipedia" label="Wiki&amp;#x27;s Waarheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="9902" end="9911" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q452945" start="10694" end="10705" title="NPO Radio 1" label="NPO Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3868585" start="10748" end="10759" title="Alternative music" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="10761" end="10764" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q229452" start="10927" end="10934" title="NPO 3FM" label="NPO 3FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125934" start="10957" end="10969" title="NPO Klassiek" label="NPO Klassiek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="10971" end="10986" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636424" start="11022" end="11029" title="3voor12" label="3voor12"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11371" end="11384" title="24 uur met..." label="24 uur met..."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11401" end="11422" title="Achterwerk in de kast" label="Achterwerk in de kast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475122" start="11439" end="11452" title="Andere Tijden" label="Andere Tijden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11472" end="11478" title="VPRO Boeken" label="Boeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482092" start="11498" end="11507" title="Buitenhof (TV program)" label="Buitenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361454" start="11527" end="11537" title="Draadstaal" label="Draadstaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238617" start="11554" end="11572" title="De Fred Haché Show" label="De Fred Haché Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11589" end="11615" title="Hier is... Adriaan van Dis" label="Hier is... Adriaan van Dis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089938" start="11632" end="11638" title="Hoepla" label="Hoepla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11648" end="11656" title="Jiskefet" label="Jiskefet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11673" end="11688" title="Keek op de week" label="Keek op de Week"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11705" end="11715" title="VPRO Metropolis" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239529" start="11732" end="11758" title="Van Oekel&amp;#x27;s Discohoek" label="Van Oekel&amp;#x27;s Discohoek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11775" end="11792" title="Rembo &amp;amp; Rembo" label="Rembo &amp;amp; Rembo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300619" start="11809" end="11819" title="Backlight (TV program)" label="Tegenlicht"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11839" end="11854" title="Theo &amp;amp; Thea" label="Theo &amp;amp; Thea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11871" end="11885" title="Vrije Geluiden" label="Vrije Geluiden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11902" end="11914" title="Wintergasten" label="Wintergasten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11934" end="11950" title="Villa Achterwerk" label="Villa Achterwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330424" start="11967" end="11978" title="Zomergasten" label="Zomergasten"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655610" start="11998" end="12015" title="Zondag met Lubach" label="Zondag met Lubach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636424" start="12057" end="12064" title="3voor12" label="3voor12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482678" start="12084" end="12089" title="Argos (radio program)" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12109" end="12126" title="Bureau Buitenland" label="Bureau Buitenland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12146" end="12156" title="De Avonden (radio programm)" label="De Avonden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12173" end="12188" title="Een Uur Cultuur" label="Een Uur Cultuur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12208" end="12221" title="Een uur Ischa" label="Een uur Ischa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12238" end="12255" title="Marathoninterview" label="Marathoninterview"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12275" end="12292" title="Nooit meer slapen (radio programm)" label="Nooit meer slapen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12312" end="12315" title="OVT (radio programm)" label="OVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280681" start="12335" end="12349" title="Radio Bergeijk" label="Radio Bergeijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13734992" start="12366" end="12377" title="Ronflonflon" label="Ronflonflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285439" start="12657" end="12671" title="Jaap Drupsteen" label="Jaap Drupsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133981" start="13303" end="13319" title="Here Is the News" label="Here Is the News"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="13329" end="13353" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151125" start="13569" end="13585" title="Pinkpop Festival" label="Pinkpop Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q969731" start="13608" end="13611" title="Omroep NTR" label="NTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15872832" start="13616" end="13623" title="BNNVARA" label="BNNVARA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991875" start="13779" end="13806" title="Nederlandse Publieke Omroep (organisation)" label="Nederlandse Publieke Omroep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165966" start="13814" end="13827" title="Pillarisation" label="Pillarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371219" start="13829" end="13844" title="AI Song Contest" label="AI Song Contest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261757" wikidata="Q1056737" url="?curid=261757" title="Morning star (weapon)">
<text>A morning star () is any of several medieval club-like weapons consisting of a shaft with an attached ball adorned with one or more spikes. Such weapons provided their wielders with a combination of blunt-force and puncture attack to kill or wound an enemy.

== History ==
The morning star first came into widespread use around the beginning of the fourteenth century, particularly in Germany where it was known as &quot;Morgenstern&quot;. The term is often confused with the military flail (&quot;fléau d&#x27;armes&quot; in French and &quot;Kriegsflegel&quot; in German), which typically consists of a wooden shaft joined by a length of chain to one or more iron-shod wooden bars. (Heavy sword pommels have also been used as weights.) However, there are few depictions of such a ball-and-chain flail from the period, so the weapon of this type appears to have been uncommon.

== Design ==
The morning star is a medieval weapon consisting of a spiked head mounted on a shaft, resembling a mace, usually with a long spike extending straight from the top and many smaller spikes around the particle of the head. Its simpler, rather improvised construction distinguish it from a flanged mace, which required the skilled craftsmanship of a smith. Versions of it were used by both infantry and cavalry; the cavalry versions tended to have shorter shafts or more slender designs to facilitate one-handed use. The mace was a traditional knightly weapon that developed somewhat independently; as the mace transitioned to being constructed entirely of metal, the morning star retained its characteristic wooden shaft. Many surviving morning stars are of a longer two-handed form typically six feet in length, with some longer examples.

There were three types, all differing in quality of workmanship. The first was the well-crafted military type used by professional soldiers, made in series by expert weaponsmiths for stocking in town arsenals. The second and much simpler type would have been hand-cut by peasant militia men, rather than turned on a lathe, from wood they had gathered themselves and fitted with nails and spikes by the local blacksmith. The shaft and head were usually of one piece but sometimes reinforced at the top with an iron band. The third type was decorative in nature, usually short-hafted and made of metal, one sixteenth century example being of steel and damascened with inlaid gold and silver, in the Wallace Collection of London.

== Holy water sprinkler ==
The holy water sprinkler (from its resemblance to the aspergillum used in the Catholic Mass), was a morning star used by the English army in the sixteenth century and made in series by professional smiths. One such weapon can be found in the Royal Armouries and has an all-steel head with six flanges forming three spikes each, reminiscent of a mace but with a short thick spike of square cross section extending from the top. The wooden shaft is reinforced with four langets and the overall length of the weapon is .

The term holy water sprinkler is also used to describe a type of military flail, this being the name for the weapon in French (&quot;goupillon&quot;). It was (according to popular legend) the favored weapon of King John of Bohemia, who was blind, and used to simply lay about himself on all sides.

== Examples ==
Two examples of the military type are housed in the museums of Vienna, both from the 16th century. The first measures in length including the top spike which is . The head is a separate wooden cylinder slipped over the top of the shaft and reinforced with steel bands, with five metal spikes in symmetrical arrangement. The second example has an all-steel head of complex craftsmanship with four V-shaped spikes mounted on a long shaft that measures slightly less than two metres in length. A twisted and braided steel bar joins the socket to the base of the top spike. There are also 183 surviving specimens in Graz, made in series and delivered to the arsenal in 1685. They are comparable in length to the previous examples and have three rows of spikes around the head. The wooden shafts of most morning stars of the military type are reinforced with metal extending down from the head. Still others can be found in the Swiss arsenals of Lucerne and Zürich.

== In art ==
These types of morning stars are also depicted in medieval art. For instance, one is shown being carried by an armored knight or soldier in the Caesar Tapestries in the Historical Museum of Bern, depicting Julius Caesar&#x27;s battle against the Germanic leader Ariovistus. These tapestries were woven in Tournai between 1465 and 1470, and taken as plunder from Charles the Bold after one of his defeats during the Burgundian Wars against the Swiss. In the poem &quot;Le Chevalier Délibéré&quot; written by Olivier de la Marche and first published in 1486, there is an anonymous woodcut depicting a knight carrying a rather simple morning star with spikes mounted in an asymmetrical pattern as well as a flail equipped with a single spiked ball, known in German as a &quot;Kettenmorgenstern&quot; (literally &quot;chain-morning star&quot;) which is technically a military flail.

== Similar weapons ==
=== Goedendag ===
The goedendag (or variant spellings) was a Flemish weapon which is often described in modern sources as similar to the morning star. However, this is a misconception; it was an infantry weapon in the form of a thick wooden shaft between in length, slightly thicker toward the top, topped with a stout iron spike. The weapon was used to great effect by the guildsmen of Flanders&#x27; wealthy cities against the French knights during the &quot;Guldensporenslag&quot; or Battle of the Golden Spurs near Kortrijk (Courtrai) on 11 July 1302; however, on account of superior but more expensive alternatives, it saw limited service from the fifteenth century on, being used exclusively by the Flemish &quot;burghers&quot;.

The goedendag was used to spear horses or knights, but little is certain about its precise mode of use.

== See also ==
* Flail (weapon)
* Kanabō
* Mace (bludgeon)
* Meteor hammer
* Pistol sword

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==

* &quot;Dictionary of Medieval Knighthood and Chivalry&quot; by Bradford Broughton (New York, Greenwood Press, 1986, , )
* &quot;Hafted Weapons in Medieval and Renaissance Europe: The Evolution of European Staff Weapons Between 1200 and 1650&quot; by John Waldman (Brill, 2005, )
* &quot;Medieval Military Technology&quot; by Kelly DeVries (Broadview Press, 1998, )
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1056737" start="2" end="14" title="Morning star (weapon)" label="morning star"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="45" end="49" title="club (weapon)" label="club"/>
<link wikidata="Q180656" start="485" end="490" title="flail (weapon)" label="flail"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="690" end="695" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068253" start="913" end="928" title="List of medieval weapons" label="medieval weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272990" start="990" end="994" title="mace (bludgeon)" label="mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q838566" start="1237" end="1242" title="Metalsmith" label="smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="1277" end="1285" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="1290" end="1297" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="1431" end="1437" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="2045" end="2050" title="lathe" label="lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="2137" end="2147" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295879" start="2379" end="2389" title="damascening" label="damascened"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327919" start="2426" end="2444" title="Wallace Collection" label="Wallace Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2448" end="2454" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q218198" start="2488" end="2498" title="holy water" label="holy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q543177" start="2538" end="2549" title="aspergillum" label="aspergillum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2562" end="2570" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="2571" end="2575" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283541" start="2726" end="2741" title="Royal Armouries" label="Royal Armouries"/>
<link wikidata="Q955957" start="2777" end="2783" title="flange" label="flange"/>
<link wikidata="Q180656" start="3077" end="3082" title="Flail (weapon)" label="flail"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3130" end="3151" title=":fr:fléau d&amp;#x27;armes" label="&amp;quot;goupillon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="3213" end="3233" title="John of Bohemia" label="King John of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="3929" end="3933" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="4258" end="4265" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="4270" end="4276" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624153" start="4342" end="4354" title="medieval art" label="medieval art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="4403" end="4410" title="armour" label="armored"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="4443" end="4453" title="tapestry" label="Tapestries"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="4472" end="4478" title="Museum" label="Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="4482" end="4486" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="4498" end="4511" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="4538" end="4546" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q316833" start="4554" end="4564" title="Ariovistus" label="Ariovistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="4597" end="4604" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="4654" end="4670" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q315342" start="4707" end="4722" title="Burgundian Wars" label="Burgundian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q922243" start="4799" end="4819" title="Olivier de la Marche" label="Olivier de la Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="4871" end="4878" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q180656" start="5065" end="5082" title="Flail (weapon)" label="Kettenmorgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="5255" end="5262" title="Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="5581" end="5589" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q44732" start="5681" end="5707" title="Battle of the Golden Spurs" label="Battle of the Golden Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941338" start="5913" end="5921" title="Burgher (social class)" label="burghers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180656" start="6052" end="6066" title="Flail (weapon)" label="Flail (weapon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305385" start="6069" end="6075" title="Kanabō" label="Kanabō"/>
<link wikidata="Q272990" start="6078" end="6093" title="Mace (bludgeon)" label="Mace (bludgeon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866240" start="6096" end="6109" title="Meteor hammer" label="Meteor hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198489" start="6112" end="6124" title="Pistol sword" label="Pistol sword"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6242" end="6260" title="Bradford Broughton" label="Bradford Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116159" start="6272" end="6287" title="Greenwood Press" label="Greenwood Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="6443" end="6448" title="Brill Publishers" label="Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194889" start="6504" end="6517" title="Kelly DeVries" label="Kelly DeVries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261760" wikidata="Q1368845" url="?curid=261760" title="E. U. Essien-Udom">
<text>Professor Essien Udosen Essien-Udom (October 25, 1928 – May 27, 2002) was born in Ikot Osong, Eastern Provinces, Nigeria (now Akwa Ibom State), the first son of Timothy and Adiaha Essien. He was educated in the local primary school and Holy Family College, Abak, Eastern Nigeria; Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio (1951–55); and the University of Chicago (1955–61).

He was a primary school teacher (1949) and later interpreter for the Eastern Provinces of Nigeria (1949–51) before receiving a Fulbright Travel Grant for undergraduate study in the United States. On completion of his studies in political science and international relations, he taught and held administrative offices in various universities: teaching assistant and research associate, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1960–62); visiting lecturer, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont (summer 1962); assistant professor, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, (fall 1962); lecturer/senior lecturer, University of Ibadan, where he became professor (1965–88), head of department (1965–72), and dean of the Faculty of the Social Sciences (1966–68); Cadbury Visiting Professorial Fellow, University of Birmingham Center for West African Studies, Birmingham, UK (1972–73); founding vice chancellor, University of Maiduguri, Borno State, Nigeria (1975–79); visiting professor and head of department; dean, Faculty of Social Sciences and Director of the Center for Development Studies; and member of the Governing Council, all of the University of Cross River State, Uyo, Nigeria (1984–86).

With a political perspective inspired by Garveyism and Pan-Africanism, Essien-Udom (dubbed the &quot;black power professor&quot; by University of Ibadan students) was intensely public spirited and committed to institution building. He was involved in public service outside the university: executive secretary (1957/58) and then president (1960/61), All African Students Union of the Americas; leader of a delegation to the Pan-African Student Conference in London, 1960; non-resident tutor, Dunstan Hall, Harvard University; Master of Independence Hall, University of Ibadan (1967–72); University of Ibadan representative to the West African Examinations Council (1963–65) assistant and chief examiner in Government GCE examination (1966–69); and external examiner to universities in Nigeria and Ghana. He was Secretary to the Military government and Head of Service, South Eastern State, Nigeria (1973–75); member and chairman, National Universities Commission, Nigeria (1986–92).

He is the author of &quot;Black Nationalism: a Search for Identity in America&quot; and many journal articles and conference papers; co-editor with Amy Jacques Garvey, More Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey; general editor of the Frank Cass Africana Modern Library Series and the Ibadan University Press Political and Administrative Studies Series.

The University of Maiduguri awarded him an honorary Doctor of Letters (D. Litt.) for his service in 1986.

He is survived by his wife, Ruby; his son Nkeruwem; his brother Ikpong; his sisters Arit, Enoh and Ester; and a host of nephews, nieces, and other relatives.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1368845" start="10" end="35" title="E. U. Essien-Udom" label="Essien Udosen Essien-Udom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="113" end="120" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q424388" start="126" end="135" title="Akwa Ibom" label="Akwa Ibom"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="280" end="295" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q988384" start="297" end="310" title="Oberlin, Ohio" label="Oberlin, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="330" end="351" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="491" end="513" title="Fulbright Travel Grant" label="Fulbright Travel Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="545" end="558" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="749" end="767" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="769" end="793" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="824" end="845" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q31058" start="847" end="866" title="Burlington, Vermont" label="Burlington, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="903" end="919" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169487" start="986" end="1006" title="University of Ibadan" label="University of Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="1171" end="1195" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509668" start="1281" end="1304" title="University of Maiduguri" label="University of Maiduguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q130626" start="1306" end="1317" title="Borno State" label="Borno State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="1319" end="1326" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13140622" start="1514" end="1545" title="University of Cross River State" label="University of Cross River State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999000" start="1547" end="1550" title="Uyo" label="Uyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="1552" end="1559" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524522" start="1613" end="1622" title="Garveyism" label="Garveyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="1627" end="1641" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169487" start="1704" end="1724" title="University of Ibadan" label="University of Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="1823" end="1837" title="Civil service" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1922" end="1964" title="All African Students Union of the Americas" label="All African Students Union of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1996" end="2026" title="Pan-African Student Conference" label="Pan-African Student Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2030" end="2036" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993835" start="2202" end="2235" title="West African Examinations Council" label="West African Examinations Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="2357" end="2364" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2369" end="2374" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q481874" start="2704" end="2722" title="Amy Jacques Garvey" label="Amy Jacques Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="2756" end="2769" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261763" wikidata="Q2624498" url="?curid=261763" title="Life support">
<text>Life support comprises the treatments and techniques performed in an emergency in order to support life after the failure of one or more vital organs. Healthcare providers and emergency medical technicians are generally certified to perform basic and advanced life support procedures; however, basic life support is sometimes provided at the scene of an emergency by family members or bystanders before emergency services arrive. In the case of cardiac injuries, cardiopulmonary resuscitation is initiated by bystanders or family members 25% of the time. Basic life support techniques, such as performing CPR on a victim of cardiac arrest, can double or even triple that patient&#x27;s chance of survival. Other types of basic life support include relief from choking (which can be done by using the Heimlich maneuver), staunching of bleeding by direct compression and elevation above the heart (and if necessary, pressure on arterial pressure points and the use of a manufactured or improvised tourniquet), first aid, and the use of an automated external defibrillator.

The purpose of basic life support (abbreviated BLS) is to save lives in a variety of different situations that require immediate attention. These situations can include, but are not limited to, cardiac arrest, stroke, drowning, choking, accidental injuries, violence, severe allergic reactions, burns, hypothermia, birth complications, drug addiction, and alcohol intoxication. The most common emergency that requires BLS is cerebral hypoxia, a shortage of oxygen to the brain due to heart or respiratory failure. A victim of cerebral hypoxia may die within 8–10 minutes without basic life support procedures. BLS is the lowest level of emergency care, followed by advanced life support and critical care.

==Bioethics==
As technology continues to advance within the medical field, so do the options available for healthcare. Out of respect for the patient&#x27;s autonomy, patients and their families are able to make their own decisions about life-sustaining treatment or whether to hasten death. When patients and their families are forced to make decisions concerning life support as a form of end-of-life or emergency treatment, ethical dilemmas often arise. When a patient is terminally ill or seriously injured, medical interventions can save or prolong the life of the patient. Because such treatment is available, families are often faced with the moral question of whether or not to treat the patient. Much of the struggle concerns the ethics of letting someone die when they can be kept alive versus keeping someone alive, possibly without their consent. Between 60 and 70% of seriously ill patients will not be able to decide for themselves whether or not they want to limit treatments, including life support measures. This leaves these difficult decisions up to loved ones and family members.

Patients and family members who wish to limit the treatment provided to the patient may complete a do not resuscitate (DNR) or do not intubate (DNI) order with their doctor. These orders state that the patient does not wish to receive these forms of life support. Generally, DNRs and DNIs are justified for patients who might not benefit from CPR, who would result in permanent damage from CPR or patients who have a poor quality of life prior to CPR or intubation and do not wish to prolong the dying process.

Another type of life support that presents ethical arguments is the placement of a feeding tube. Decisions about hydration and nutrition are generally the most ethically challenging when it comes to end-of-life care. In 1990, the US Supreme Court ruled that artificial nutrition and hydration are not different from other life-supporting treatments. Because of this, artificial nutrition and hydration can be refused by a patient or their family. A person cannot live without food and water, and because of this, it has been argued that withholding food and water is similar to the act of killing the patient or even allowing the person to die. This type of voluntary death is referred to as passive euthanasia.

In addition to patients and their families, doctors also are confronted with ethical questions. In addition to patient life, doctors have to consider medical resource allocations. They have to decide whether one patient is a worthwhile investment of limited resources versus another. Current ethical guidelines are vague since they center on moral issues of ending medical care but disregard discrepancies between those who understand possible treatments and how the patient&#x27;s wishes are understood and integrated into the final decision. Physicians often ignore treatments they deem ineffective, causing them to make more decisions without consulting the patient or representatives. However, when they decide against medical treatment, they must keep the patient or representatives informed even if they discourage continued life support. Whether the physician decides to continue to terminate life support therapy depends on their own ethical beliefs. These beliefs concern the patient&#x27;s independence, consent, and the efficacy and value of continued life support. In a prospective study conducted by T J Predergast and J M Luce from 1987 to 1993, when physicians recommended withholding or withdrawing life support, 90% of the patients agreed to the suggestion and only 4% refused. When the patient disagreed with the physician, the doctor complied and continued support with one exception. If the doctor believed the patient was hopelessly ill, they did not fulfill the surrogate&#x27;s request for resuscitation. In a survey conducted by Jean-Louis Vincent MD, PhD in 1999, it was found that of European intensivists working in the Intensive Care Unit, 93% of physicians occasionally withhold treatment from those they considered hopeless. Withdrawal of treatment was less common. For these patients, 40% of the physicians gave large doses of drugs until the patient died. All of the physicians were members of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine.

== Case studies ==

=== Sawatzky vs. Riverview Health Center Inc., November 1998 ===
Mr. Sawatsky had Parkinson&#x27;s disease and had been a patient at the Riverview Health Centre, Manitoba, Canada since May 28, 1998. When he was admitted to the hospital, the attending physician decided that if he went into cardiac arrest, he should not be resuscitated. Mrs. Sawatsky opposed the decision and the doctor complied. Later, the doctor decided that the patient needed a cuffed tracheotomy tube, which Mrs. Sawatsky opposed. In response, the hospital applied to have a Public Trustee become the patient&#x27;s legal guardian and the Trustee consented to the operation. In late October, without consulting another physician or the patient&#x27;s wife, the physician again made a &quot;do not resuscitate&quot; order after the patient developed pneumonia. Mrs. Sawatzky went to court for an interim order to remove the DNR. The &quot;do not resuscitate&quot; order was withdrawn.

In the case law to date in 1988, the courts decided that a decision to withhold or withdraw treatment was only for the physician to make, not the courts. However, the Manitoba court decided that given the scarcity of related cases and how none of them considered the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, it would try the case. Previous courts had held that physicians should not be bound by law to provide treatment that they did not believe the patient would want. Otherwise, the physician would be acting against his conscience and his duty as a physician. However, if the patient disagreed, they can sue the physician for negligence. To avoid this, Justice Beard ruled in favor of the patient. Resuscitation is not controversial and only requires CPR, which would be performed by the first qualified person on the scene. Even if resuscitation was an ethical dilemma, it was minor given that the doctor had allowed resuscitation for several months already. In contrast with related cases in which patients were comatose, Mrs. Sawatzky provided evidence that her husband was able to communicate and believed that he could recover, but the doctor disagreed. The uncertainty of recovery pushed the Court to order the physician to allow resuscitation. Where rulings discuss end of life issues, the question is more, &quot;Is continued life a benefit to this person&quot; instead of, &quot;Is it possible to treat this person&quot;. These questions are beyond the scope of the medical profession and can be answered philosophically or religiously, which is also what builds our sense of justice. Both philosophy and religion value life as a basic right for humans, rather than as the ability to contribute to society, and purposely encompasses all people. Mr. Sawatzky fell under the umbrella, so the judge ruled in his favor.

=== Airedale NHS Trust v. Bland (1993) ===
The &quot;Airedale NHS Trust v. Bland&quot; case was an English House of Lords decision for a 17-year-old comatose survivor of the Hillsborough disaster. He had been artificially fed and hydrated via life support for about three years, but he had not shown any improvement while in his persistent vegetative state. His parents challenged the therapeutic life support at the High Court and wanted permission to end life support for their son. The Court decided that his &quot;existence in a persistent vegetative state is not a benefit to the patient,&quot; but the statement did not cover the innate value of human life. The court interpreted the sanctity of life as only applicable when life could continue in the way that the patient would have wanted to live their life. If the quality of life did not fall within what the patient valued as a meaningful life, then sanctity of life did not apply. The accuracy of a proxy&#x27;s decision about how to treat a patient is influenced by what the patient would have wanted for themselves. However, just because the patient wanted to die did not mean the courts would allow physicians to assist and medically kill a patient. This part of the decision was influenced by the case &quot;Rodriguez (1993)&quot; in which a British Columbian woman with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis could not secure permission for assisted suicide.

==Techniques==
There are many therapies and techniques that may be used by clinicians to achieve the goal of sustaining life. Some examples include:
* Feeding tube
* Total parenteral nutrition
* Mechanical ventilation
* Heart/Lung bypass
* Urinary catheterization
* Dialysis
* Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
* Defibrillation
* Artificial pacemaker

These techniques are applied most commonly in the Emergency Department, Intensive Care Unit and Operating Rooms. As various life support technologies have improved and evolved they are used increasingly outside of the hospital environment. For example, a patient who requires a ventilator for survival is commonly discharged home with these devices. Another example includes the now-ubiquitous presence of automated external defibrillators in public venues which allow lay people to deliver life support in a prehospital environment.

The ultimate goals of life support depend on the specific patient situation. Typically, life support is used to sustain life while the underlying injury or illness is being treated or evaluated for prognosis. Life support techniques may also be used indefinitely if the underlying medical condition cannot be corrected, but a reasonable quality of life can still be expected.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Life extension

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2624498" start="0" end="12" title="Life support" label="Life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497094" start="176" end="204" title="emergency medical technician" label="emergency medical technician"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="463" end="492" title="cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="cardiopulmonary resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="624" end="638" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19275831" start="760" end="767" title="choking" label="choking"/>
<link wikidata="Q857300" start="800" end="817" title="Heimlich maneuver" label="Heimlich maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="834" end="842" title="bleeding" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132870" start="995" end="1005" title="tourniquet" label="tourniquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="1008" end="1017" title="first aid" label="first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q787407" start="1037" end="1069" title="automated external defibrillator" label="automated external defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="1282" end="1288" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="1290" end="1298" title="drowning" label="drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="1330" end="1338" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="1347" end="1364" title="allergic reaction" label="allergic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q170518" start="1367" end="1371" title="burn" label="burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="1374" end="1385" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="1408" end="1422" title="drug overdose" label="drug addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="1428" end="1448" title="alcohol intoxication" label="alcohol intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249526" start="1497" end="1513" title="cerebral hypoxia" label="cerebral hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="1565" end="1584" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q679690" start="1763" end="1776" title="Intensive care medicine" label="critical care"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535129" start="2979" end="2997" title="do not resuscitate" label="do not resuscitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q750195" start="3007" end="3022" title="intubate" label="do not intubate"/>
<link wikidata="Q939018" start="3334" end="3344" title="intubation" label="intubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3622" end="3638" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087035" start="3650" end="3670" title="Feeding tube" label="artificial nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="4084" end="4102" title="passive euthanasia" label="passive euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338741" start="6238" end="6261" title="Riverview Health Centre" label="Riverview Health Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="6263" end="6271" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6273" end="6279" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="6557" end="6568" title="tracheotomy" label="tracheotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046664" start="6968" end="6981" title="interim order" label="interim order"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="7325" end="7364" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="8994" end="9008" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="9061" end="9082" title="Hillsborough disaster" label="Hillsborough disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="9304" end="9314" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357472" start="10161" end="10177" title="Rodriguez v British Columbia (AG)" label="Rodriguez (1993)"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="10224" end="10253" title="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087035" start="10456" end="10468" title="Feeding tube" label="Feeding tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="10471" end="10497" title="Total parenteral nutrition" label="Total parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="10500" end="10522" title="Mechanical ventilation" label="Mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q552304" start="10525" end="10542" title="Cardiopulmonary bypass" label="Heart/Lung bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025432" start="10545" end="10568" title="Urinary catheterization" label="Urinary catheterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="10571" end="10579" title="Kidney dialysis" label="Dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="10582" end="10611" title="Cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="Cardiopulmonary resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="10614" end="10628" title="Defibrillation" label="Defibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="10631" end="10651" title="Artificial pacemaker" label="Artificial pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="10703" end="10723" title="Emergency Department" label="Emergency Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="10725" end="10744" title="Intensive Care Unit" label="Intensive Care Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="10749" end="10763" title="Operating Room" label="Operating Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q787407" start="11059" end="11091" title="automated external defibrillator" label="automated external defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q574567" start="11592" end="11606" title="Life extension" label="Life extension"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261773" wikidata="Q21653202" url="?curid=261773" title="Parenteral nutrition">
<text>Parenteral nutrition (PN), or intravenous feeding, is the feeding of nutritional products to a person intravenously, bypassing the usual process of eating and digestion. The products are made by pharmaceutical compounding entities or standard pharmaceutical companies. The person receives a nutritional mix according to a formula including glucose, salts, amino acids, lipids and vitamins and dietary minerals. It is called total parenteral nutrition (TPN) or total nutrient admixture (TNA) when no significant nutrition is obtained by other routes, and partial parenteral nutrition (PPN) when nutrition is also partially enteric. It is called peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN) when administered through vein access in a limb rather than through a central vein as in central venous nutrition (CVN).

==Medical uses==
Total nutrition (TPN) is provided when the gastrointestinal tract is nonfunctional because of an interruption in its continuity (it is blocked, or has a leak – a fistula) or because its absorptive capacity is impaired. It has been used for comatose patients, although enteral feeding is usually preferable, and less prone to complications. Parenteral nutrition is used to prevent malnutrition in patients who are unable to obtain adequate nutrients by oral or enteral routes. The Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition recommends waiting until the seventh day of hospital care.

===Absolute indications for TPN===
Diseases that would require the use of TPN include:

* Short bowel syndrome
* Small bowel obstruction
* Active gastrointestinal bleeding
* Pseudo-obstruction with complete intolerance to food
* High-output (defined as &gt; 500ml/day) enteric-cutaneous fistulas (unless a feeding tube can be passed distal to the fistula)

===Gastrointestinal disorders===
TPN may be the only feasible option for providing nutrition to patients who do not have a functioning gastrointestinal tract or who have disorders requiring complete bowel rest, including bowel obstruction, short bowel syndrome, gastroschisis, prolonged diarrhea regardless of its cause, very severe Crohn&#x27;s disease or ulcerative colitis, and certain pediatric GI disorders including congenital GI anomalies and necrotizing enterocolitis.

=== In the geriatric population ===
There are physical, physiological, or mental differences in the geriatric population that could potentially lead to poor nutrient intake that would require them to have nutrition therapy. Geriatric patients are more inclined to have delayed muscle restoration compared to the younger population. Additionally, older patients are observed to have greater cardiac and renal impairment, insulin resistance, and to have deficiencies in vitamins and crucial elements. Patients who require nutrition therapy but have contraindications for or cannot tolerate enteral nutrition are appropriate candidates for parenteral nutrition. In the geriatric population, it is indicated if oral or enteral nutrition is impossible for 3 days or when oral or enteral nutrition is likely insufficient for more than 7 to 10 days. While there are no complications of parenteral nutrition specific to the geriatric population, complications are more prevalent in this population due to increased comorbidities.

===In cancer===
Patients who are diagnosed with cancer, whether as outpatient undergoing treatment or hospitalized, are at a greater risk of malnutrition and cachexia. Cancer-related malnutrition can be attributed to the decrease in food intake, increase in the need for energy, and the alteration of metabolism. Patients should be assessed early on in their cancer treatment for any nutritional risk, such as by taking routine weights and BMI. Parenteral nutrition is indicated in cancer patients when it is not possible to access the digestive tract or if the tract is ineffective. In advanced cancer patients, the use of PN should be discussed in context of the risks and benefits, such as if the approximate survival rate is longer than 3 months and if PN would be expected to greatly improve the patients&#x27; quality of life.

It is uncertain whether home parenteral nutrition improves survival or quality of life in people with malignant bowel obstruction.

==Duration==
Short-term PN may be used if a person&#x27;s digestive system has shut down (for instance by peritonitis), and they are at a low enough weight to cause concerns about nutrition during an extended hospital stay. Long-term PN is occasionally used to treat people suffering the extended consequences of an accident, surgery, or digestive disorder. PN has extended the life of children born with nonexistent or severely deformed organs.

===Living with TPN===
Approximately 40,000 people use TPN at home in the United States, and because TPN requires 10–16 hours to be administered, daily life can be affected. Although daily lifestyle can be changed, most patients agree that these changes are better than staying at the hospital. Many different types of pumps exist to limit the time the patient is &quot;hooked up&quot;. Usually a backpack pump is used, allowing for mobility. The time required to be connected to the IV is dependent on the situation of each patient; some require once a day, or five days a week.

It is important for patients to avoid as much TPN-related change as possible in their lifestyles. This allows for the best possible mental health situation; constantly being held down can lead to resentment and depression. Physical activity is also highly encouraged, but patients must avoid contact sports (equipment damage) and swimming (infection). Many teens find it difficult to live with TPN due to issues regarding body image and not being able to participate in activities and events.

==Complications==
TPN fully bypasses the GI tract and normal methods of nutrient absorption. Possible complications, which may be significant, are listed below. Other than those listed below, common complications of TPN include hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, hyperglycemia, hypercapnia, decreased copper and zinc levels, elevated prothrombin time (if associated with liver injury), hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis and decreased gastrointestinal motility.

===Infection===
TPN requires a chronic IV access for the solution to run through, and the most common complication is infection of this catheter. Infection is a common cause of death in these patients, with a mortality rate of approximately 15% per infection, and death usually results from septic shock. When using central venous access, the subclavian (or axillary) vein is preferred due to its ease of access and lowest infectious complications compared to the jugular and femoral vein insertions.

Catheter complications include pneumothorax, accidental arterial puncture, and catheter-related sepsis. The complication rate at the time of insertion should be less than 5%. Catheter-related infections may be minimised by appropriate choice of catheter and insertion technique.

===Blood clots===
Chronic IV access leaves a foreign body in the vascular system, and blood clots on this IV line are common. Death can result from pulmonary embolism wherein a clot that starts on the IV line breaks off and travels to the lungs, blocking blood flow. 
Patients on TPN who have such clots occluding their catheter may receive a thrombolytic flush to dissolve the clots and prevent further complications.

===Fatty liver and liver failure===
Fatty liver is usually a more long-term complication of TPN, though over a long enough course it is fairly common. The pathogenesis is due to using linoleic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid component of soybean oil) as a major source of calories. TPN-associated liver disease strikes up to 50% of patients within 5–7 years, correlated with a mortality rate of 2–50%. The onset of this liver disease is the major complication that leads TPN patients to requiring an intestinal transplant.

Intralipid (Fresenius-Kabi), the US standard lipid emulsion for TPN nutrition, contains a 7:1 ratio of n-6/n-3 ratio of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). By contrast, Omegaven has a 1:8 ratio and showed promise in multiple clinical studies. Therefore, n-3-rich fat may alter the course of parenteral nutrition associated liver disease (PNALD).

===Hunger===
Because patients are being fed intravenously, the subject does not physically eat, resulting in intense hunger pangs (pains). The brain uses signals from the mouth (taste and smell), the stomach and gastrointestinal tract (fullness) and blood (nutrient levels) to determine conscious feelings of hunger. In cases of TPN, the taste, smell and physical fullness requirements are not met, and so the patient experiences hunger, although the body is being fully nourished.

Patients who eat food despite the inability can experience a wide range of complications, such as refeeding syndrome.

=== Cholecystitis ===
Total parenteral nutrition increases the risk of acute cholecystitis due to complete disuse of the gastrointestinal tract, which may result in bile stasis in the gallbladder. Other potential hepatobiliary dysfunctions include steatosis, steatohepatitis, cholestasis, and cholelithiasis. Six percent of patients on TPN longer than three weeks and 100% of patients on TPN longer than 13 weeks develop biliary sludge. The formation of sludge is the result of stasis due to lack of enteric stimulation and is not due to changes in bile composition. Gallbladder sludge disappears after four weeks of a normal oral diet. Administration of exogenous cholecystokinin (CCK) or stimulation of endogenous CCK by a periodic pulse of large amounts of amino acids has been shown to help prevent sludge formation. These therapies are not routinely recommended. Such complications are suggested to be the main reason for mortality in people requiring long-term total parenteral nutrition, such as in short bowel syndrome. In newborn infants with short bowel syndrome with less than 10% of expected intestinal length, thereby being dependent upon total parenteral nutrition, five-year survival is approximately 20%.

=== Gut atrophy ===
Infants who are sustained on TPN without food by mouth for prolonged periods are at risk for developing gut atrophy.

=== Hypersensitivity ===
Hypersensitivity is a rarely described but significant complication of parenteral nutrition therapy. First reported in 1965, the incidence of these reactions is speculated to be around one in 1.5 million patients who are provided parenteral nutrition. There is a wide range in how and when these reactions manifest. Cutaneous manifestations are the most common presentation. Hypersensitivity is thought to occur to the individual components of TPN, with the intravenous lipid emulsion being the most frequently implicated component, followed by the multivitamin solution and the amino acid solution.

Medications

Patients who are receiving intravenous parenteral nutrition may also need to receive intravenous medications as well using the same Y-site. It is important to assess the compatibility of the medications with the nutrition components. Incompatibilities can be observed physically through discoloration, phase separation, or precipitation.

=== Metabolic complications ===
Metabolic complications include the refeeding syndrome characterised by hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia and hypomagnesemia. Hyperglycemia is common at the start of therapy, but can be treated with insulin added to the TPN solution. Hypoglycaemia is likely to occur with abrupt cessation of TPN. Liver dysfunction can be limited to a reversible cholestatic jaundice and to fatty infiltration (demonstrated by elevated transaminases). Severe hepatic dysfunction is a rare complication. Overall, patients receiving TPN have a higher rate of infectious complications. This can be related to hyperglycemia.

=== Pregnancy ===
Pregnancy can cause major complications when trying to properly dose the nutrient mixture. Because all of the fetus&#x27; nourishment comes from the mother&#x27;s blood stream, the doctor must properly calculate the dosage of nutrients to meet both recipients’ needs and have them in usable forms. Incorrect dosage can lead to many adverse, hard-to-guess effects, such as death, and varying degrees of deformation or other developmental problems.

It is recommended that parenteral nutrition administration begins after a period of natural nutrition so doctors can properly calculate the nutritional needs of the fetus. Otherwise, it should only be administered by a team of highly skilled doctors who can accurately assess the fetus’ needs.

==Total parenteral nutrition==

Solutions for total parenteral nutrition may be customized to individual patient requirements, or standardized solutions may be used. The use of standardized parenteral nutrition solutions is cost-effective and may provide better control of serum electrolytes. 
Ideally each patient is assessed individually before commencing on parenteral nutrition, and a team consisting of specialised doctors, nurses, clinical pharmacists, and registered dietitians evaluate the patient&#x27;s individual data and decide what PN formula to use and at what infusion rate.

For energy only, intravenous sugar solutions with dextrose or glucose are generally used. This is not considered to be parenteral nutrition as it does not prevent malnutrition when used on its own. Standardized solutions may also differ between developers. Following are some examples of what compositions they may have. The solution for normal patients may be given both centrally and peripherally.

==Components==

===Prepared solutions===
Prepared solutions generally consist of water and electrolytes; glucose, amino acids, and lipids; essential vitamins, minerals and trace elements are added or given separately. Previously lipid emulsions were given separately but it is becoming more common for a &quot;three-in-one&quot; solution of glucose, proteins, and lipids to be administered.

===Added components===
Individual nutrient components may be added to more precisely adjust the body contents of it. That individual nutrient may, if possible, be infused individually, or it may be injected into a bag of nutrient solution or intravenous fluids (volume expander solution) that is given to the patient.

Administration of individual components may be more hazardous than administration of pre-mixed solutions such as those used in total parenteral nutrition, because the latter are generally already balanced in regard to e.g. osmolarity and ability to infuse peripherally. Incorrect IV administration of concentrated potassium can be lethal, but this is not a danger if the potassium is mixed in TPN solution and diluted.

Vitamins may be added to a bulk premixed nutrient immediately before administration, since the additional vitamins can promote spoilage of stored product. Vitamins can be added in two doses, one fat-soluble, the other water-soluble. There are also single-dose preparations with both fat- and water-soluble vitamins such as &quot;Cernevit&quot;.

Minerals and trace elements for parenteral nutrition are available in prepared mixtures, such as &quot;Addaven&quot;.

These additional components in parenteral nutritions, however were subject to stability checks, since they greatly affect the stability of lipid emulsions that serve as the base for these formulations. Studies have shown differences in physical and chemical stabilities of these total parenteral nutrition solutions, which greatly influences pharmaceutical manufacturing of these admixtures.

===Emulsifier===
Only a limited number of emulsifiers are commonly regarded as safe to use for parenteral administration, of which the most important is lecithin. Lecithin can be biodegraded and metabolized, since it is an integral part of biological membranes, making it virtually non-toxic. Other emulsifiers can only be excreted via the kidneys, creating a toxic load. The emulsifier of choice for most fat emulsions used for parenteral nutrition is a highly purified egg lecithin, due to its low toxicity and complete integration with cell membranes.

Use of egg-derived emulsifiers is not recommended for people with an egg allergy due to the risk of reaction. In situations where there is no suitable emulsifying agent for a person at risk of developing essential fatty acid deficiency, cooking oils may be spread upon large portions of available skin for supplementation by transdermal absorption.

Another type of fat emulsion Omegaven is being used experimentally within the US primarily in the pediatric population. It is made of fish oil instead of the soybean oil based formulas more widely in use. Research has shown use of Omegaven may reverse and prevent liver disease and cholestasis.

==History==

Developed in the 1960s by Dr. Stanley Dudrick, who as a surgical resident in the University of Pennsylvania, working in the basic science laboratory of Dr. Jonathan Rhoads, was the first to successfully nourish initially Beagle puppies and subsequently newborn babies with catastrophic gastrointestinal malignancies. Dudrick collaborated with Dr. Willmore and Dr. Vars to complete the work necessary to make this nutritional technique safe and successful.

In 2019 the UK experienced a severe shortage of TPN bags due to safety restrictions at the sole manufacturing site, operated by Calea. The National Health Service described the situation as an emergency.

== See also ==
* Feeding tube
* Hickman line
* Intradialytic parenteral nutrition
* Intravenous therapy
* Nothing by mouth
* Intralipid

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="0" end="20" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="Parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="22" end="24" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="PN"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="30" end="49" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="intravenous feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="102" end="113" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303150" start="195" end="221" title="pharmaceutical compounding" label="pharmaceutical compounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="340" end="347" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="349" end="354" title="salts" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="356" end="366" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="369" end="374" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="380" end="387" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="393" end="409" title="dietary minerals" label="dietary minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="424" end="450" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="total parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="452" end="455" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="TPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="460" end="484" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="total nutrient admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="486" end="489" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="TNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="554" end="582" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="partial parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="584" end="587" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="PPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="622" end="629" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="enteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="644" end="675" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="peripheral parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="677" end="680" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="PPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168716" start="708" end="729" title="Peripherally inserted central catheter" label="vein access in a limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q190404" start="752" end="764" title="central venous catheter" label="central vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="771" end="795" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="central venous nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="797" end="800" title="Parenteral nutrition" label="CVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="864" end="886" title="Human gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q189470" start="983" end="990" title="fistula" label="fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="1061" end="1065" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087035" start="1089" end="1104" title="feeding tube" label="enteral feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344580" start="1281" end="1288" title="enteral" label="enteral"/>
<link wikidata="Q662272" start="1550" end="1570" title="Short bowel syndrome" label="Short bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244733" start="1579" end="1596" title="bowel obstruction" label="bowel obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495657" start="1606" end="1631" title="gastrointestinal bleeding" label="gastrointestinal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924862" start="1634" end="1652" title="Intestinal pseudo-obstruction" label="Pseudo-obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="1667" end="1686" title="anorexia (symptom)" label="intolerance to food"/>
<link wikidata="Q189470" start="1747" end="1754" title="fistula" label="fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244733" start="2038" end="2055" title="bowel obstruction" label="bowel obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q662272" start="2057" end="2077" title="short bowel syndrome" label="short bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495674" start="2079" end="2092" title="gastroschisis" label="gastroschisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="2104" end="2112" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="2150" end="2170" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477" start="2174" end="2192" title="ulcerative colitis" label="ulcerative colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859678" start="2267" end="2292" title="necrotizing enterocolitis" label="necrotizing enterocolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384" start="2395" end="2404" title="Geriatrics" label="geriatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414874" start="3302" end="3315" title="Comorbidity" label="comorbidities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003455" start="3476" end="3484" title="cachexia" label="cachexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244733" start="4264" end="4281" title="bowel obstruction" label="bowel obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="4390" end="4401" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="5522" end="5532" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q747883" start="5534" end="5551" title="Physical activity" label="Physical activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="5668" end="5673" title="teens" label="teens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733239" start="5733" end="5743" title="body image" label="body image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765564" start="6554" end="6566" title="septic shock" label="septic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="6796" end="6808" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="7193" end="7211" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931577" start="7388" end="7400" title="thrombolytic" label="thrombolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407426" start="7649" end="7662" title="linoleic acid" label="linoleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q306246" start="7667" end="7685" title="omega-6 fatty acid" label="omega-6 fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326552" start="7961" end="7982" title="intestine transplantation" label="intestinal transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058432" start="7985" end="7995" title="Lipid emulsion" label="Intralipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q705361" start="7997" end="8011" title="Fresenius (company)" label="Fresenius-Kabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="8105" end="8132" title="Polyunsaturated fat" label="polyunsaturated fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090055" start="8154" end="8162" title="Omegaven" label="Omegaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535686" start="8449" end="8460" title="hunger pang" label="hunger pang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8503" end="8508" title="mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="8510" end="8515" title="taste" label="taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="8520" end="8525" title="Olfaction" label="smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="8532" end="8539" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="8544" end="8566" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="8582" end="8587" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="8589" end="8597" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535686" start="8641" end="8647" title="Hunger (motivational state)" label="hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812693" start="8913" end="8931" title="refeeding syndrome" label="refeeding syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q376666" start="9011" end="9024" title="cholecystitis" label="cholecystitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q64386" start="9118" end="9129" title="gallbladder" label="gallbladder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9147" end="9172" title="hepatobiliary dysfunction" label="hepatobiliary dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365091" start="9182" end="9191" title="steatosis" label="steatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335423" start="9193" end="9208" title="steatohepatitis" label="steatohepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075923" start="9210" end="9221" title="cholestasis" label="cholestasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272714" start="9227" end="9241" title="cholelithiasis" label="cholelithiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492283" start="9355" end="9369" title="biliary sludge" label="biliary sludge"/>
<link wikidata="Q60315441" start="9599" end="9620" title="cholecystokinin" label="cholecystokinin (CCK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q662272" start="9940" end="9960" title="short bowel syndrome" label="short bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="10319" end="10335" title="Hypersensitivity" label="Hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="10635" end="10644" title="Skin" label="Cutaneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058432" start="10777" end="10803" title="Lipid emulsion" label="intravenous lipid emulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172395" start="10868" end="10880" title="multivitamin" label="multivitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="10898" end="10908" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045712" start="11065" end="11071" title="Y-Set (intravenous therapy)" label="Y-site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812693" start="11340" end="11358" title="refeeding syndrome" label="refeeding syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="11376" end="11387" title="hypokalemia" label="hypokalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641384" start="11389" end="11405" title="hypophosphatemia" label="hypophosphatemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771629" start="11410" end="11424" title="hypomagnesemia" label="hypomagnesemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271993" start="11426" end="11439" title="Hyperglycemia" label="Hyperglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="11923" end="11932" title="Pregnancy" label="Pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="12295" end="12300" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182746" start="12325" end="12336" title="deformity" label="deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="12346" end="12368" title="Intellectual disability" label="developmental problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="12536" end="12541" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155491" start="13103" end="13122" title="clinical pharmacist" label="clinical pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q842811" start="13129" end="13149" title="registered dietitian" label="registered dietitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489648" start="13274" end="13300" title="intravenous sugar solution" label="intravenous sugar solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="13307" end="13315" title="dextrose" label="dextrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="13319" end="13326" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="13739" end="13744" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="13763" end="13770" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="13772" end="13782" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="13807" end="13814" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424651" start="14312" end="14327" title="volume expander" label="volume expander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14683" end="14692" title="Potassium#Nutrition" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q241595" start="15800" end="15808" title="lecithin" label="lecithin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090055" start="16582" end="16590" title="Omegaven" label="Omegaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q55945743" start="16892" end="16907" title="Stanley Dudrick" label="Stanley Dudrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="17458" end="17481" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087035" start="17541" end="17553" title="Feeding tube" label="Feeding tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143998" start="17556" end="17568" title="Hickman line" label="Hickman line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058556" start="17571" end="17605" title="Intradialytic parenteral nutrition" label="Intradialytic parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="17608" end="17627" title="Intravenous therapy" label="Intravenous therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7036808" start="17630" end="17646" title="Nothing by mouth" label="Nothing by mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058432" start="17649" end="17659" title="Intralipid" label="Intralipid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261774" wikidata="Q2311820" url="?curid=261774" title="Télécom Paris">
<text>Télécom Paris (also known as ENST or Télécom or École nationale supérieure des télécommunications ; also Télécom ParisTech until 2019) is a French public institution for higher education (&quot;grande école&quot;) and engineering research. Located in Palaiseau, it is also a member of the Institut Polytechnique de Paris and the Institut Mines-Télécom. In 2021, it was the sixth highest ranked French university in the &quot;World University Rankings&quot;, and the 7th best small university worldwide.
In the QS Ranking, Télécom Paris is the 64th best university worldwide in Engineering.

In 1991, Télécom Paris and the EPFL established a school named EURECOM located in Sophia-Antipolis. Students can be admitted either in Palaiseau or in Sophia-Antipolis.

== History ==
In 1845, Alphonse Foy, director of telegraphic lines, proposed a school specializing in telegraphy for Polytechnicians. However, his proposition was rejected. The school was founded on 12 July 1878 as the École professionnelle supérieure des postes et télégraphes (EPSPT). In 1912, the school&#x27;s name was changed to École supérieure des postes et télégraphes (ESPT). In 1934, the ESPT moved to rue Barrault, in the 13th arrondissement of Paris. In 1938, the school was renamed École nationale supérieure des postes, télégraphes et téléphones (ENSPTT), and in the same year, the President of France, Albert Lebrun awarded the school Legion of Honor. During the Second World War, in 1942, the school was divided into two schools: the ENSPTT and École nationale supérieure des télécommunications (ENST). The ENSPTT was closed on 31 December 2002. In 1971, the ENST passed under the direct guardianship of the &quot;Direction générale des télécommunications&quot;, and the development of telecommunications during this period drove the state to create two associate schools: the ENST Bretagne in 1977 in Brest, and the INT in 1979 at Évry. In 1992, the ENST, together with the EPFL, founded the EURECOM at Sophia-Antipolis. On 26 December 1996, the Groupe des Écoles des Télécommunications (GET, nowadays Institut Mines-Télécom) was established. It consists of a group of telecommunications schools including the ENST, the Télécom Bretagne (nowadays IMT Atlantique), the Télécom SudParis, and EURECOM. On 21 September 2009, the school&#x27;s name was changed to Télécom ParisTech. On 1 June 2019, the school&#x27;s name was again changed to Télécom Paris after the formation of Institute Polytechnique de Paris.

== Present ==
There are two ways to get admitted into Télécom Paris as an undergraduate student: 
* Through a selective entrance examination (Concours Commun Mines Ponts) after at least two years of preparation in Classes préparatoires aux Grandes Écoles curriculum following high school (in France, Morocco, and Tunisia)
* Through an application-based admission process for university students, especially from foreign universities
** After a scientific bachelor&#x27;s degree (Mathematics, Physics, Mechanics, Computer Science, etc.)
** After a DUT degree from a French university of technology.

Télécom Paris is also one of the approved application schools for the École Polytechnique, making it possible for fourth-year students to complete their studies with a one-year specialization at Télécom Paris. Télécom Paris also provides education for the Corps des Mines.

Around 250 engineers graduate each year from Télécom Paris. About forty percent of the graduates are foreign students. Specialization courses cover all aspects of computer science and communication engineering: electronics, signal processing, software engineering, networking, economics, finance etc.

== Research at Télécom Paris ==
Research at Télécom Paris consists of:

* Optimization and transmission of information
* Improvements in data processing
* Microelectronics, such as FPGA and DSP systems
* Image and Signal processing, wavelets
* Artificial intelligence, data mining, distributed and real-time systems
* User experience Design, Information visualisation and computer-human interfaces.

Télécom Paris has four departments:

* The Department of Electronics and Communications: This laboratory consists of about one hundred researchers and teaching researchers (37 tenured) within 7 research groups
* The Department of Computer Science and Networking
* The Department of Signal and Image Processing
* The Department of Economic and Social Sciences.

The three first labs are gathered in Télécom Paris&#x27; own laboratory: LTCI, &quot;Laboratoire de Traitement et de Communication et de l&#x27;Information&quot;
The Economic and Social Sciences department is associated with the CNRS through the &quot;Interdisciplinary Institute for Innovation&quot;.

== Training for engineering degrees ==
First year – Multidisciplinary studies
For undergraduate students, the core curriculum, commonly referred to as &quot;common base&quot;, consists of courses in most areas of science (Mathematics, Economics, Applied Mathematics, Computer Science, Physics, etc.) and mandatory courses in the humanities (foreign languages, social sciences, liberal arts, etc.).

In the Paris campus of Télécom Paris, this primary year of multidisciplinary studies is common among Paris and Sophia-Antipolis curriculum students. It is followed by a one or two-month mandatory summer internship.

Second and Third Year – Specialization in Paris or at Sophia-Antipolis (at Eurecom) 
Starting from their second year, students have to choose a specialization in which they&#x27;ll receive in-depth courses and that will conclude their engineering curriculum. Based on 13 specialization tracks of more than 120 courses, these two years eventually unfold into a six-month internship through which the engineering student will acquire their first real professional experience.

Third-year students can also complete their studies in an approved university in France or abroad as part of a double degree or a Master of Science program.

== Training for master degrees ==
Télécom Paris offers post master&#x27;s degrees &quot;Mastères spécialisés&quot; (MS), and masters in different domains.

=== Post-master&#x27;s degrees ===
* &quot;One year full-time training&quot;
** Big Data, &quot;gestion et analyse de données massives&quot; 
** &quot;Conception, Architecture de Réseaux et Cybersécurité&quot; 
** &quot;Concepteur de Projet Digital&quot; (in partnership with l&#x27;INA) (formerly &quot;Création et Production Multimédia&quot;) 
** &quot;Cybersécurité et cyberdéfense&quot;
** &quot;Intelligence Artificielle&quot; 
** &quot;Radio-Mobiles, IoT et 5G&quot;
** &quot;Systèmes Embarqués&quot;
* &quot;Two years part-time training&quot;
** &quot;Architecte Digital d&#x27;Entreprise&quot; 
** &quot;Architecte Réseaux et Cybersécurité&quot;
** &quot;Management des Systèmes d&#x27;Information&quot; (in partnership with l&#x27;ESSEC)
** &quot;Smart Mobility&quot;

=== Masters courses ===
Four master&#x27;s degrees of University Paris Saclay are taught by Télécom ParisTech in collaboration with other Parisian Universities and grande ecoles.

* Master Multimedia Networking (MN) 
* Master Advanced Computer Networks (ACN)
* Master Data &amp; Knowledge (D&amp;K)
* Master Industries de Réseau et Économie Numérique (IREN).

It participates in organising several other master courses its partners offer in and around Paris.

== Rankings ==
National ranking (ranked as Télécom Paris for its Master of Sciences in Engineering)
== References ==
== External links ==

* Official website.
* Official site of EURECOM.
* Télécom ParisTech Alumni.
* Junior Entreprise of Télécom ParisTech.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2311820" start="0" end="13" title="Télécom Paris" label="Télécom Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311820" start="29" end="33" title="Télécom Paris" label="ENST"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311820" start="37" end="44" title="Télécom Paris" label="Télécom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311820" start="48" end="97" title="Télécom Paris" label="École nationale supérieure des télécommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311820" start="105" end="122" title="Télécom Paris" label="Télécom ParisTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q847027" start="194" end="206" title="grande école" label="grande école"/>
<link wikidata="Q205580" start="251" end="260" title="Palaiseau" label="Palaiseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q48759778" start="289" end="320" title="Polytechnic Institute of Paris" label="Institut Polytechnique de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885718" start="329" end="351" title="Institut Mines-Télécom" label="Institut Mines-Télécom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="425" end="450" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="510" end="520" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q262760" start="622" end="626" title="École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne" label="EPFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518473" start="654" end="661" title="EURECOM" label="EURECOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359930" start="673" end="689" title="Sophia-Antipolis" label="Sophia-Antipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175129" start="1194" end="1222" title="13th arrondissement of Paris" label="13th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="1357" end="1376" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q158749" start="1378" end="1391" title="Albert Lebrun" label="Albert Lebrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="1411" end="1426" title="Legion of Honor" label="Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1439" end="1455" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460307" start="1854" end="1867" title="ENST Bretagne" label="ENST Bretagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="1879" end="1884" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546585" start="1894" end="1897" title="Télécom &amp;amp; Management SudParis" label="INT"/>
<link wikidata="Q192393" start="1909" end="1913" title="Évry, Essonne" label="Évry"/>
<link wikidata="Q262760" start="1952" end="1956" title="École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne" label="EPFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518473" start="1970" end="1977" title="EURECOM" label="EURECOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359930" start="1981" end="1997" title="Sophia-Antipolis" label="Sophia-Antipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885718" start="2024" end="2064" title="Groupe des Écoles des Télécommunications" label="Groupe des Écoles des Télécommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885718" start="2080" end="2102" title="Institut Mines-Télécom" label="Institut Mines-Télécom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460307" start="2198" end="2214" title="ENST Bretagne" label="Télécom Bretagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962533" start="2225" end="2239" title="IMT Atlantique" label="IMT Atlantique"/>
<link wikidata="Q43305" start="2246" end="2262" title="Télécom SudParis" label="Télécom SudParis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518473" start="2268" end="2275" title="EURECOM" label="EURECOM"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2630" end="2657" title=":fr:Concours commun Mines-Ponts" label="Concours Commun Mines Ponts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096010" start="2702" end="2742" title="Classe préparatoire aux grandes écoles" label="Classes préparatoires aux Grandes Écoles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3035" end="3038" title=":fr:Diplôme universitaire de technologie" label="DUT"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="3157" end="3176" title="École Polytechnique" label="École Polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350226" start="3343" end="3358" title="Corps des Mines" label="Corps des Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="3844" end="3848" title="FPGA" label="FPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="3853" end="3856" title="Digital signal processor" label="DSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q280413" start="4653" end="4657" title="CNRS" label="CNRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518473" start="5417" end="5424" title="Eurecom" label="Eurecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="6035" end="6055" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665109" start="6414" end="6417" title="Institut national de l&amp;#x27;audiovisuel" label="INA"/>
<link wikidata="Q273642" start="6871" end="6876" title="ESSEC" label="ESSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q109409389" start="6963" end="6986" title="University of Paris-Saclay" label="University Paris Saclay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261775" wikidata="Q422186" url="?curid=261775" title="TPN">
<text>TPN may refer to:

==Science and Medicine==
* Total parenteral nutrition
* Triphosphopyridine nucleotide, the previous name for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+)
* Task Positive Network, see Dorsal attention network

==Organisations==
* Towarzystwo Przyjaciół Nauk (Society of Friends of Science) in Warsaw

==Other==
* Third-party note or Note verbale, a diplomatic document
* Tupinambá language, by ISO 639 code
* Tiputini Airport, Ecuador
* Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
* &quot;The Promised Neverland&quot; (Manga / Anime Series)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q422186" start="0" end="3" title="TPN" label="TPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="46" end="72" title="Total parenteral nutrition" label="Total parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q28747" start="128" end="171" title="nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate" label="nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298764" start="209" end="233" title="Dorsal attention network" label="Dorsal attention network"/>
<link wikidata="Q607496" start="255" end="282" title="Society of Friends of Science in Warsaw" label="Towarzystwo Przyjaciół Nauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893413" start="358" end="370" title="Note verbale" label="Note verbale"/>
<link wikidata="Q56944" start="396" end="414" title="Tupinambá language" label="Tupinambá language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824788" start="434" end="450" title="Tiputini Airport" label="Tiputini Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="462" end="506" title="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q28682687" start="515" end="537" title="The Promised Neverland" label="The Promised Neverland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261778" wikidata="Q434352" url="?curid=261778" title="Chad Hedrick">
<text>Chad Hedrick (born April 17, 1977) is an American inline speed skater and ice speed skater. He was born in Spring, Texas.

Hedrick revolutionized the inline speed skating world with his unique technique, called the double push, or DP. During his career he won 93 national championships and 50 world championships, as well as having a brand of inline skating wheels named after him.

== Speed skating ==
After winning his 50th World Championship, in Ostend, Belgium, in 2002, he switched to ice speed skating after watching, on a television in a Las Vegas casino in 2002, fellow inline skater Derek Parra win a medal at the Salt Lake City Winter Olympics. In February 2004, a year and a half after he made his switch, Hedrick won the 2004 World Allround Speed Skating Championships, knocking more than a point off the world record points, reducing it to 150.478. On March 12, 2004, Hedrick won the gold medal in the 5,000 meters during the 2004 World Single Distance Championships, which were held Seoul, South Korea. In 2005 he successfully defended his 5,000 m world title in Inzell, Germany. At the 2005 World Allround Speed Skating Championships he lost his title to Shani Davis. Hedrick has set six world records in speed skating, but these have later been broken by others. , he was 4th in the unofficial world ranking, the Adelskalender after having led the rankings from November 2005-7.

=== 2006 Winter Olympic Games ===
The Texan raised the stakes for the Winter Olympics 2006 in Turin by proclaiming that he would equal Eric Heiden&#x27;s record of five gold medals. On February 11, 2006, Hedrick won his only gold medal at this Olympics at the 5,000 m beating Sven Kramer of the Netherlands who claimed a silver medal.

Hedrick caused controversy when he insisted that Shani Davis, fellow American speed skater in the 1,000 m race, should have participated in the men&#x27;s pursuit, stating, &quot;I don&#x27;t see what his logic is. We can&#x27;t be beat if he skates. It&#x27;s his decision. I&#x27;m not going to get in the middle of it. I would like him to be in the pursuit, but am I going to beg him? No.&quot; Five-time gold medalist and Olympic-team physician, Eric Heiden, has publicly written that Davis made the right choice in not participating in the team pursuit and thereby not jeopardizing his chances at a gold medal in his best event, the 1,000 meter race. Davis eventually won the gold medal in the 1000 m race, while Hedrick finished sixth.

Hedrick added a silver medal in the 10,000 m to his Olympic tally along with a bronze medal in the 1,500 m. With three medals, Hedrick became only the third American ever to win three speed skating medals in a single Winter Olympics winning a medal in each color (gold, silver, and bronze).

=== Post-Torino career ===
On March 5, 2006, Hedrick won a 1500 m race in the Netherlands and captured the 2006 World Cup title in the event. Two weeks later, Hedrick participated in the World Allround Championships in Calgary, aiming to take back the title he lost to Davis in 2005. On the fourth and final distance, the 10,000 meter, Hedrick needed to beat Davis by 8.32 seconds, but made a crucial mistake midway through the race; he turned into the inner lane instead of his scheduled outer, and though he realised his mistake quickly, he was motioned off some laps later.

=== 2010 Winter Olympic Games ===
Hedrick qualified for the 1000 m, 1500 m, 5000 m, and the long-track team pursuit in the 21st Winter Olympiad held in Vancouver. Hedrick lost to Håvard Bøkko in the final pair of the 5000 m event. He would ultimately finish 10 places behind the winner, Dutchman Sven Kramer, in 11th place. Hedrick skated a 1:09.32 in the 1000 m which was good for the bronze behind Davis and South Korea&#x27;s Mo Tae-bum. Hedrick was the leader of the team that won a surprising silver medal in team pursuit with an upset of the heavily favored Netherlands team in the semifinals bringing Hedrick&#x27;s Olympic career to an end with a total of five medals with each one in a different event.

==Personal bests==




== World ice speedskating records ==

Hedrick has so far skated six world records on ice skates

== World Titles Inline Speed Skating ==
Hedrick has won the following world titles in inline speed skating:
== U.S. and world roller speed skating records ==
* National roller skating record in the 3,000 meters relay race (1993)
* National inline skating record in the 5,000 meters relay race (1998)
* National inline skating record in the 3,000 meters male-female relay race (1998)
* National inline skating record in the 1,500 meters race (1996)
* National outdoor track record in the 1,000 and 1,500 meters races (1999 and 1998 respectively)
* National outdoor track record in the 15,000 meters race (1998)
* National outdoor road record in the 500 and 1,000 meters races (2001)
* National outdoor road record in the 1,500 meters race (1998)
* National outdoor road record in the 10,000 meters race (2001)
* World outdoor road record in the 1,500 meters race (1999)
* World outdoor road record in the 10,000 meters race (1996)
* World outdoor road record in the 15,000 meters race (2000)
* Course Record - NorthShore Inline Marathon (1998)

== Personal life ==
On June 7, 2008, Hedrick and Lynsey Elizabeth Adams were married in Houston, Texas. Their wedding was featured on the Style Network reality show &quot;Whose Wedding Is It Anyway?&quot; They had their first daughter in 2009, a second daughter in 2010, and a son in 2014. Hedrick currently works as a licensed realtor.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Official website (archive)
* Chad Hedrick&#x27;s U.S. Olympic Team bio (archive)
* Chad Hedrick at SpeedSkatingStats.com
* Photos of Chad Hedrick
* OffThePodium.com
* Current Adelskalender
* SpeedskatingBase.eu PB&#x27;s Chad with a link to Results International Championships 
* AP Winter Games Profile: Chad Hedrick
* Associated Press: Davis, Hedrick carving quite an Olympic legacy
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q434352" start="0" end="12" title="Chad Hedrick" label="Chad Hedrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q618786" start="50" end="69" title="inline speed skating" label="inline speed skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="78" end="90" title="speed skating" label="speed skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q981346" start="107" end="120" title="Spring, Texas" label="Spring, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q937223" start="215" end="226" title="double push" label="double push"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="449" end="455" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="457" end="464" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q492196" start="592" end="603" title="Derek Parra" label="Derek Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319876" start="738" end="780" title="World Allround Speed Skating Championships" label="World Allround Speed Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q186355" start="944" end="979" title="World Single Distance Championships" label="World Single Distance Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="997" end="1002" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="1004" end="1015" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q252537" start="1077" end="1083" title="Inzell" label="Inzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1085" end="1092" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q533441" start="1170" end="1181" title="Shani Davis" label="Shani Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="1203" end="1215" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q355476" start="1329" end="1342" title="Adelskalender (skating)" label="Adelskalender"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="1466" end="1481" title="Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="1490" end="1495" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311289" start="1531" end="1542" title="Eric Heiden" label="Eric Heiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q111320" start="1672" end="1683" title="Sven Kramer" label="Sven Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q533441" start="1781" end="1792" title="Shani Davis" label="Shani Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="3497" end="3506" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q706238" start="3524" end="3536" title="Håvard Bøkko" label="Håvard Bøkko"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3632" end="3640" title="Netherlands" label="Dutchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q376215" start="3774" end="3784" title="Mo Tae-bum" label="Mo Tae-bum"/>
<link wikidata="Q618786" start="4264" end="4284" title="inline speed skating" label="inline speed skating"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261780" wikidata="Q5524522" url="?curid=261780" title="Garveyism">
<text>Garveyism is an aspect of black nationalism that refers to the economic, racial and political policies of UNIA-ACL founder Marcus Garvey. 

Ideologically, Garvey was a black nationalist. Generally referring to dark-skinned peoples of African descent as &quot;Negroes&quot;, he and the UNIA insisted that that term should be capitalized, thus affording dignity and respect to those whom it described. His ideas were influenced by a range of sources. According to biographer Colin Grant, while he was living in London, Garvey displayed &quot;an amazing capacity to absorb political tracts, theories of social engineering, African history and the Western Enlightenment.&quot; Garvey was exposed to the ideas about race that were prevalent at the time; his ideas on race were also heavily informed by the writings of Edward Wilmot Blyden and by his work in London with Dusé Mohamed Ali.

During the late 1910s and 1920s, Garvey was also influenced by the ideas of the Irish independence movement, to which he was sympathetic. He saw strong parallels between the subjugation of Ireland and the global subjugation of black people, and identified strongly with the Irish independence leader Éamon de Valera. In 1922, he sent a message to Valera stating that &quot;We believe Ireland should be free even as Africa shall be free for the Negroes of the world. Keep up the fight for a free Ireland.&quot;

For Garvey, Ireland&#x27;s Sinn Féin and the Irish independence movement served as blueprints for his own black nationalist cause. In July 1919 he stated that &quot;the time has come for the Negro race to offer up its martyrs upon the altar of liberty even as the Irish [had] given a long list from Robert Emmet to Roger Casement.&quot; He also expressed admiration for the Indian independence movement, which was seeking independence from British rule in India, describing Mahatma Gandhi as &quot;one of the noblest characters of the day&quot;.

== Race and racial separatism ==

&quot;Race first&quot; was the adage which was widely used in Garveyism. In Garvey&#x27;s view, &quot;no race in the world is so just as to give others, for the asking, a square deal in things economic, political and social&quot;, but rather each racial group will favor its own interests. Rejecting the &quot;melting pot&quot; notion of much 20th century American nationalism, he thought that European Americans would never willingly grant equality to African Americans, and thus it was inefficient for the latter to ask for it. He was hostile to the efforts of the progressive movement to agitate for social and political rights for African Americans, arguing that this was ineffective and that law would never change the underlying racial prejudice of European Americans.

He argued that the European-American population of the U.S. would never tolerate the social integration which was being advocated by activists like W. E. B. Du Bois because he believed that campaigns for such integration would lead to anti-black riots and lynchings. He openly conceded that the U.S. was a white man&#x27;s country and thus, he did not think that African Americans should expect equal treatment within it. Thus, he opposed attempts to socially and economically integrate the different races which lived within the country. Garveyism promoted the view that whites had no duty to help blacks achieve racial equality, maintaining the view that the latter needed to advance themselves on their initiative. He advocated racial separatism, but he did not believe in black supremacy. He also rallied against Eurocentric beauty standards among blacks, seeing them as impediments to black self-respect.

In the U.S., ideas about the need for black racial purity became central to Garvey&#x27;s thought. He vehemently denounced miscegenation, believing that mixed-race individuals were &quot;torn by dual allegiances&quot; and they would often ally themselves &quot;with the more powerful race,&quot; thus, they would become &quot;traitors to the [black] race&quot;. Garvey argued that mixed-race people would be bred out of existence. Cronon believed that Garvey exhibited &quot;antipathy and distrust of anybody but the darkest-skinned Negroes&quot;; the hostility towards black people whose African blood was not considered &quot;pure&quot; was a sentiment which Garvey shared with Blyden.

This view caused great friction between Garvey and Du Bois, with the former accusing Du Bois and the NAACP of promoting &quot;amalgamation or general miscegenation&quot;. He rallied against what he called the &quot;race destroying doctrine&quot; of those African Americans who were promulgating racial integration in the U.S., instead, he maintained the view that his UNIA stood for &quot;the pride and purity of race. We believe that the white race should uphold its racial pride and perpetuate itself, and we also believe that the black race should do likewise. We believe that there is room enough in the world for the various race groups to grow and develop by themselves without seeking to destroy the Creator&#x27;s plan by the constant introduction of mongrel types.&quot; Arguing that Garvey &quot;imitated white supremacist ideas at random&quot;, the scholar John L. Graves commented that &quot;racism permeated nearly every iota of his ideology,&quot; with Garveyism representing &quot;a gospel of hate for whites&quot;.

Garvey&#x27;s belief in racial separatism, his advocacy of the migration of African Americans to Africa, and his opposition to miscegenation endeared him to the KKK, which supported many of the same policies. Garvey was willing to collaborate with the KKK in order to achieve his aims, and it was willing to work with him because his approach effectively acknowledged its belief that the U.S. should only be a country for white people and campaigns for advanced rights for African Americans who are living within the U.S. should be abandoned. Garvey called for collaboration between black and white separatists, stating that they shared common goals: &quot;the purification of the races, their autonomous separation and the unbridled freedom of self-development and self-expression. Those who are against this are enemies of both races, and rebels against morality, nature and God.&quot; In his view, the KKK and other far-right white groups were &quot;better friends&quot; of black people &quot;than all other groups of hypocritical whites put together&quot; because they were honest about their desires and intentions.

== Pan-Africanism ==

Garvey was a Pan-Africanist, and an African nationalist. In Jamaica, he and his supporters were heavily influenced by the pan-Africanist teachings of Dr Love and Alexander Bedward. In the wake of the First World War, Garvey called for the formation of &quot;a United Africa for the Africans of the World&quot;. The UNIA promoted the view that Africa was the natural homeland of the African diaspora. While he was imprisoned, he penned an editorial for the &quot;Negro World&quot; titled &quot;African Fundamentalism&quot;, in which he called for &quot;the founding of a racial empire whose only natural, spiritual and political aims shall be God and Africa, at home and abroad.&quot;

Garvey supported the Back-to-Africa movement, which had been influenced by Edward Wilmot Blyden, who migrated to Liberia in 1850. However, Garvey did not believe that all African Americans should migrate to Africa. Instead, he believed that an elite group, namely those African Americans who were of the purest African blood, should do so. The rest of the African-American population, he believed, should remain in the United States, where it would become extinct within fifty years.

A proponent of the Back-to-Africa movement, Garvey called for a vanguard of educated and skilled African Americans to travel to West Africa, a journey which would be facilitated by his Black Star Line. Garvey stated that &quot;The majority of us may remain here, but we must send our scientists, our mechanics and our artisans and let them build railroads, let them build the great educational and other institutions necessary&quot;, after which other members of the African diaspora could join them. He was aware that the majority of African Americans would not want to move to Africa until it had the more modern comforts that they had become accustomed to in the U.S. Through the UNIA, he discussed plans for a migration to Liberia, but these plans came to nothing and his hope to move African Americans to West Africa ultimately failed.

In the 1920s, Garvey referred to his desire for a &quot;big black republic&quot; in Africa. Garvey&#x27;s envisioned Africa was to be a one-party state in which the president could have &quot;absolute authority&quot; to appoint &quot;all of his lieutenants from cabinet ministers, governors of States and Territories, administrators and judges to minor offices&quot;. According to the scholar of African-American studies Wilson S. Moses, the future African state which Garvey envisioned was &quot;authoritarian, elitist, collectivist, racist, and capitalistic&quot;, suggesting that it would have resembled the later Haitian government of François Duvalier. Garvey told the historian J. A. Rogers that he and his followers were &quot;the first fascists&quot;, adding that &quot;Mussolini copied Fascism from me, but the Negro reactionaries sabotaged it&quot;.

Garvey never visited Africa himself, and he did not speak any African language. He knew very little about the continent&#x27;s varied customs, languages, religions, and traditional social structures, and his critics frequently believed that his views of the continent were based on romanticism and ignorance. It has been suggested that the European colonial authorities would not have given Garvey permission to visit colonies where he would be calling for decolonization.

For instance, the Jamaican writer and poet Claude McKay noted that Garvey &quot;talks of Africa as if it were a little island in the Caribbean Sea.&quot; Garvey believed in negative stereotypes about Africa which portrayed it as a backward continent that was in need of the civilizing influence of Western, Christian states. Among his stated aims, he wanted &quot;to assist in civilizing the backward tribes of Africa&quot; and he also wanted &quot;to promote a conscientious Christian worship among&quot; them. His belief that Africans would ultimately be liberated by the efforts of the African diaspora which was living outside the continent has been considered condescending.

Moses stated that instead of being based on respect for indigenous African cultures, Garvey&#x27;s views of an ideal united Africa were based on an &quot;imperial model&quot; of the kind which was promoted by western powers. When he extolled the glories of Africa, Garvey cited the ancient Egyptians and Ethiopians who had built empires and monumental architectural structures, which he cited as evidence of civilization, rather than the smaller-scale societies which lived on other parts of the continent. In doing so, he followed the lead of white academics of that era, who were similarly ignorant of most of African history and who focused nearly exclusively on ancient Egypt. Moses thought that Garvey &quot;had more affinity for the pomp and tinsel of European imperialism than he did for black African tribal life&quot;. Similarly, the writer Richard Hart noted that Garvey was &quot;much attracted by the glamour of the British nobility&quot;, an attraction which was reflected when he honored prominent supporters by giving them such British-derived titles as &quot;Lords&quot;, &quot;Ladies&quot;, and &quot;Knights&quot;. Garvey&#x27;s head was not turned, however, by the scholarly authority of Harvard University professor George Reisner whose opinion Garvey challenged on the pages of &quot;The Negro World.&quot;

== Economic views ==
Garvey believed in economic independence for the African diaspora and through the UNIA, he attempted to achieve it by forming ventures like the Black Star
Line and the Negro Factories Corporation. In Garvey&#x27;s opinion, &quot;without commerce and industry, a people perish economically. The Negro is perishing because he has no economic system&quot;. In his view, European-American employers would always favor European-American employees, so to gain more security, African Americans needed to form their own businesses. In his words, &quot;the Negro[...] must become independent of white capital and white employers if he wants salvation.&quot; He believed that financial independence for the African-American community would ensure greater protection from discrimination, and provide the foundation for social justice.

Economically, Garvey supported capitalism, stating that &quot;capitalism is necessary to the progress of the world, and those who unreasonably and wantonly oppose it or fight against it are enemies of human advancement.&quot; In the U.S., Garvey promoted a capitalistic ethos for the economic development of the African-American community, advocating black capitalism. His emphasis on capitalist ventures meant, according to Grant, that Garvey &quot;was making a straight pitch to the petit-bourgeois capitalist instinct of the majority of black folk.&quot;

He admired Booker T. Washington&#x27;s economic endeavours but criticized his focus on individualism: Garvey believed that African-American interests would best be advanced if businesses included collective decision-making and group profit-sharing. His advocacy of capitalistic wealth distribution was a more equitable view of capitalism than the view of capitalism which was then prevalent in the U.S.; he believed that some restrictions should be imposed on individuals and businesses in order to prevent them from acquiring too much wealth, in his view, no individual should be allowed to control more than one million dollars and no company should be allowed to control more than five million dollars. While he was living in Harlem, he envisioned the formation of a global network of black people who would trade among themselves, believing that his Black Star Line would contribute to the achievement of this aim.

There is no evidence to support the view that Garvey was ever sympathetic to socialism. While he was living in the U.S., he strongly opposed attempts to recruit African Americans into the trade union movement by socialist and communist groups, and he urged African Americans not to support the Communist Party. This led to heavy scrutiny from communist group leaders and figureheads such as Grace Campbell, among others. He believed that the communist movement did not serve the interests of African Americans because it was a white person&#x27;s creation. He stated that communism was &quot;a dangerous theory of economic or political reformation because it seeks to put government in the hands of an ignorant white mass who have not been able to destroy their natural prejudices towards Negroes and other non-white people. While it may be a good thing for them, it will be a bad thing for the Negroes who will fall under the government of the most ignorant, prejudiced class of the white race.&quot; In response, the Communist International characterised Garveyism as a reactionary bourgeois philosophy.

== Black Christianity ==

Grant noted that &quot;Garveyism would always remain a secular movement with a strong under-tow of religion&quot;. Garvey envisioned a form of Christianity which would specifically be designed for black African people, a sort of black religion. Reflecting his own view of religion, he wanted this black-centric Christianity to be as close to Catholicism as possible.

Even so, he attended the foundation ceremony of the African Orthodox Church in Chicago in 1921. According to Graves, this Church preached &quot;the orthodox Christian tradition with emphasis on racism&quot;, and Cronon suggested that Garvey promoted &quot;racist ideas about religion&quot;.

Garvey emphasised the idea of black people worshipping a God who was also depicted as black. In his words, &quot;If the white man has the idea of a white God, let him worship his God as he desires. Since the white people have seen their God through white spectacles, we have only now started out to see our God through our own spectacles[...] we shall worship Him through the spectacles of Ethiopia.&quot; He called for black people to worship images of Jesus of Nazareth and the Virgin Mary that depicted these figures as black Africans. In doing so, he did not make use of pre-existing forms of black-dominated religions. Garvey had little experience with them, because he had attended a white-run Wesleyan congregation when he was a child, and later, he converted to Catholicism.

==See also==

*Black Power
*Back-to-Africa movement
*Black nationalism
*Black supremacy
*Rastafari

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5524522" start="0" end="9" title="Garveyism" label="Garveyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="26" end="43" title="Black Nationalism" label="black nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63" end="102" title="Marcus Garvey#Ideology" label="economic, racial and political policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="106" end="114" title="UNIA-ACL" label="UNIA-ACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="123" end="136" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="168" end="185" title="Black nationalism" label="black nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q338460" start="210" end="249" title="Negroid" label="dark-skinned peoples of African descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145149" start="473" end="484" title="Colin Grant (author)" label="Colin Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250561" start="580" end="586" title="Tract (literature)" label="tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q847808" start="588" end="618" title="Social engineering (political science)" label="theories of social engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="620" end="635" title="History of Africa" label="African history"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="644" end="665" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Western Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="711" end="715" title="Race (human categorization)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q384338" start="813" end="833" title="Edward Wilmot Blyden" label="Edward Wilmot Blyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q49265" start="865" end="881" title="Dusé Mohamed Ali" label="Dusé Mohamed Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="964" end="982" title="Irish Home Rule movement" label="Irish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="1184" end="1199" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="1422" end="1431" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q558750" start="1694" end="1706" title="Robert Emmet" label="Robert Emmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q311966" start="1710" end="1724" title="Roger Casement" label="Roger Casement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="1769" end="1797" title="Indian independence movement" label="Indian independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1835" end="1856" title="British Raj" label="British rule in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="1869" end="1883" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q862085" start="2286" end="2297" title="melting pot" label="melting pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q381255" start="2332" end="2352" title="American nationalism" label="American nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="2771" end="2799" title="European Americans" label="European-American population"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="2900" end="2916" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="3008" end="3016" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q795000" start="3528" end="3543" title="black supremacy" label="black supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q717939" start="3707" end="3720" title="racial purity" label="racial purity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="3786" end="3799" title="miscegenation" label="miscegenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="6303" end="6312" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874021" start="6564" end="6583" title="African nationalism" label="African nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718329" start="6690" end="6707" title="Alexander Bedward" label="Alexander Bedward"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6728" end="6743" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839012" start="7234" end="7257" title="Back-to-Africa movement" label="Back-to-Africa movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q384338" start="7288" end="7308" title="Edward Wilmot Blyden" label="Edward Wilmot Blyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="7326" end="7333" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="9037" end="9050" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="9052" end="9059" title="Elitism" label="elitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="9087" end="9099" title="Capitalism" label="capitalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187697" start="9179" end="9196" title="François Duvalier" label="François Duvalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="9318" end="9327" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="9335" end="9342" title="Fascism" label="Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096967" start="9918" end="9930" title="Claude McKay" label="Claude McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="10838" end="10851" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q273595" start="10860" end="10870" title="History of Ethiopia" label="Ethiopians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="10964" end="10976" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q502932" start="11792" end="11806" title="George Andrew Reisner" label="George Reisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="12714" end="12728" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="12762" end="12772" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922285" start="13082" end="13098" title="black capitalism" label="black capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319871" start="13301" end="13321" title="Booker T. Washington" label="Booker T. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="14287" end="14296" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="14398" end="14409" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="14436" end="14445" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="14504" end="14519" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033559" start="14601" end="14615" title="Grace Campbell" label="Grace Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="15229" end="15252" title="Communist International" label="Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="15486" end="15498" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="15685" end="15696" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q384223" start="15763" end="15786" title="African Orthodox Church" label="African Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="16457" end="16474" title="Jesus of Nazareth" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="16483" end="16494" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633792" start="16703" end="16711" title="Wesleyan theology" label="Wesleyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q880483" start="16802" end="16813" title="Black Power" label="Black Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839012" start="16815" end="16838" title="Back-to-Africa movement" label="Back-to-Africa movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="16840" end="16857" title="Black nationalism" label="Black nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q795000" start="16859" end="16874" title="Black supremacy" label="Black supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="16876" end="16885" title="Rastafari" label="Rastafari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261782" wikidata="Q1255274" url="?curid=261782" title="Ocean Island">
<text>Ocean Island may refer to:
* Banaba Island, Kiribati (renamed in the 1970s?)
* Kure Atoll, Hawaii, United States (renamed in 1924)
* Ocean Island Inn, a historic building in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada
* Ocean Island, in Port Ross harbour, Auckland Islands, New Zealand
* An alternative name for &quot;Tito v Waddell (No 2)&quot;, a leading English trusts case

== See also ==
* Oceanic island, a type of island</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1255274" start="0" end="12" title="Ocean Island" label="Ocean Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="29" end="42" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q686179" start="79" end="89" title="Kure Atoll" label="Kure Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076018" start="133" end="149" title="Ocean Island Inn" label="Ocean Island Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230897" start="228" end="237" title="Port Ross" label="Port Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022842" start="309" end="330" title="Tito v Waddell (No 2)" label="Tito v Waddell (No 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="386" end="400" title="Oceanic island" label="Oceanic island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261785" wikidata="Q192523" url="?curid=261785" title="Dutch disease">
<text>In economics, Dutch disease is the apparent causal relationship between the increase in the economic development of a specific sector (for example natural resources) and a decline in other sectors (like the manufacturing sector or agriculture).

The term was coined in 1977 by &quot;The Economist&quot; to describe the decline of the manufacturing sector in the Netherlands after the discovery of the large Groningen natural gas field in 1959.

The presumed mechanism is that while revenues increase in a growing sector (or inflows of foreign aid), the given economy&#x27;s currency becomes stronger (&quot;appreciates&quot;) compared to foreign currencies (manifested in the exchange rate). This results in the country&#x27;s other exports becoming more expensive for other countries to buy, while imports become cheaper, altogether rendering those sectors less competitive.

While it most often refers to natural resource discovery, it can also refer to &quot;any development that results in a large inflow of foreign currency, including a sharp surge in natural resource prices, foreign assistance, and foreign direct investment&quot;.

== Model ==
The classic economic model describing Dutch disease was developed by the economists W. Max Corden and J. Peter Neary in 1982. In the model, there is a non-tradable sector (which includes services) and two tradable sectors: the booming sector, and the lagging (or non-booming) tradable sector. The booming sector is usually the extraction of natural resources such as oil, natural gas, gold, copper, diamonds or bauxite, or the production of crops, such as coffee or cocoa. The lagging sector is usually manufacturing or agriculture.

A resource boom affects this economy in two ways:
# In the &quot;resource movement effect&quot;, the resource boom increases demand for labor, which causes production to shift toward the booming sector, away from the lagging sector. This shift in labor from the lagging sector to the booming sector is called &quot;direct deindustrialization&quot;. However, this effect can be negligible, since the hydrocarbon and mineral sectors tend to employ few people.
# The &quot;spending effect&quot; occurs as a result of the extra revenue brought in by the resource boom. It increases demand for labor in the non-tradable sector (services), at the expense of the lagging sector. This shift from the lagging sector to the non-tradable sector is called &quot;indirect deindustrialization&quot;. The increased demand for non-traded goods increases their price. However, prices in the traded good sector are set internationally, so they cannot change. This amounts to an increase in the real exchange rate.

=== Resource-based international trade ===
In a model of international trade based on resource endowments as the Heckscher–Ohlin/Heckscher–Ohlin-Vanek, the Dutch disease can be explained by the Rybczynski theorem.

== Effects ==
Simple trade models suggest that a country should specialize in industries in which it has a comparative advantage; thus a country rich in some natural resources would be better off specializing in the extraction of those natural resources.

However, other theories suggest that this can be detrimental, for example when the natural resources deplete. Also, prices may decrease and competitive manufacturing cannot return as quickly as it left. This may happen because technological growth is smaller in the booming sector and the non-tradable sector than the non-booming tradable sector. Because that economy had smaller technological growth than did other countries, its comparative advantage in non-booming tradable goods will have shrunk, thus leading firms not to invest in the tradables sector.

Also, volatility in the price of natural resources, and thus the real exchange rate, limits investment by private firms, because firms will not invest if they are not sure what the future economic conditions will be. Commodity exports such as raw materials drive up the value of the currency. This is what leads to the lack of competition in the other sectors of the economy. The extraction of natural resources is also extremely capital intensive, resulting in few new jobs being created.

== Minimization ==
There are three basic ways to reduce the threat of Dutch disease: (1) slowing the appreciation of the real exchange rate, (2) boosting the competitiveness of the adversely affected sectors, and (3) demographic adaptation. One approach is to withhold the boom revenues, that is, not to bring all the revenues into the country all at once, and to save some of the revenues abroad in special funds and bring them in slowly. In developing countries, this can be politically difficult as there is often pressure to spend the boom revenues immediately to alleviate poverty, but this ignores broader macroeconomic implications.

Withholding will reduce the spending effect, alleviating some of the effects of inflation. Another benefit of letting the revenues into the country slowly is that it can give a country a stable revenue stream, improving the year-to-year certainty of revenues. Also, a country can provide for future generations by setting aside some of the boom revenues in a sovereign wealth fund. Examples of these include the Future Fund, Iranian national development fund, the Government Pension Fund in Norway, the Stabilization Fund of the Russian Federation, the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan, Alberta Heritage Savings Trust Fund of Alberta, Canada, the Permanent School Fund and Permanent University Fund of Texas, the Alaska Permanent Fund and the Future Generations Fund of the State of Kuwait established in 1976. Recent talks led by the United Nations Development Programme in Cambodia – International Oil and Gas Conference on fueling poverty reduction – point out the need for better education of state officials and energy CaDREs (Capacity Needs Diagnostics for Renewable Energies) linked to a sovereign wealth fund to avoid the resource curse (Paradox of plenty).

Another strategy for avoiding real exchange rate appreciation is to increase saving in the economy in order to reduce large capital inflows which may appreciate the real exchange rate. This can be done if the country runs a budget surplus. A country can encourage individuals and firms to save more by reducing income and profit taxes. By increasing saving, a country can reduce the need for loans to finance government deficits and foreign direct investment.

Investments in education and infrastructure can increase the competitiveness of the lagging manufacturing or agriculture sector. Another approach is to protect the lagging sector by increasing subsidies or tariffs. However, this could worsen the effects of Dutch disease, as large inflows of foreign capital are usually provided by the export sector and bought up by the import sector. Imposing tariffs on imported goods will artificially reduce that sector&#x27;s demand for foreign currency, leading to further appreciation of the real exchange rate.

== Diagnosis ==
It is usually difficult to be certain that a country has Dutch disease because it is difficult to prove the relationship between an increase in natural resource revenues, the real-exchange rate, and a decline in the lagging sector. An appreciation in the real exchange rate could be caused by other things such as productivity increases in the Balassa-Samuelson effect, changes in the terms of trade and large capital inflows. Often these capital inflows are caused by foreign direct investment or to finance a country&#x27;s debt. However, evidence does exist suggesting that unexpected and very large oil and gas discoveries do cause the appreciation of the real exchange rate and the decline of the lagging sector across affected countries on average.

== Examples ==
* Gold and other wealth imported to Spain and Portugal during the 16th century from the Americas. 
* Australian gold rush in the 19th century, first documented by Cairns in 1859. 
* Kuwaiti oil from the 1960s to present. 
* Indonesia&#x27;s greatly increased export revenues after the oil booms in 1974 and 1979. 
* The effect of North Sea oil on manufacturing sectors in Norway and the United Kingdom in 1970–1990. 
* Analysts have argued that the United Kingdom&#x27;s increasing reliance on the financial sector since the &#x27;Big Bang&#x27; in 1986 prevented manufacturing growth. A similar argument has been made regarding London&#x27;s booming property market. Concentrated almost exclusively on the City of London, this financial sector growth has exacerbated regional economic differences such as the North–South divide despite the North&#x27;s historically strong industrial and manufacturing base. Paul Krugman (among others) has written about the effect of a strong financial sector on UK manufacturing and a potential readjustment following Brexit, should the financial sector reduce its reliance on London. 
* Nigeria and other post-colonial African states in the 1990s. 
* Venezuelan oil for certain periods throughout its history. A notable case occurred during the first presidency of Carlos Andrés Pérez when he established Venezuela as a rentier state.
* Post-disaster booms accompanied by inflation following the provision of large amounts of relief and recovery assistance such as occurred in some places in Asia following the Asian tsunami in 2004. 
* Canada&#x27;s rising dollar due to foreign demand for natural resources, with the Athabasca oil sands becoming increasingly dominant, hampered its manufacturing sector from the early 2000s until the oil price crash in late 2014/early 2015. 
* The Philippines&#x27; strong foreign exchange market inflows in the 2000s leading to appreciation of currency and loss of competitiveness.
* Signs of emerging Dutch disease in Chile in the late 2000s, due to the boom in mineral commodity prices.
* Australian mineral commodities in the 2000s and 2010s.
* Russian oil and natural gas in the 2000s and 2020s.
* Azerbaijani oil in the 2000s and 2020s.
* In the United States, the San Francisco Bay Area&#x27;s reliance on the high technology sector in the 21st century. 
* Ransoms from Somali piracy.
* Nauru&#x27;s heavy reliance on phosphate mining, combined with a lack of taxes and large government expenses, caused issues after the depletion of much of its reserves. The country came close to bankruptcy in 2000, and the unemployment rate rose to 90% in 2004. Nauru was for a time the world&#x27;s richest country (GDP per capita), but has since fallen in ranking to 117th place (Worldbank, 2022).
* Denmark&#x27;s reliance in the mid-2020s on Novo Nordisk&#x27;s anti-obesity medications (GLP-1 receptor agonists) to drive all its economic growth.

== See also ==

* Balance of trade
* Beggar thy neighbour
* Gentrification
* Law of the handicap of a head start
* Norwegian paradox
* Price–specie flow mechanism
* Rasizade&#x27;s algorithm
* Resource curse
* Tragedy of the commons
* Zero-sum game

== References ==


==Further reading==
* Elkhan Richard Zada. 2016. Oil Abundance and Economic Growth. Berlin: Logos Verlag.

== External links ==
* CaDRE at energypedia.info/wiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="3" end="12" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192523" start="14" end="27" title="Dutch disease" label="Dutch disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="147" end="164" title="natural resources" label="natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="207" end="227" title="Secondary sector of industry" label="manufacturing sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="231" end="242" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="283" end="296" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="362" end="373" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069152" start="407" end="434" title="Groningen gas field" label="Groningen natural gas field"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206162" start="607" end="618" title="Currency appreciation and depreciation" label="appreciates"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="676" end="689" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="863" end="874" title="Competitive#Economics and business competition" label="competitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="1012" end="1028" title="Currency" label="foreign currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="1082" end="1100" title="Foreign aid" label="foreign assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="1106" end="1131" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180497" start="1164" end="1178" title="Model (economics)" label="economic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232759" start="1236" end="1249" title="W. Max Corden" label="W. Max Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106779" start="1254" end="1268" title="J. Peter Neary" label="J. Peter Neary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831892" start="1303" end="1322" title="non-tradable sector" label="non-tradable sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="1339" end="1347" title="Service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831892" start="1357" end="1372" title="tradable sector" label="tradable sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="1655" end="1668" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1672" end="1683" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384234" start="1697" end="1701" title="Economic boom" label="boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="2085" end="2096" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="2101" end="2108" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2662" end="2680" title="Exchange rate#Nominal and real exchange rates" label="real exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261156" start="2796" end="2833" title="Heckscher–Ohlin model" label="Heckscher–Ohlin/Heckscher–Ohlin-Vanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348736" start="2877" end="2895" title="Rybczynski theorem" label="Rybczynski theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215551" start="3005" end="3026" title="comparative advantage" label="comparative advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q465352" start="3381" end="3401" title="History of technology" label="technological growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q756115" start="3720" end="3730" title="volatility (finance)" label="volatility"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="4648" end="4668" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="5205" end="5226" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824215" start="5258" end="5269" title="Future Fund" label="Future Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972274" start="5271" end="5304" title="National Development Fund of Iran" label="Iranian national development fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196231" start="5310" end="5333" title="The Petroleum Fund of Norway" label="Government Pension Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462167" start="5349" end="5393" title="Stabilization Fund of the Russian Federation" label="Stabilization Fund of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146910" start="5399" end="5427" title="State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan" label="State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711753" start="5429" end="5464" title="AIMCo" label="Alberta Heritage Savings Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="5468" end="5475" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169266" start="5489" end="5510" title="Permanent School Fund" label="Permanent School Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899999" start="5515" end="5540" title="Permanent University Fund" label="Permanent University Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061000" start="5555" end="5576" title="Alaska Permanent Fund" label="Alaska Permanent Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="5616" end="5631" title="Kuwait" label="State of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="5677" end="5713" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q72596" start="5972" end="5986" title="resource curse" label="resource curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q319622" start="6086" end="6092" title="Saving (money)" label="saving"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="6133" end="6140" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="6233" end="6247" title="Government budget deficit" label="budget surplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="6320" end="6326" title="income tax" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="6338" end="6341" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="6442" end="6467" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="6622" end="6629" title="protectionism" label="protect"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="6663" end="6672" title="Subsidy" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="6676" end="6682" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q305411" start="7384" end="7408" title="Balassa-Samuelson effect" label="Balassa-Samuelson effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570293" start="7425" end="7439" title="terms of trade" label="terms of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="7847" end="7852" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="7857" end="7865" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914928" start="7912" end="7932" title="Australian gold rush" label="Australian gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="7993" end="8000" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwaiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="8035" end="8044" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="8141" end="8154" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="8183" end="8189" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8198" end="8212" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8260" end="8274" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902142" start="8342" end="8350" title="Big Bang (financial markets)" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="8518" end="8532" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060534" start="8621" end="8639" title="North–South divide in England" label="North–South divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="8720" end="8732" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="8865" end="8871" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="8924" end="8930" title="City of London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="8935" end="8942" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="8999" end="9008" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q295790" start="9113" end="9132" title="Carlos Andrés Pérez" label="Carlos Andrés Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502123" start="9168" end="9181" title="rentier state" label="rentier state"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="9359" end="9372" title="Asian tsunami" label="Asian tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="9385" end="9391" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q754632" start="9467" end="9486" title="Athabasca oil sands" label="Athabasca oil sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="9632" end="9643" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="9657" end="9680" title="foreign exchange market" label="foreign exchange market"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="9804" end="9809" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="9933" end="9939" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="9987" end="9997" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10036" end="10049" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="10055" end="10077" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="10101" end="10123" title="Silicon Valley" label="high technology sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="10161" end="10174" title="Piracy off the coast of Somalia" label="Somali piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="10178" end="10190" title="Nauru" label="Nauru&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="10580" end="10587" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q818846" start="10624" end="10636" title="Novo Nordisk" label="Novo Nordisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303753" start="10644" end="10667" title="anti-obesity medication" label="anti-obesity medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572286" start="10670" end="10692" title="GLP-1 receptor agonist" label="GLP-1 receptor agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="10748" end="10764" title="Balance of trade" label="Balance of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396424" start="10767" end="10787" title="Beggar thy neighbour" label="Beggar thy neighbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="10790" end="10804" title="Gentrification" label="Gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893451" start="10807" end="10842" title="Law of the handicap of a head start" label="Law of the handicap of a head start"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061386" start="10845" end="10862" title="Norwegian paradox" label="Norwegian paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534676" start="10865" end="10892" title="Price–specie flow mechanism" label="Price–specie flow mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10895" end="10920" title="Alec_Rasizade#Rasizade&amp;#x27;s_algorithm" label="Rasizade&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q72596" start="10923" end="10937" title="Resource curse" label="Resource curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q334622" start="10940" end="10962" title="Tragedy of the commons" label="Tragedy of the commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q156612" start="10965" end="10978" title="Zero-sum game" label="Zero-sum game"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261786" wikidata="Q329695" url="?curid=261786" title="The Highway Code">
<text>The Highway Code is the official set of information and guidance for road users in the United Kingdom. Its objective is to promote the safe and efficient use of the road network. The Code applies to all road users, including pedestrians, horse riders and cyclists, as well as motorcyclists and other drivers. It gives information on traffic signs, traffic signals, road markings and legal requirements for different road users, and has annexes on vehicle maintenance, licence requirements, documentation, penalties, and vehicle security.

Though &quot;The Highway Code&quot; itself is not legally binding, many of its rules directly reflect the law, and a failure to observe any of its provisions may be used as evidence in legal proceedings (especially to establish liability in relation to offences such as careless and dangerous driving).

&quot;The Highway Code&quot; was first published in 1931, and is regularly updated. It is prepared by the Department for Transport and the Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency, and is published by The Stationery Office in both electronic form and as a printed book.

The 17th edition (2022) introduced some significant changes. In particular, a new &quot;hierarchy of road users&quot; classifies road users according to the danger they pose to others in the event of a collision, with the most vulnerable (for example, pedestrians and cyclists) at the top.

The Great Britain version, available in English and Welsh, applies to England, Scotland and Wales, but region-specific signs such as driver location signs in England and bilingual signs in Scotland and Wales are not covered. There is also a Northern Ireland version, available in English and Irish.

==History==
The Departmental Committee on the Regulation of Motor Vehicles announced in 1920 that &quot;a compulsory and uniform code of signals for all road vehicles is to be brought into operation&quot;. Drivers in London had evolved a system for signalling their intentions to turn right or stop, using their arm, and this was seen to be of such benefit that it should be required and standardised as a code of behaviour across the country. The code allowed the driver to use either his own arm or a dummy arm – which had obvious benefits in wet weather for drivers with the luxury of an enclosed cab, or for drivers using left-hand-drive vehicles, as in imported American cars. The intention to bring in the compulsory code was delayed and in successive years the code was expanded including whip signals for horse-drawn vehicles, and signals made by policemen controlling junctions.

In 1923 a booklet costing one penny was published by His Majesty&#x27;s Stationery Office and approved by the Home Office (and Scottish Office). Entitled &quot;Traffic Signals to be used by the Police and Drivers of Vehicles&quot;, this booklet arose from discussions between the Police and The Automobile Association. In subsequent years, in addition to being promoted by the automobile associations, the code was publicised using posters by the National Safety First Association (which still continues this work, having been renamed the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents in 1936).

The formal introduction of &quot;The Highway Code&quot; was one of the provisions of the wide-reaching Road Traffic Act 1930. Costing one penny, the first edition of the code was published on 14 April 1931. It contained 21 pages of advice, including the arm signals to be given by drivers and police officers controlling traffic. The second edition, considerably expanded, appeared in 1934, and now illustrated road signs for the first time. During its preparation the Ministry of Transport consulted with the Pedestrians&#x27; Association.

Further major revisions followed after the Second World War so that, for example, references to trams were removed after the 1954 version. (Blackpool was for decades the only place in the UK with a tram system. Tramway rules returned to the Code in 1994, after the first modern tram systems in Britain had opened.) Motorway driving was included in the fifth edition. The sixth edition, in 1968, used photographs as well as drawings for the first time, and also updated the illustrations of road signs to take the new &#x27;continental&#x27; designs into account. The 70-page 1978 edition introduced the Green Cross Code for pedestrians and orange badges for unskilled drivers. The format was changed to a &#x27;taller&#x27; size in the 1990s. An electronic &quot;Highway Code&quot; app followed in 2012. Following public consultations in 2020, a new &quot;hierarchy of road users&quot; was incorporated into the 17th edition (2022), classifying road users according to their risk in the event of a collision, with the most vulnerable at the top.

== Hierarchy of road users (2022 edition) ==

The &quot;hierarchy of road users&quot;, according to &quot;The Official Highway Code &quot;&quot;is a concept that places those road users most at risk in the event of a collision at the top of the hierarchy&quot;. Three special rules are provided which cover the concept:

=== Rule H1 ===
Sets out the principle that those in charge of vehicles that can cause the greatest harm in the event of a collision bear the greatest responsibility to take care and reduce the danger they pose to others. The principle applies most strongly to drivers of large goods and passenger vehicles, vans/minibuses, cars/taxis and motorcycles. Cyclists, horse riders and drivers of horse drawn vehicles likewise have a responsibility to reduce danger to pedestrians.

=== Rule H2 – for drivers (including motorcyclists), horse drawn vehicles, horse riders and cyclists ===
At a junction, other road users should give way to pedestrians crossing or waiting to cross a road into which or from which they are turning.

Pedestrians have priority on zebra crossings and on shared use cycle tracks. Only pedestrians (including wheelchair and mobility scooter users) may use the pavement. Pedestrians may use any part of the road and may use cycle tracks as well as the pavement, unless there are signs to the contrary.

=== Rule H3 – for drivers (including motorcyclists) ===
Drivers should not cut across cyclists, horse riders or horse drawn vehicles going ahead when they are turning into or out of a junction or changing direction or lane (just as they would not turn across the path of another motor vehicle). The code says &quot;do not turn at a junction if to do so would cause the [more vulnerable road user] going straight ahead to stop or swerve&quot;. This applies not only when the more vulnerable road user is on the road, but also when they are in a cycle lane or on a cycle track.

==Legal aspects==

Certain rules in &quot;The Highway Code&quot; are legal requirements, and are identified by the words &#x27;must&#x27; or &#x27;must not&#x27;, presented in bold red block capitals. In these cases, the rules also include references to the corresponding legislation. Offenders may be cautioned, given penalty points on their driving licences, fined, banned from driving or imprisoned, depending on the severity of the offence. Although failure to comply with the other rules will not, in itself, cause a person to be prosecuted, &quot;The Highway Code&quot; may be used in court under the Road Traffic Act 1988 to establish liability or determine who is at fault in a road traffic incident. These include advisory rules with the wording &#x27;should&#x27; and &#x27;should not&#x27; or &#x27;do&#x27; or &#x27;do not&#x27;. The latest official printed version of the Highway Code is the one in force at any time, but in legal proceedings the version current at the time of the incident applies.

The Road Traffic Act 1988 states:

==Access==

The currently applicable Highway Code for England, Scotland, and Wales is available to read online at the Highway Code website, with links to download as free PDF eBook, app, and audio book. A printed version is widely available for purchase.

==See also==
* Driver&#x27;s manual, the United States and Canada equivalent of the Highway Code
*&quot;Road Users&#x27; Code&quot;, the Hong Kong equivalent of &quot;The Highway Code&quot;
*Malta&#x27;s &quot;The Highway Code&quot;, the Maltese Highway Code
*Ireland&#x27;s &quot;Rules of the Road&quot;, the Irish equivalent of the Highway Code
*Road surface marking
*Road marking machine
*Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions
*Vienna Convention on Road Traffic
*Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals

==References==
==External links==
* The Highway Code (in English)
* The Highway Code for Northern Ireland with links to English, Irish, Polish, Lithuanian, Russian, Portuguese and Mandarin versions.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="87" end="101" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="225" end="235" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="255" end="262" title="cyclist" label="cyclist"/>
<link wikidata="Q608003" start="276" end="288" title="motorcyclist" label="motorcyclist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954295" start="333" end="346" title="road signs in the United Kingdom" label="traffic signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="348" end="363" title="Traffic light" label="traffic signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392287" start="365" end="378" title="road surface marking" label="road markings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308138" start="809" end="817" title="Driving without due care and attention" label="careless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216147" start="822" end="839" title="dangerous driving" label="dangerous driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="949" end="973" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974184" start="982" end="1017" title="Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency" label="Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766412" start="1039" end="1060" title="The Stationery Office" label="The Stationery Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308016" start="1533" end="1553" title="driver location sign" label="driver location sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q29079" start="1570" end="1584" title="bilingual sign" label="bilingual sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1641" end="1657" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1917" end="1923" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593203" start="2619" end="2624" title="Penny (British pre-decimal coin)" label="penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766412" start="2642" end="2678" title="The Stationery Office" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Stationery Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="2699" end="2710" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311619" start="2716" end="2731" title="Scottish Office" label="Scottish Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785352" start="2880" end="2906" title="The Automobile Association" label="The Automobile Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374840" start="3128" end="3173" title="Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents" label="Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339423" start="3288" end="3309" title="Road Traffic Act 1930" label="Road Traffic Act 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="3654" end="3675" title="Department for Transport" label="Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659294" start="3695" end="3724" title="Living Streets (UK)" label="Pedestrians&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="3867" end="3876" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602459" start="4330" end="4346" title="Green Cross Code" label="Green Cross Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037910" start="5882" end="5893" title="cycle track" label="cycle track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378400" start="6661" end="6671" title="cycle lane" label="cycle lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770119" start="7301" end="7322" title="Road Traffic Act 1988" label="Road Traffic Act 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770119" start="7712" end="7733" title="Road Traffic Act 1988" label="Road Traffic Act 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307979" start="8014" end="8034" title="Driver&amp;#x27;s manual" label="Driver&amp;#x27;s manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339461" start="8103" end="8124" title="Road Users&amp;#x27; Code" label="Road Users&amp;#x27; Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739664" start="8209" end="8225" title="The Highway Code (Malta)" label="The Highway Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379046" start="8280" end="8297" title="Rules of the Road (Ireland)" label="Rules of the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392287" start="8347" end="8367" title="Road surface marking" label="Road surface marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392287" start="8369" end="8389" title="Road marking machine" label="Road marking machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832471" start="8391" end="8439" title="Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions" label="Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions"/>
<link wikidata="Q697986" start="8441" end="8474" title="Vienna Convention on Road Traffic" label="Vienna Convention on Road Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q699366" start="8476" end="8519" title="Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals" label="Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261787" wikidata="Q42573" url="?curid=261787" title="Burmese cat">
<text>The Burmese cat (, , or , or , meaning copper colour) is a breed of domestic cat, originating in Burma, believed to have its roots near the Thai-Burma border and developed in the United States and Britain.

Most modern Burmese are descendants of one female cat called &quot;Wong Mau&quot;, which was brought from Burma to the United States in 1930 and bred with American Siamese. From there, American and British breeders developed distinctly different Burmese breed standards, which is unusual among pedigreed domestic cats. Most modern cat registries do not formally recognise the two as separate breeds, but those that do refer to the British type as the European Burmese.

Originally, all Burmese cats were dark brown (genetically black), but are now available in a wide variety of colours; formal recognition of these also varies by standard. Both versions of the breed are known for their uniquely social and playful temperament and persistent vocalisation.

==History==
In 1871, Harrison Weir organised a cat show at the Crystal Palace, London. A pair of Siamese cats were on display that closely resembled modern American Burmese cats in build, thus probably similar to the modern Tonkinese breed. The first attempt to deliberately develop the Burmese in the late 19th century in Britain resulted in what were known as Chocolate Siamese rather than a breed in their own right; this view persisted for many years, encouraging crossbreeding between Burmese and Siamese in an attempt to more closely conform to the Siamese build. The breed thus slowly died out in Britain.

Joseph Cheesman Thompson imported Wong Mau, a dark female cat, into San Francisco in 1930. Thompson considered the cat&#x27;s build to be sufficiently different from the Siamese to still have potential as a fully separate breed. Wong Mau was bred with Tai Mau, a seal point Siamese, and then bred with her son to produce dark brown kittens that became the foundation of a new, distinctive strain of Burmese. In 1936, the Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association (CFA) granted the breed formal recognition. However, due to continued extensive outcrossing with Siamese cats to increase the population, the original type was overwhelmed, and the CFA suspended breed recognition a decade later. Attempts by various American breeders to refine the unique Burmese standard persisted, however, and in 1954, the CFA lifted the suspension permanently. In 1958, the United Burmese Cat Fanciers (UBCF) compiled an American judging standard that has remained essentially unchanged since its adoption.

Meanwhile, in the UK, interest in the breed was reviving. The cats that composed the new British breeding program were of a variety of builds, including some imported from the United States. By 1952, three true generations had been produced in Britain and the breed was recognised by the United Kingdom&#x27;s Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF). Since the 1950s, countries in the Commonwealth and Europe started importing British Burmese; as a result, most countries have based their standard on the British model.

Historically, the two versions of the breed were kept strictly distinct genetically. European Burmese (also known as &quot;traditional&quot;) were declassed as a breed by the CFA in the 1980s. The GCCF banned the registration of all Burmese imported from the United States in order to preserve the &quot;traditional&quot; bloodlines. Most modern cat registries do not formally recognise these dual standards as representing separate breeds, but those that do refer to the British type as the European Burmese. Recently, The International Cat Association (TICA) and CFA clubs have started using the American breed standard at select shows in Europe.

During the early period of breed development, it became clear that Wong Mau herself was genetically a crossbreed between a Siamese and Burmese type. This early crossbreed type was later developed as a separate breed, known today as the Tonkinese. Burmese cats have also been instrumental in the development of the Bombay and the Burmilla, among others.

==Description==

=== Appearance ===

The two standards differ mainly in head and body shape. The British or traditional ideal tends toward a more slender, long-bodied cat with a wedge-shaped head, large pointed ears, long tapering muzzle and moderately almond-shaped eyes. The legs should likewise be long, with neat oval paws. The tail tapers to medium length. The American (also called &quot;contemporary&quot;) Burmese is a noticeably stockier cat, with a much broader head, round eyes and distinctively shorter, flattened muzzle; the ears are wider at the base. Legs and tail should be proportionate to the body, medium-length, and the paws also rounded.

In either case, Burmese are a small to medium size breed, tending to be about , but are nevertheless substantially-built, muscular cats and should feel heavy for their size when held – &quot;a brick wrapped in silk&quot;.

===Coat and colour===
In either standard, the coat should be very short, fine and glossy, with a satin-like finish. Colour is solid and must be uniform over the body, only gradually shading to lighter underparts. Faint colourpoint markings may be visible, but any barring or spotting is considered a serious fault. The eyes are green or gold depending on coat colour.

The breed&#x27;s original standard colour is a distinctively rich dark brown (genetically black), variously known as sable (USA), brown (UK, Australia) or seal (New Zealand). It is the result of the Burmese gene (cb), part of the albino series. This gene causes a reduction in the amount of pigment produced, converting black into brown and rendering all other colours likewise paler than their usual expression. The action of the gene also produces the modified colourpoint effect, which is more noticeable in young kittens.

The first blue Burmese was born in 1955 in Britain, followed by red, cream, and tortoiseshell over the next decades. Chocolate (&quot;champagne&quot; in the USA) first appeared in the United States. Lilac (&quot;platinum&quot; in the USA), the last major variant to appear, was likewise developed in the USA beginning in 1971. Currently, the British GCCF standard recognises solid brown, chocolate, blue, lilac, red and cream, as well as the tortoiseshell pattern on a base of brown, chocolate, blue or lilac.

In the USA, chocolate (&quot;champagne&quot;), blue, and lilac (&quot;platinum&quot;) cats were first formally considered a separate breed, the Malayan, in 1979. This distinction was abolished in 1984, but until 2010, the CFA continued to place the brown (&quot;sable&quot;) Burmese into a separate division, bundling all other recognised colours into a &quot;dilute division&quot; and judging them separately. Currently, the CFA standard still recognises the Burmese only in sable, blue, chocolate (&quot;champagne&quot;), and lilac (&quot;platinum&quot;).

Other colours have been developed from this initial base set, with varying degrees of popularity and recognition. In 1989 a cinnamon breeding programme was started in the Netherlands; the first fawn kitten was born in 1998. Cinnamon, fawn, caramel, and apricot Burmese have also been developed in New Zealand, as have tortoiseshell variants of all these colours. A new colour mutation (&quot;russet&quot;) appeared in New Zealand in 2007. This line has an initially dark pigment in the cats&#x27; coats, which fades as they grow, eventually becoming a paler orange colour.

=== Temperament ===
Burmese are a notably people-oriented breed, maintaining their kitten-like energy and playfulness into adulthood. They are also said to have a number of overtly puppy-like characteristics, forming strong bonds with their owners and gravitating toward human activity. The cats often learn to play games such as &#x27;fetch&#x27; and &#x27;tag&#x27;. Veterinarian Joan O. Joshua has written that the &quot;dog-like attachment to the owners&quot; of the Burmese, as with the similarly behaving Abyssinians, causes &quot;greater dependence on human contacts&quot;. This stands in contrast to the mere &quot;tolerant acceptance of human company&quot; based around &quot;comforts&quot; that other breeds display. They are persistently vocal, in a manner reminiscent of their Siamese ancestry, yet they have softer, sweeter voices. Burmese are not as independent as other breeds and are not suited to being left alone for extended periods of time.

==Genetics==
The Burmese gene is also present in some other cat breeds, particularly the established rex breeds, where it can be fully expressed in its homozygous form (cbcb) (referred to as Burmese Colour Restriction or Sepia). The same gene can also be combined with the Siamese gene (cbcs) to produce either darker points or a light-on-dark-brown coat, similar to the Burmese chocolate (champagne in the USA), known as &quot;mink&quot;.

The Asian Group cat breed is related to the Burmese; the Asian is physically similar but comes in different patterns and colours. The Singapura is always homozygous for the Burmese gene, combining it with a ticked tabby pattern. Snow Bengals with eye colours other than blue also have the gene.

The lineage of Burmese cats known as &quot;Contemporary Burmese&quot; often hosts a 4-aminoacid deletion on the ALX1 gene. Heterozygosity of the mutation results in brachicephaly, while homozygosity results in a profound head malformation known as the Burmese head defect, which is always fatal. 

===Genetic diversity===
A 2008 study conducted at UC Davis by the team led by feline geneticist Dr Leslie Lyons found that the American Burmese has the second lowest level of genetic diversity (after the Singapura) of all the breeds studied, and concludes that this situation should be addressed. The CFA observes that &quot;breeders are reporting less hearty litters, smaller adults, smaller litters, and immune system problems, all of which point towards inbreeding depression becoming more common.&quot; The Burmese breed council currently allows outcrossing using Bombay, Tonkinese and Burmese type cats imported from Southeast Asia to improve genetic diversity. The Fédération Internationale Féline (FIFe) excludes novice show cats from breeding.

==Health==
A 2016 study in England of veterinary records found the Burmese to have a higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus compared to other breeds with 2.27% of Burmese having the condition compared to the overall rate of 0.58%. An Australian study in 2009 found a prevalence of 22.1% compared to an overall rate of 7.4%.

A study of veterinary records in the UK found an average life expectancy of 14.42 years for the Burmese with a sample size of 45, the highest in the study and higher than the overall of 11.74 years.

Certain UK bloodlines suffer from an acute teething disorder in young kittens (FOPS: Feline Orofacial Pain Syndrome), where the eruption of the second teeth causes extreme discomfort and the young cat tears at its face to try to alleviate the pain. Eruption of the new teeth in the jaw that causes the problem; these cannot be removed until they have erupted, by which time the problem ceases. Pain relief intervention should be considered, to prevent overt self-trauma. Apart from scarring caused by the self-mutilation, the cat seems to recover completely.

The Burmese is predisposed to congenital hypotrichosis.

The Burmese is one of the more commonly affected breeds for gangliosidosis 2. An autosomal recessive mutation of the HEXB gene is responsible for the condition in the breed.

The Burmese is the cat breed most often affected by hypokalaemia. An autosomal recessive mutation of the WNK4 gene is responsible for congenital forms of hypokalaemia in the breed.

The Burmese is the most commonly affected breed for feline orofacial pain syndrome.

==See also==

* List of cat breeds
** Tonkinese cat, a domestic cat breed produced by crossbreeding between Siamese and Burmese cats.
* Puppy cat

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 4th printing.

==External links==

* National Alliance of Burmese Breeders, a CFA-affiliated Burmese Club
* Burmese pedigree database
* Burmese-Burmilla pedigree database
* Burmese Cat Club of New Zealand
* UK Burmese Cat Association
* The Burmese Cat Club
* Burmese Brown Cat Breeds Characteristics and more also read about another brown cat breed York Chocolate 
* UK Burmese Cat Society
* United Burmese Cat Fanciers (UBCF) a non-affiliated global Burmese Cat Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42573" start="4" end="15" title="Burmese cat" label="Burmese cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="59" end="64" title="cat breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="77" end="80" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="97" end="102" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088841" start="140" end="157" title="Myanmar–Thailand border" label="Thai-Burma border"/>
<link wikidata="Q42604" start="371" end="378" title="Siamese cat" label="Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320143" start="501" end="510" title="pedigreed" label="pedigreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="511" end="523" title="domestic cat" label="domestic cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051107" start="538" end="552" title="cat registry" label="cat registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572825" start="986" end="999" title="Harrison Weir" label="Harrison Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="1028" end="1042" title="The Crystal Palace" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q42726" start="1189" end="1198" title="Tonkinese (cat)" label="Tonkinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390467" start="1433" end="1443" title="crossbreed" label="crossbreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q260706" start="1579" end="1603" title="Joseph Cheesman Thompson" label="Joseph Cheesman Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1647" end="1660" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050099" start="2000" end="2030" title="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q42604" start="2128" end="2140" title="Siamese (cat)" label="Siamese cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2847" end="2861" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q42543" start="2869" end="2903" title="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy" label="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2946" end="2958" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051107" start="3428" end="3442" title="Cat registry" label="cat registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42709" start="3602" end="3635" title="The International Cat Association" label="The International Cat Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390467" start="3834" end="3844" title="crossbreed" label="crossbreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390467" start="3892" end="3902" title="crossbreed" label="crossbreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q42726" start="3968" end="3977" title="Tonkinese (cat)" label="Tonkinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42566" start="4046" end="4052" title="Bombay (cat)" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q29258" start="4061" end="4069" title="Burmilla" label="Burmilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q42643" start="5188" end="5199" title="Point (coat color)" label="colourpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q15259690" start="5945" end="5958" title="Tortoiseshell cat" label="tortoiseshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="7311" end="7319" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21002392" start="7690" end="7716" title="Dog-like cat" label="puppy-like characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955" start="8020" end="8031" title="Abyssinian cats" label="Abyssinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="8623" end="8633" title="zygosity" label="homozygous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974" start="8916" end="8927" title="Asian cat" label="Asian Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q42679" start="9046" end="9055" title="Singapura (cat)" label="Singapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q42583" start="9146" end="9152" title="Bengal (cat)" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032731" start="9320" end="9324" title="ALX1" label="ALX1"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="9331" end="9345" title="Heterozygosity" label="Heterozygosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="9394" end="9406" title="homozygosity" label="homozygosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="9556" end="9564" title="UC Davis" label="UC Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42679" start="9710" end="9719" title="Singapura (cat)" label="Singapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q42566" start="10074" end="10080" title="Bombay (cat)" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q42726" start="10082" end="10091" title="Tonkinese (cat)" label="Tonkinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42584" start="10177" end="10209" title="Fédération Internationale Féline" label="Fédération Internationale Féline"/>
<link wikidata="Q389913" start="10365" end="10382" title="Diabetes in cats" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181391" start="11374" end="11398" title="hypotrichosis" label="congenital hypotrichosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513691" start="11461" end="11477" title="gangliosidosis 2" label="gangliosidosis 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="11482" end="11501" title="autosomal recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905006" start="11518" end="11522" title="HEXB" label="HEXB"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="11628" end="11640" title="hypokalaemia" label="hypokalaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="11645" end="11664" title="autosomal recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q18045874" start="11681" end="11685" title="WNK4" label="WNK4"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149257" start="11810" end="11840" title="feline orofacial pain syndrome" label="feline orofacial pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="11859" end="11877" title="List of cat breeds" label="List of cat breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42726" start="11881" end="11894" title="Tonkinese cat" label="Tonkinese cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390467" start="11929" end="11942" title="crossbreeding" label="crossbreeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q42604" start="11951" end="11958" title="Siamese cat" label="Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q21002392" start="11979" end="11988" title="Puppy cat" label="Puppy cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166017" start="12378" end="12392" title="York Chocolate" label="York Chocolate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261789" wikidata="Q2610835" url="?curid=261789" title="List of municipalities of the Flemish Region">
<text>At the creation of Belgium in 1831, there were 2,739 municipalities in the country, which had fallen to 2,663 municipalities by 1961. Following a series of decisions and actions, carried out in 1975, 1983 and 2019, the [[fusion of the Belgian municipalities]] reduced the national total to 581 municipalities. Of these, the following is a list of the 300 municipalities in the [[Flemish Region]] of Belgium. The numbers refer to the location of the municipalities on the maps of the respective provinces.

==List==



==Notes==
== See also ==

* List of municipalities of Belgium
* List of cities in Flanders</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="19" end="26" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53" end="67" title="Municipalities of Belgium#History number of municipalities" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610835" start="219" end="259" title="List of municipalities of the Flemish Region" label="[[fusion of the Belgian municipalities]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610835" start="377" end="395" title="List of municipalities of the Flemish Region" label="[[Flemish Region]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606337" start="546" end="579" title="List of municipalities of Belgium" label="List of municipalities of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757589" start="582" end="608" title="List of cities in Flanders" label="List of cities in Flanders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261790" wikidata="Q2449484" url="?curid=261790" title="List of municipalities in Wallonia">
<text>Wallonia is a region located in southern Belgium, and divided into 262 municipalities, listed in the table below. The numbers refer to the location of the municipalities on the maps of the respective provinces.

Nine municipalities –located in the arrondissement of Verviers (province of Liège)– form the German-speaking Community of Belgium, being Eupen, Kelmis, Raeren, Lontzen, Büllingen, Bütgenbach, Burg-Reuland, Amel and Sankt Vith. The German-speaking Community Government has authority over these municipalities.

==List==




== See also ==

* List of municipalities of Belgium
* List of former municipalities in Wallonia
* List of cities in Wallonia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="0" end="8" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="41" end="48" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q493522" start="71" end="85" title="Municipalities in Belgium" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q93989" start="248" end="274" title="arrondissement of Verviers" label="arrondissement of Verviers"/>
<link wikidata="Q90027" start="305" end="341" title="German-speaking Community of Belgium" label="German-speaking Community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606337" start="553" end="586" title="List of municipalities of Belgium" label="List of municipalities of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248406" start="589" end="630" title="List of former municipalities in Wallonia" label="List of former municipalities in Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052078" start="633" end="659" title="List of cities in Wallonia" label="List of cities in Wallonia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261794" wikidata="Q937223" url="?curid=261794" title="Double push">
<text>Double push is an inline speed skating technique. Its major advantage over the previously practised &quot;classic&quot; technique is that it allows the skater to do useful work during the part of the stride that was &quot;wasted&quot;, and therefore to go faster. Opinions differ on its usefulness for non-elite skaters as it requires much practice before a skater is faster using doublepush than without.

==History==
It is uncertain who first invented the doublepush. Chad Hedrick is generally acknowledged as having brought it to the public eye. Prior to Chad&#x27;s arrival on the scene circa 1992, inline speed skaters used the classic speed skating technique derived from ice speed skating. Hedrick&#x27;s alternative approach rapidly proved itself to be faster and was soon adopted by many elite skaters.

==Technique==
Wheels used in speed skating are usually round or elliptical in profile, and do not literally have edges. The terminology is carried over from ice skate blades, which have edges. In inline skating, being &quot;on an inside edge&quot; refers to skating with the wheel of the skate leaning inwards (i.e. medially: right skate leaning left, and vice versa). An outside edge is the opposite, and a center edge implies that the wheel is vertical.

The classic speedskating technique is an alternating cycle of inside-edge pushes and outer-edge glides. The cycle starts as the skater is gliding on one (let us suppose the right) leg with a bent knee. Then the right knee straightens (extends) while leaning to the left. The direction of the push is therefore outwards (rightwards) from the center of mass. When the pushing leg reaches full extension, the left (now support) leg is set down and used to glide, while the right leg lifts and is brought back behind and underneath the skater (recovery) ready to be placed on the ground (set down) and become the new support leg. Once the pushing leg has been recovered, the support leg pushes out in the other direction and the cycle repeats. Note that the pushes are always in a lateral direction: the left leg pushes exclusively leftwards, and the right leg exclusively rightwards.

This will naturally result in a push that starts on the center edge or on a slight outside edge and &quot;rolls over&quot; onto the inside edge as the foot moves away from the skater&#x27;s center of mass.

The double-push eliminates the &quot;glide&quot; phase from the above cycle, replacing it with a medially-directed &quot;underpush&quot; on the outside-edge. The recovery skate is placed on an outside edge and pushed &quot;underneath&quot; the body (right leg pushes leftward, and vice versa) while maintaining that outside edge, before being steered or pulled back across the centerline for the regular inside-edge push that follows.
By its nature the double-push is less stable than classic technique, making it difficult to learn. If the skater should lose traction during an underpush there is no support leg to fall back on.
The double-push also allows for the very brief application of force through both legs simultaneously. The skater does this by transferring weight from the inside-edge foot to the outside-edge foot gradually, rather than transferring all weight to the outside-edge foot instantly. Some hold that this is essential to the double push, but this opinion is not universal.

==Advantages==
The principal advantage of the double push is that it allows skaters to generate propulsive force during a part of the stroke cycle which was previously wasted. In the glide phase of the classic stroke, friction from road, atmosphere and bearings tends to slow skaters down, yet the deep knee flexion during this part of the cycle fatigues the muscles. Using DP, skaters can do useful work in this time instead. This is beneficial to their muscles and also helps keep speed more nearly constant instead of surging ahead and then slowing down repeatedly.

The DP extends the effective stroke length. One of the best ways to go faster is to push further in each stroke, but whereas traditionally this requires sitting lower (restricting blood flow and increasing lactic acid production in the muscles), in DP the same leg at a higher bend angle can achieve a longer effective stroke by pushing both inward and outwards.

==Double-Push On Ice==
Although it is possible to use the double-push in ice skating, it is by no means certain that it can provide the same advantage that it can in inline skating. This has been attributed to the different characteristics of edging on ice. Whereas an inline skate on a center edge continues to grip the road, an ice blade on a center edge will slip if pushed sideways: it must be on an inside or outside edge if it is to &quot;dig into&quot; the ice.

Although some skaters can be seen to be underpushing slightly on ice, the effect is much more subtle. Chad Hedrick, due to his success in connection with the DP, has had his form widely commented on since he moved to ice. The DP has not been widely adopted on ice. Whether this is because it makes little practical difference or for other reasons is at present difficult to say.

The main reason why DP does not work on ice, it is proposed, is that ice skates can move only on a straight line or on a big radius, while DP requires carving movements. Perhaps some technical developments could enable creating an ice speed skate that can carve, but it may have more drag. This problem is similar to cross country skis that do not enable carving techniques.

==References==
==External links==
*Speed Skating &amp; Double Push For Beginners</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q937223" start="0" end="11" title="Double push" label="Double push"/>
<link wikidata="Q618786" start="18" end="38" title="inline speed skating" label="inline speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q434352" start="470" end="482" title="Chad Hedrick" label="Chad Hedrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="970" end="979" title="ice skating" label="ice skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q434352" start="4864" end="4876" title="Chad Hedrick" label="Chad Hedrick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261796" wikidata="Q312603" url="?curid=261796" title="Postumus">
<text>Marcus Cassianius Latinius Postumus ( 259–269) was a Roman commander of Batavian origin, who ruled as emperor of the splinter state of the Roman Empire known to modern historians as the Gallic Empire. The Roman army in Gaul threw off its allegiance to emperor Gallienus around the year 260, and Postumus assumed the title and powers of Emperor in the provinces of Gaul, Germania, Britannia, and Hispania. He ruled for the better part of ten years before he was murdered by his own troops.

==Life==

===Rise to power===
Little is known about the early life of Postumus. He has been claimed as being of Batavian origin; certainly his coinage honors deities—Hercules Magusanus and Hercules Deusoniensis—who would have been popular among the Batavians. Hercules Magusanus was probably an &quot;interpretatio romana&quot; translation of the Germanic deity Þunraz. &quot;Deusoniensis&quot; may refer to the town of Deuso, located in or near Batavian territory and likely to be identified with modern-day Diessen; it has been hypothesized that Postumus himself was born in Deuso. From these relatively obscure provincial origins, Postumus would have risen through the ranks of the army until he held command of the Roman forces &quot;... among the Celts&quot;. What his precise title was is not definitely known, though he may plausibly have been promoted by the emperor Valerian to the position of imperial legate of Germania Inferior. Postumus was evidently in favour at court, and, according to König, was granted an honorary consulship.

By 259, Valerian was campaigning in the east against the Persians, while his son and co-emperor Gallienus was preoccupied with the situation on the Danubian frontier. Consequently, Gallienus left his son, Saloninus, and military commanders, including Postumus, to protect the Rhine. Amid the chaos of an invasion by the Alamanni and Franks, and spurred on by news of the defeat and capture of Valerian, the army in Gaul revolted and proclaimed Postumus emperor.

The trigger was their defeat in 260 of a Juthungian army which was returning from Italy laden with prisoners, even though they had been repulsed by Gallienus at Mediolanum (Milan). Under the command of Postumus and Marcus Simplicinius Genialis, the Roman army crushed the Juthungi, and Postumus proceeded to distribute the captured spoils to the legions he commanded. Saloninus, on the advice of his praetorian prefect Silvanus (who had coordinated Roman policy in Gaul alongside Postumus), demanded the transfer of the recovered booty to his residence at Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium (Cologne). Postumus assembled his army and made a show of reluctantly enforcing this command, thus inviting his troops to instead throw off their allegiance to Gallienus. The troops accordingly proclaimed Postumus emperor and besieged Colonia, trapping Saloninus and Silvanus. After breaching the walls of the city, Postumus had Silvanus and Saloninus killed, although his supporters later claimed that it was the native Gauls who were responsible for the murders. Later he erected a triumphal arch to celebrate his victory.

===Establishment of a Gallic Empire===
Postumus was immediately recognized as emperor in Gaul (except perhaps for the province of Gallia Narbonensis), Germania Superior and Inferior, and Raetia. By 261, Britannia, Narbonensis and Hispania also acknowledged him as emperor, possibly after an expedition to Britain in the winter of 260–261. He established his capital in northern Gaul, probably at Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium or Augusta Treverorum (Trier), and furnished his government with many of the traditional Roman legislative and executive structures. Apart from the position of emperor, he immediately assumed the office of consul alongside a colleague, Honoratianus. Like his imperial predecessors, he became the &quot;pontifex maximus&quot; of the state and assumed tribunician power each year. He is thought to have established a senate, perhaps on the basis of the Council of the Three Gauls or provincial councils, and a Pretorian Guard, one of whose officers was the future Gallic emperor Victorinus. The chief members of Postumus&#x27;s administration, such as Victorinus and Tetricus, appear to have been drawn from his power base in northern Gaul, and indeed the entire administration rapidly became Gallicized.

Postumus represented himself as the restorer of Gaul (&quot;Restitutor Galliarum&quot;) and the bringer of security to the provinces (&quot;Salus Provinciarum&quot;) on some of his coins; prior to 10 December 261, he also took the title of &quot;Germanicus maximus&quot;, a title he earned after successfully defending Gaul against the Germans. His principal objective in assuming the purple appeared to be the restoration and defence of the Rhine frontier and the surrounding area, a task that he approached with vigour, earning the admiration of the ancient authors, who declared that he restored the security that the provinces had enjoyed in the past. So successful was he in the task of stabilizing his domain that the coins issued by Postumus were of better workmanship and higher precious metal content than coins issued by Gallienus. His control of the Spanish and British mining regions was presumably crucial in this regard, as was his employment of master minters who would have come into Gaul with Gallienus. Postumus fought successful campaigns against the Franks and Alemanni in 262 and 263; following his victory over them in 263, his coin-types celebrated peaceful themes such as &quot;Felicitas Augusti&quot; for some time. After having spent much of the last four years pushing the Franks out of Gaul, Postumus then recruited Frankish troops to fight against other Franks, probably dispersed within existing Roman army units.

Scholars continue to debate whether Postumus originally intended to dislodge Gallienus from Rome or was content to rule only the western provinces. From the beginning of his usurpation, Postumus had made it clear that his priority was for Gaul, and that he had no immediate intentions to make a bid for Rome. Postumus&#x27;s power base was Gaul and his main responsibility was the defense of the Rhine provinces. If he marched against Gallienus, then he would be exposing his heartland not only to the Germanic tribes but also potentially to any number of usurpers. Perhaps he hoped to achieve some official recognition from Gallienus; what is clear, however, is that Postumus was not overtly separatist and did not revive the 1st-century dream of an independent &quot;Galliarum imperium&quot;. (See Julius Sabinus and revolt of the Batavi.) The forms, titles, and administrative structures of Postumus&#x27;s principate remained conventionally Roman.

===Confrontation with Gallienus===
For four years Gallienus was too distracted by Germanic invasions and other usurpers in the east to address the situation to his north and west, but in 265 he launched a campaign to defeat Postumus. His first attempt failed when Postumus managed to escape from a precarious situation due to the carelessness of Gallienus&#x27;s cavalry commander Aureolus. Aureolus was punished with demotion, eventually leading him to turn against Gallienus in 267.

A second campaign, led by Gallienus himself, also seemed to have the advantage over Postumus, but while Gallienus was besieging a city in Gaul (perhaps Augusta Treverorum), he was wounded and forced to withdraw. After this, Gallienus was occupied with crises in the rest of his empire and did not confront Postumus again.

===Final years===
By the end of 265, Postumus&#x27;s coin issues were triumphantly commemorating the victory over Gallienus, and the festivities celebrating his &quot;quinquennalia&quot; continued into the following year. Very little troubled the reign of Postumus from 265 to 268; archaeological evidence, such as it is, points to a general return to peace and normalcy. In 266, Postumus became consul for the fourth time, taking as his colleague Marcus Piavonius Victorinus, a Gallic noble who was also a senior military officer; his selection to such a high-profile position may be seen as an attempt to broaden Postumus&#x27;s base of support. The year 268 saw the issuing of the &#x27;Labours of Hercules&#x27; series of gold coins in honour of Postumus&#x27;s favourite god. A sudden debasement of the coinage later that year shows that Postumus was facing increasing financial difficulties, due perhaps to a disruption of silver production in the Spanish mines or the need to buy off an increasingly discontented army.

Such discontent was probably due to Postumus&#x27;s failure to take advantage of a golden opportunity to move against Gallienus in 268. Aureolus, the general who was in command of Mediolanum (Milan) in Gallienus&#x27;s interest, rebelled and ultimately declared for Postumus. The city of Mediolanum and its north Italian and Raetian hinterland would have been critical to Postumus if he planned to march on Rome. For whatever reason, Postumus failed to support Aureolus, who was defeated by Gallienus and besieged inside Mediolanum. Before the end of summer in 268, Gallienus was assassinated, and his successor, Claudius II, captured and killed Aureolus. At the same time, a sequence of events began which would end Postumus&#x27;s rule in Gaul.

===Fall===
Postumus assumed his fifth consulship on 1 January 269, but the army in Germania Superior raised a usurper in early 269. Laelianus, one of Postumus&#x27;s top military leaders and the governor of Germania Superior, was declared emperor in Mogontiacum (now Mainz) by the local garrison and surrounding troops (Legio XXII &quot;Primigenia&quot;). Within a few months, Postumus was able to capture Mogontiacum and kill Laelianus. His army wanted to sack the defeated city, and when Postumus tried to restrain them, the soldiers turned on him and killed him.

The mutineers set up Marius, a common soldier, as emperor. Marius held sway for a short while before being overthrown by Victorinus, Postumus&#x27;s erstwhile colleague in the consulship and tribune of the praetorian guard. In the meantime, the Gallic Empire lost Hispania.

==Legacy==
Postumus&#x27;s coinage has been of particular interest to numismatists, in light of the high quality and relative abundance of his coin issues. His ‘Labours of Hercules’ series is particularly renowned, as are several aurei which carry full-face portraits of Postumus instead of the usual profile view.

==Historical sources==
Most of the ancient literary references to Postumus come from the works thought to be based on the &quot;Enmannsche Kaisergeschichte&quot; (Aurelius Victor, &quot;Epitome de Caesaribus&quot;, Eutropius, and the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, in the last of which Postumus is listed among the Thirty Tyrants). He also figures in the works of Zosimus and Zonaras.

== Notes ==
== References ==
;Primary sources
* Aurelius Victor, &quot;Liber de Caesaribus&quot;
* &quot;Epitome de Caesaribus&quot; (sometimes attributed to Aurelius Victor)
* Eutropius, &quot;Brevarium&quot;, Book 9
* Historia Augusta, Tyranni_XXX*.html &quot;The Thirty Tyrants&quot;
* Joannes Zonaras, Compendium of History extract: Zonaras: Alexander Severus to Diocletian: 222–284
* Zosimus, &quot;Historia Nova&quot;

;Secondary sources
* Bakker, Lothar. (1993), &quot;Raetien unter Postumus. Das Siegesdenkmal einer Juthungenschlacht im Jahre 260 n. Chr. aus Augsburg.&quot; &quot;Germania&quot; 71, pp. 369–386.
* 
* ()
* 

== External links ==

* Partial coinage listing featuring Postumus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312603" start="0" end="35" title="Postumus" label="Marcus Cassianius Latinius Postumus"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="72" end="80" title="Batavi (Germanic tribe)" label="Batavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="139" end="151" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q273025" start="186" end="199" title="Gallic Empire" label="Gallic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104475" start="260" end="269" title="Gallienus" label="Gallienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q879466" start="364" end="368" title="Roman Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="370" end="378" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="380" end="389" title="Roman Britain" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="395" end="403" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="602" end="610" title="Batavii" label="Batavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q977188" start="656" end="674" title="Hercules Magusanus" label="Hercules Magusanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="791" end="811" title="interpretatio romana" label="interpretatio romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="852" end="858" title="Thor" label="Þunraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027519" start="999" end="1006" title="Diessen" label="Diessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46750" start="1365" end="1373" title="Valerian (Roman emperor)" label="Valerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q158648" start="1393" end="1408" title="Legatus Augusti pro praetore" label="imperial legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="1412" end="1429" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q104475" start="1632" end="1641" title="Gallienus" label="Gallienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1684" end="1692" title="Danube" label="Danubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q146924" start="1693" end="1701" title="Limes (Roman Empire)" label="frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q297494" start="1741" end="1750" title="Saloninus" label="Saloninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="1812" end="1817" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="1856" end="1864" title="Alamanni" label="Alamanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1869" end="1875" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165502" start="1907" end="1925" title="Battle of Edessa" label="defeat and capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q378382" start="2040" end="2048" title="Juthungi" label="Juthungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="2081" end="2086" title="Italia (Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q729978" start="2160" end="2170" title="Mediolanum" label="Mediolanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="2172" end="2177" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288852" start="2214" end="2242" title="Marcus Simplicinius Genialis" label="Marcus Simplicinius Genialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="2399" end="2417" title="praetorian prefect" label="praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q652937" start="2418" end="2426" title="Silvanus (praetorian prefect)" label="Silvanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048" start="2555" end="2589" title="Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium" label="Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="2591" end="2598" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="3246" end="3264" title="Gallia Narbonensis" label="Gallia Narbonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="3267" end="3284" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="3289" end="3297" title="Germania Inferior" label="Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q156789" start="3303" end="3309" title="Raetia" label="Raetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q666165" start="3550" end="3568" title="Augusta Treverorum" label="Augusta Treverorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="3570" end="3575" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="3707" end="3714" title="Roman Emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q116507259" start="3753" end="3759" title="Consul (Gallic Empire)" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3783" end="3795" title="Honoratianus" label="Honoratianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212943" start="3849" end="3865" title="pontifex maximus" label="pontifex maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="3897" end="3908" title="Tribune" label="tribunician"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="3962" end="3968" title="Roman Senate" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="4055" end="4070" title="Pretorian Guard" label="Pretorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q333770" start="4124" end="4134" title="Victorinus" label="Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312672" start="4212" end="4220" title="Tetricus I" label="Tetricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="5421" end="5427" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="5432" end="5440" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q606722" start="6596" end="6610" title="Julius Sabinus" label="Julius Sabinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="6615" end="6635" title="revolt of the Batavi" label="revolt of the Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312910" start="7130" end="7138" title="Aureolus" label="Aureolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q666165" start="7387" end="7405" title="Augusta Treverorum" label="Augusta Treverorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020991" start="7725" end="7738" title="quinquennalia" label="quinquennalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q333770" start="8006" end="8033" title="Victorinus" label="Marcus Piavonius Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q729978" start="8765" end="8775" title="Mediolanum" label="Mediolanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156789" start="8910" end="8916" title="Raetia" label="Raetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46762" start="9198" end="9209" title="Claudius II Gothicus" label="Claudius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="9416" end="9433" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q326560" start="9465" end="9474" title="Laelianus" label="Laelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q571790" start="9583" end="9594" title="Roman Mogontiacum" label="Mogontiacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="9600" end="9605" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q703896" start="9653" end="9686" title="Legio XXII Primigenia" label="Legio XXII &amp;quot;Primigenia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q310442" start="9921" end="9927" title="Marcus Aurelius Marius" label="Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q333770" start="10021" end="10031" title="Victorinus" label="Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q476078" start="10405" end="10410" title="aureus" label="aurei"/>
<link wikidata="Q488217" start="10619" end="10646" title="Enmannsche Kaisergeschichte" label="Enmannsche Kaisergeschichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q275606" start="10654" end="10669" title="Aurelius Victor" label="Aurelius Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q426008" start="10677" end="10698" title="Epitome de Caesaribus" label="Epitome de Caesaribus"/>
<link wikidata="Q314694" start="10706" end="10715" title="Eutropius (historian)" label="Eutropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="10731" end="10747" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258299" start="10805" end="10819" title="Thirty Tyrants (Roman)" label="Thirty Tyrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="10854" end="10861" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q32052" start="10866" end="10873" title="Zonaras" label="Zonaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q275606" start="10924" end="10939" title="Aurelius Victor" label="Aurelius Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q314694" start="11053" end="11062" title="Eutropius (historian)" label="Eutropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="11096" end="11112" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q32052" start="11165" end="11180" title="Joannes Zonaras" label="Joannes Zonaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="11265" end="11272" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="261798" wikidata="Q379904" url="?curid=261798" title="Colossal Cave Adventure">
<text>Colossal Cave Adventure (also known as Adventure or ADVENT) is a text-based adventure game, released in 1976 by developer Will Crowther for the PDP-10 mainframe computer. It was expanded upon in 1977 by Don Woods. In the game, the player explores a cave system rumored to be filled with treasure and gold. The game is composed of dozens of locations, and the player moves between these locations and interacts with objects in them by typing one- or two-word commands which are interpreted by the game&#x27;s natural language input system. The program acts as a narrator, describing the player&#x27;s location and the results of the player&#x27;s attempted actions. It is the first well-known example of interactive fiction, as well as the first well-known adventure game, for which it was also the namesake.

The original game, written in 1975 and 1976, was based on Crowther&#x27;s maps and experiences caving in Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, the longest cave system in the world; further, it was intended, in part, to be accessible to non-technical players, such as his two daughters. Woods&#x27;s version expanded the game in size and increased the number of fantasy elements present in it, such as a dragon and magic spells. Both versions, typically played over teleprinters connected to mainframe computers, were spread around the nascent ARPANET, the precursor to the Internet, which Crowther was involved in developing.

&quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; was one of the first teletype games and was massively popular in the computer community of the late 1970s, with numerous ports and modified versions being created based on Woods&#x27;s source code. It directly inspired the creation of numerous games, including &quot;Zork&quot; (1977), &quot;Adventureland&quot; (1978), &quot;Mystery House&quot; (1980), &quot;Rogue&quot; (1980), and &quot;Adventure&quot; (1980), which went on to be the foundations of the interactive fiction, adventure, roguelike, and action-adventure genres. It also influenced the creation of the MUD and computer role-playing game genres. It has been noted as one of the most influential video games, and in 2019 was inducted into the World Video Game Hall of Fame by The Strong and the International Center for the History of Electronic Games.

==Gameplay==

&quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; is a text-based adventure game wherein the player explores a mysterious cave that is rumored to be filled with treasure and gold. The player must explore the cave system and solve puzzles by using items that they find to obtain the treasures and leave the cave. The player types in one- or two-word commands to move their character through the cave system, interact with objects in the cave, pick up items to put into their inventory, and perform other actions. The allowable commands are contextual to the location, or room, the player is in; for example, &quot;get lamp&quot; only has an effect if there is a lamp present. There are dozens of rooms, each of which has a name such as &quot;Debris Room&quot; and a description, and may contain objects or obstacles. The program acts as a narrator, describing to the player their location in the cave and the results of certain actions. If it does not understand the player&#x27;s commands, it asks for the player to retype their actions. The program&#x27;s replies are typically in a humorous, conversational tone, much as a Dungeon Master would use in leading players in a tabletop role-playing game.

The original 1976 version of the game contains five treasures which can be collected. Although it is based on a real cave system, it contains a few fantasy elements such as a crystal bridge, magic words, and axe-wielding dwarves. The player can die by falling into a pit or being killed by the dwarves, but otherwise the game has no ending or goal beyond finding the treasures. The 1977 version of the game, upon which later versions were based, adds ten more treasures and more fantasy elements. It also adds a points system, whereby completing certain goals earns a predetermined number of points. The ultimate goal is to earn the maximum number of points—350, in the 1977 version—which involves finding all the treasures in the game and safely leaving the cave.

==Development==
===Crowther&#x27;s original version===
&quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; was originally created by William Crowther in 1975 and 1976. Crowther and his ex-wife Patricia were both programmers and cavers and had extensively explored Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, the longest cave system in the world, in the early 1970s as part of the Cave Research Foundation. In 1972, Patricia led the expedition that found a connection between Mammoth Cave and the larger Flint Ridge Cave System. In addition to caving, the pair produced vector map surveys of the cave: they transcribed the survey data of the cave from &quot;muddy little books&quot; into a teleprinter terminal in their house, which could send and print messages from programs running on the central computer and was connected to a PDP-1 mainframe computer at Bolt, Beranek and Newman (BBN) where William Crowther worked. This data was then fed into a program developed by the pair that generated plotting commands onto punched tape, which were then fed into a Honeywell 316 minicomputer attached to a Calcomp drum plotter at BBN to print paper maps. These maps were some of the earliest computer-drawn maps of caves.

In 1975, after he and Patricia divorced, William Crowther stopped caving with the Cave Research Foundation. Driven by what he later described as an increase in spare time combined with missing his two daughters, he began working on a text-based game in Fortran on BBN&#x27;s PDP-10 mainframe, interfacing through a teletype printer, that they could play. He combined his memories and maps of the Mammoth Cave system, particularly a 1975 map of the Bedquilt area of the caves, including Colossal Cavern, with elements of the &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; campaigns that he played with friends to design a game around exploring a cave for treasure. Crowther wanted the game to be accessible and not intimidating to non-technical players such as his children, and so developed a natural language input system to control the game so that it would be &quot;a thing that gave you the illusion anyway that you&#x27;d typed in English commands and it did what you said&quot;. Crowther later commented that this approach allowed the game to appeal to both non-programmers and programmers alike, as in the latter case, it gave programmers a challenge of how to make &quot;an obstinate system&quot; perform in a manner they wanted it to. This approach was also developed to allow the game to be played on a teletype printer, rather than rely on user interface elements used in programs designed for monitors.

The initial version of the game was about 700 lines of code, plus another 700 lines of data such as descriptions for 66 rooms, navigational messages, 193 vocabulary words, and miscellaneous messages. Once the game was complete, in early 1976, Crowther showed it off to his co-workers at BBN for feedback, and then considered his work on the game finished, leaving the compiled game on the mainframe before taking a month off for vacation. According to one of Crowther&#x27;s then-coworkers in 2007, &quot;once it was working, Will wasn&#x27;t very interested in perfecting or expanding it.&quot; Crowther&#x27;s work at BBN was in developing ARPANET, one of the first networks of computers and a precursor to the Internet, and the PDP-10 mainframe was part of that network. During his vacation, others found the game and it was distributed widely across the network to computers at other companies and universities, which surprised Crowther on his return. The game did not have an explicit title in it, simply stating &quot;WELCOME TO ADVENTURE!!&quot; as a part of the opening message and having a file name of ADVENT; it was referred to as both &quot;Adventure&quot; and &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot;, with the latter becoming the more common name over time. Most computer terminals at the time did not have monitors, and players would instead play the game over teleprinters connected to the mainframe.

===Woods&#x27;s modifications===

One person who discovered the game was Don Woods, a graduate student at Stanford University. Woods found the game on a PDP-10 at the Stanford Medical School and wanted to expand upon the game. He contacted Crowther to gain access to the source code by emailing &quot;crowther&quot; at every domain that existed on the ARPANET. Woods built upon Crowther&#x27;s code, introducing more high fantasy-related elements such as a dragon. He changed the puzzles, adding new elements and complexities, and added new puzzles and features such as a pirate that roams the map and steals treasure from the player or objects that could exist in multiple states. He also introduced a scoring system within the game and added ten more treasures to collect in addition to the five in Crowther&#x27;s original version.

According to cavers who have played the game, much of Crowther&#x27;s original version matches the Bedquilt section of Mammoth Cave with some passages removed for gameplay purposes, though Woods&#x27;s additions do not as he had never been there. According to William Mann, a caving compatriot of Crowther who played both versions when they were developed, Crowther was focused on creating the cave system as a setting for a game, while Woods was interested in making a game and not in replicating the feeling of caving.

Woods&#x27;s version, released in 1977, expanded Crowther&#x27;s game to approximately 3,000 lines of code and 1,800 lines of data, growing to 140 map locations, 293 vocabulary words, and 53 objects. Woods also added access controls to the game, allowing mainframe administrators to restrict the game from running during business hours. Woods began working on the game in March 1977; by May his version was complete enough to release, and was soon attracting attention around the United States. Woods continued releasing updated editions in Fortran until 1995. Crowther later said that Woods&#x27;s bringing fantasy elements earlier into the gameplay was an improvement to his version, though Crowther&#x27;s daughters also recall him telling them when they were frustrated at puzzles in the game that it was one of Woods&#x27;s additions, not his.

Crowther did not distribute the source code to his version to anyone else, and it was later believed to be lost until it was rediscovered on an archive of Woods&#x27;s student account at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory in 2005. Woods, however, distributed the code to his version alongside the compiled executable. Woods&#x27;s 1977 version became the more recognizable and widespread version of &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot;, in part due to its wider code availability, as it led to several other variants of the game being produced.

===Later versions===

Both Crowther&#x27;s and Woods&#x27;s version were designed to run on the PDP-10 and used features unique to DECSYSTEMS-10 Fortran IV on that architecture, meaning that the program could not be easily moved to other systems, even those that could run Fortran programs. One of the first efforts to port the code to other languages or systems was by RAND Corporation researcher James Gillogly in 1977. Gillogly, with agreement from Crowther and Woods, spent several weeks porting the code to the C programming language to run on the more generic Unix architecture. It can still be found as part of the BSD Operating Systems distributions, or as part of the &quot;bsdgames&quot; package under most Linux distributions, under the command name &quot;adventure&quot;. Bob Supnik of Digital Equipment Corporation also ported the game in Fortran to the PDP-11 minicomputer in mid-1977, spreading it to other minicomputer systems. Afterwards, numerous other ports were made of the game to different languages and systems, sometimes identified by the number of points available in the game. There were enough ports and variants and alternate takes of the game by 1982 that an article in &quot;Your Computer&quot; described the entire set of games wherein the player enters short commands to move between set locations as &quot;&quot;Adventure&quot; games&quot;, and provided code for the ZX81 computer for an &quot;Adventure-writing kit&quot; program that could be used to generate a game with that gameplay. In 2017, Eric S. Raymond created a port for modern computers of Woods&#x27;s 1995 version of the game as &quot;Open Adventure&quot; and released the source code under an open-source license with permission from Crowther and Woods.

Commercial versions of the game were also released. Microsoft published a version titled &quot;Microsoft Adventure&quot; in 1979 for the Apple II Plus and TRS-80 computers, and again in 1981 for MS-DOS as a launch title for IBM PCs, one of the few software programs and the only game at launch. The Software Toolworks released &quot;The Original Adventure&quot; for IBM PCs in 1981; endorsed by Crowther and Woods in exchange for a nominal payment, it was the only version for which they received any money. Level 9 Computing released multiple versions of the game for different computer platforms under the name &quot;Colossal Adventure&quot;, beginning with a version in 1982 for the Nascom that includes an entire extra section where the player saves elves from flooding caves, as well as later versions that include pictures of the areas.

A 3D remake of the game, under the title &quot;Colossal Cave&quot;, was released by Cygnus Entertainment as its first title in on January 19, 2023, for Windows, macOS, Linux, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X, and Meta Quest 2. Designed by Ken and Roberta Williams, co-founders of Sierra Entertainment, the game was started as a hobby project by the pair during the COVID-19 pandemic, before being expanded into a full commercial product by a team of thirty. It was intended by lead designer Roberta to be a recreation of how playing the game felt like to her in 1979.

==Legacy==
===Video games===
&quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; is considered one of the most influential video games. In 2019, it was inducted into the World Video Game Hall of Fame by The Strong and the International Center for the History of Electronic Games. The game is the first well-known example of interactive fiction and established conventions that have since become standard in interactive fiction titles, such as the use of shortened cardinal directions for commands like &quot;e&quot; for &quot;east&quot;, as well as inspiring the contents of the fiction titles themselves. The game is the namesake and the first well-known example of an adventure game, as it combined the interactivity of computer programs with the storytelling of literature or role-playing games such as &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, despite its lack of linear plot. The only text adventure game known to precede it is &quot;Wander&quot; from 1974, which did not have the spread or influence of &quot;Adventure&quot;.

&quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; was immensely popular among the small computer-using population of the time. Historian Alexander Smith described it as &quot;ubiquitous&quot; on computer networks by the end of 1977, alongside &quot;Star Trek&quot; and &quot;Lunar Lander&quot;, and Walter Bright, creator of &quot;Empire&quot; (1977), recalled that &quot;Adventure&quot; &quot;caused a sensation&quot;. Columnist Jerry Pournelle said that &quot;two weeks&#x27; work would be lost&quot; whenever it arrived at a computer installation as employees played it. Attempts to restrict the game failed; the only cure was to let everyone solve it.

Computer game programmers of the time were greatly inspired by the game; according to game designer and creator of the Inform interactive fiction language Graham Nelson, &quot;for the five years to 1982 almost every game created was another &#x27;Advent&#x27;&quot;. Several of these games were the initial releases of companies that would go on to become key innovators for the early adventure game genre. These included &quot;Zork&quot; (1977)—which began development within a month of the release of Woods&#x27;s version—first by the team of Dave Lebling, Marc Blank, Tim Anderson, and Bruce Daniels at MIT and later by Infocom; &quot;Adventureland&quot; (1978) by Scott Adams of Adventure International; and &quot;Mystery House&quot; (1980) by Roberta and Ken Williams of On-Line Systems. The 1980 Atari 2600 video game &quot;Adventure&quot; was an attempt to create a graphical version of &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot;, and itself became the first known example of an action-adventure game and introduced the fantasy genre to video game consoles. &quot;Carmen Sandiego&quot;, an early educational game series begun in 1985, was inspired by transforming the idea of moving around the caverns of &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; looking for treasure into moving around the globe searching for clues.

In addition to inspiring adventure games, as described by Matt Barton in &quot;Dungeons and Desktops: The History of Computer Role-Playing Games&quot;, &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; demonstrated the &quot;creation of a virtual world and the means to explore it&quot;, and the inclusion of monsters and simplified combat. For this, it is considered a precursor of computer role-playing games, though it was lacking several elements of the genre. Glenn Wichman and Michael Toy name the game as an influence for their game &quot;Rogue&quot; in 1980, which went on to become the namesake of the roguelike genre. &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; also inspired the development of online multiplayer games like MUDs, the precursors of the modern-day massively multiplayer online role-playing game.

===Other media===
Two phrases from the game have gone on to have a lasting impact in programming and video games. &quot;Xyzzy&quot; is a magic word that teleports the player between two locations (&quot;inside building&quot; and the &quot;debris room&quot;). It was added by Crowther at a request by his sister when play-testing the game to skip the early section of the game. As an in-joke tribute to &quot;Adventure&quot;, many later games and computer programs include a hidden &quot;xyzzy&quot; command, the results of which range from the straightforward to the humorous. Crowther stated that for its purpose in the game, &quot;magic words should look queer, and yet somehow be pronounceable&quot;, leading him to select &quot;xyzzy&quot;. Additionally, in the game there is a maze created by Crowther where each of ten room descriptions was exactly the same: &quot;YOU ARE IN A MAZE OF TWISTY LITTLE PASSAGES, ALL ALIKE.&quot; The layout of this &quot;all alike&quot; maze was fixed, so the player would have to figure out how to map the maze. The phrase &quot;you are in a maze of twisty little passages, all alike&quot; has become memorialized and popularized in the hacker culture, where &quot;passages&quot; may be replaced with a different word, as the situation warrants. This phrase came to signify a situation when whatever action is taken does not change the result.

&quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; has continued to be referenced by media for decades since. The 2003 book on the history of interactive fiction &quot;Twisty Little Passages&quot; was named after the &quot;all alike&quot; maze, and the 2010 documentary on the history of text adventure games &quot;Get Lamp&quot; is named for the command to get one of the first objects the player encounters and must carry to solve the game. The 2013 game &quot;Kentucky Route Zero&quot;″s third act draws direct inspiration from the game, showing a computer simulation set up inside of a cave, which is itself depicting a massive cave system. The game is also a key plot point in an episode of the 2014 TV series &quot;Halt and Catch Fire&quot;, a period drama taking place in the early days of the personal computing revolution. In it, the chief software designer uses the game as a competency test to determine which programmers will remain on the team. As a tie-in, a fully playable version of the game augmented with player hints and artwork revealed when certain locations are visited was made available on the show&#x27;s official website.

==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; at the Interactive Fiction Database with downloadable versions for many platforms
* &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; at the Interactive Fiction Wiki with downloadable versions for many platforms
* Original source code and modified source code for modern Fortran compilers of Crowther&#x27;s 1976 version
* &quot;Open Adventure&quot; source code of a port of the 1995 version
* 1987 Windows port of the PDP-11 version of &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; for modern Windows
* &quot;The Colossal Cave Adventure Page&quot;, containing downloadable versions and details about each version of the game
* Interviews with Don Woods and Dennis Jerz for the &quot;Get Lamp&quot; documentary film</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="65" end="90" title="interactive fiction" label="text-based adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344970" start="122" end="135" title="William Crowther (programmer)" label="Will Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="144" end="150" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="151" end="169" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614997" start="203" end="212" title="Don Woods (programmer)" label="Don Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="508" end="530" title="natural language processing" label="natural language input"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="561" end="569" title="narrative" label="narrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="756" end="770" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="798" end="806" title="eponym" label="namesake"/>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="904" end="910" title="caving" label="caving"/>
<link wikidata="Q242681" start="914" end="926" title="Mammoth Cave National Park" label="Mammoth Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="1158" end="1165" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="1262" end="1273" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="1340" end="1347" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1370" end="1378" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249149" start="1481" end="1495" title="teletype games" label="teletype games"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="1581" end="1586" title="porting" label="ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q226736" start="1727" end="1731" title="Zork" label="Zork"/>
<link wikidata="Q379981" start="1752" end="1765" title="Adventureland (video game)" label="Adventureland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751498" start="1786" end="1799" title="Mystery House" label="Mystery House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140407" start="1820" end="1825" title="Rogue (video game)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q379915" start="1850" end="1859" title="Adventure (1980 video game)" label="Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143132" start="1949" end="1958" title="roguelike" label="roguelike"/>
<link wikidata="Q343568" start="1964" end="1980" title="action-adventure game" label="action-adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="2028" end="2031" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="MUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="2036" end="2062" title="role-playing video game" label="computer role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q20487122" start="2167" end="2196" title="World Video Game Hall of Fame" label="World Video Game Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767051" start="2200" end="2210" title="The Strong" label="The Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049056" start="2219" end="2275" title="International Center for the History of Electronic Games" label="International Center for the History of Electronic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="2333" end="2358" title="interactive fiction" label="text-based adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="2650" end="2659" title="player character" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773301" start="3403" end="3417" title="Dungeon Master" label="Dungeon Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="3452" end="3478" title="tabletop role-playing game" label="tabletop role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="3702" end="3709" title="Dwarf (folklore)" label="dwarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344970" start="4364" end="4380" title="William Crowther (programmer)" label="William Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145542" start="4424" end="4432" title="Patricia Crowther (caver)" label="Patricia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="4459" end="4465" title="caving" label="cavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q242681" start="4495" end="4507" title="Mammoth Cave National Park" label="Mammoth Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="4511" end="4519" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943265" start="4593" end="4617" title="Cave Research Foundation" label="Cave Research Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471665" start="4782" end="4788" title="vector (mathematics and physics)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="4902" end="4913" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758866" start="5044" end="5049" title="PDP-1" label="PDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="5050" end="5068" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="5072" end="5096" title="Raytheon BBN" label="Bolt, Beranek and Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474611" start="5209" end="5217" title="plot (graphics)" label="plotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="5232" end="5244" title="punched tape" label="punched tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q623187" start="5273" end="5286" title="Honeywell 316" label="Honeywell 316"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="5287" end="5299" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018853" start="5314" end="5334" title="Calcomp plotter" label="Calcomp drum plotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="5684" end="5691" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="5706" end="5712" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149111" start="5917" end="5932" title="Colossal Cavern" label="Colossal Cavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="5961" end="5983" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="6212" end="6234" title="natural language processing" label="natural language input"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="7477" end="7484" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="8107" end="8124" title="computer terminal" label="computer terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="8151" end="8159" title="computer monitor" label="monitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614997" start="8321" end="8330" title="Don Woods (programmer)" label="Don Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="8354" end="8373" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q326439" start="8665" end="8677" title="high fantasy" label="high fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931153" start="10647" end="10690" title="Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory" label="Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11145" end="11169" title="Fortran#FORTRAN_IV" label="DECSYSTEMS-10 Fortran IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="11333" end="11337" title="porting" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="11384" end="11400" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729292" start="11412" end="11426" title="James Gillogly" label="James Gillogly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="11530" end="11552" title="C (programming language)" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="11580" end="11584" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="11636" end="11639" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="11731" end="11736" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="11812" end="11841" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="11881" end="11887" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023075" start="12219" end="12232" title="Your Computer (British magazine)" label="Your Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q263250" start="12414" end="12418" title="ZX81" label="ZX81"/>
<link wikidata="Q188954" start="12544" end="12559" title="Eric S. Raymond" label="Eric S. Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q97044024" start="12705" end="12724" title="open-source license" label="open-source license"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="12819" end="12828" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623053" start="12862" end="12881" title="Microsoft Adventure" label="Microsoft Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q621254" start="12904" end="12917" title="Apple II Plus" label="Apple II Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="12922" end="12928" title="TRS-80" label="TRS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="12962" end="12968" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="12991" end="12997" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576806" start="13062" end="13084" title="The Software Toolworks" label="The Software Toolworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q940646" start="13275" end="13292" title="Level 9 Computing" label="Level 9 Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q106621938" start="13386" end="13404" title="Colossal Adventure" label="Colossal Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q178930" start="13453" end="13459" title="Nascom (computer kit)" label="Nascom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="13763" end="13770" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="13772" end="13777" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="13779" end="13784" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="13786" end="13801" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184502" start="13803" end="13816" title="PlayStation 5" label="PlayStation 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q98973368" start="13818" end="13831" title="Xbox Series X" label="Xbox Series X"/>
<link wikidata="Q99620218" start="13837" end="13849" title="Meta Quest 2" label="Meta Quest 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q956112" start="13863" end="13866" title="Ken Williams (game developer)" label="Ken"/>
<link wikidata="Q55176" start="13871" end="13887" title="Roberta Williams" label="Roberta Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q494614" start="13904" end="13924" title="Sierra Entertainment" label="Sierra Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="13989" end="13997" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q20487122" start="14347" end="14376" title="World Video Game Hall of Fame" label="World Video Game Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767051" start="14380" end="14390" title="The Strong" label="The Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049056" start="14399" end="14455" title="International Center for the History of Electronic Games" label="International Center for the History of Electronic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="14799" end="14807" title="eponym" label="namesake"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="14847" end="14861" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="14956" end="14973" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764120" start="15110" end="15116" title="Wander (1974 video game)" label="Wander"/>
<link wikidata="Q662253" start="15439" end="15448" title="Star Trek (1971 video game)" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759969" start="15465" end="15477" title="Lunar Lander (video game genre)" label="Lunar Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993645" start="15489" end="15502" title="Walter Bright" label="Walter Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669973" start="15521" end="15527" title="Empire (1977 video game)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q578031" start="15620" end="15635" title="Jerry Pournelle" label="Jerry Pournelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q539268" start="15966" end="15972" title="Inform" label="Inform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593100" start="16002" end="16015" title="Graham Nelson" label="Graham Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q226736" start="16275" end="16279" title="Zork" label="Zork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229165" start="16392" end="16404" title="Dave Lebling" label="Dave Lebling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755399" start="16406" end="16416" title="Marc Blank" label="Marc Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803086" start="16418" end="16430" title="Tim Anderson (programmer)" label="Tim Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977347" start="16436" end="16449" title="Bruce Daniels" label="Bruce Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="16453" end="16456" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q742561" start="16470" end="16477" title="Infocom" label="Infocom"/>
<link wikidata="Q379981" start="16485" end="16498" title="Adventureland (video game)" label="Adventureland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260771" start="16515" end="16526" title="Scott Adams (game designer)" label="Scott Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686510" start="16530" end="16553" title="Adventure International" label="Adventure International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751498" start="16565" end="16578" title="Mystery House" label="Mystery House"/>
<link wikidata="Q494614" start="16623" end="16638" title="Sierra Entertainment" label="On-Line Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="16649" end="16659" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q379915" start="16677" end="16686" title="Adventure (1980 video game)" label="Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q343568" start="16826" end="16847" title="action-adventure game" label="action-adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043579" start="16911" end="16926" title="Carmen Sandiego (video game series)" label="Carmen Sandiego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140363" start="16943" end="16959" title="educational game" label="educational game"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="17529" end="17555" title="role-playing video game" label="computer role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569179" start="17611" end="17624" title="Glenn Wichman" label="Glenn Wichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140407" start="17692" end="17697" title="Rogue (video game)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143132" start="17757" end="17766" title="roguelike" label="roguelike"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="17873" end="17876" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="MUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="17912" end="17958" title="massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="massively multiplayer online role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616527" start="18081" end="18086" title="Xyzzy (computing)" label="Xyzzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204043" start="18114" end="18123" title="teleportation" label="teleports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083944" start="19136" end="19150" title="hacker culture" label="hacker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338287" start="19186" end="19216" title="snowclone" label="replaced with a different word"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553976" start="19644" end="19652" title="Get Lamp" label="Get Lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392377" start="19792" end="19811" title="Kentucky Route Zero" label="Kentucky Route Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072819" start="20050" end="20069" title="Halt and Catch Fire (TV series)" label="Halt and Catch Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553976" start="21241" end="21249" title="Get Lamp" label="Get Lamp"/>
</links>
</doc>
