<doc id="297853" wikidata="Q42876" url="?curid=297853" title="Flag of Italy">
<text>The flag of Italy (, ), often referred to as The Tricolour (, ), is a flag featuring three equally sized vertical pales of green, white and red, with the green at the hoist side, as defined by Article 12 of the Constitution of the Italian Republic. The Italian law regulates its use and display, protecting its defense and providing for the crime of insulting it; it also prescribes its teaching in Italian schools together with other national symbols of Italy.

The Italian Flag Day named Tricolour Day was established by law n. 671 of 31 December 1996, and is held every year on 7 January. This celebration commemorates the first official adoption of the tricolour as a national flag by a sovereign Italian state, the Cispadane Republic, a Napoleonic sister republic of Revolutionary France, which took place in Reggio Emilia on 7 January 1797, on the basis of the events following the French Revolution (1789–1799) which, among its ideals, advocated national self-determination. The Italian national colours appeared for the first time in Genoa on a tricolour cockade on 21 August 1789, anticipating by seven years the first green, white and red Italian military war flag, which was adopted by the Lombard Legion in Milan on 11 October 1796.

After 7 January 1797, popular support for the Italian flag grew steadily, until it became one of the most important symbols of Italian unification, which culminated on 17 March 1861 with the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy, of which the tricolour became the national flag. Following its adoption, the tricolour became one of the most recognisable and defining features of united Italian statehood in the following two centuries of the history of Italy.

== History ==
=== The French Revolution ===


The Italian tricolour, like other tricolour flags, is inspired by the French one, introduced by the revolution in 1790 on French Navy warships, and is symbolic of the renewal perpetrated by the origins of Jacobinism. Shortly after the French revolutionary events, the ideals of social innovation began to spread widely on the basis of the advocacy of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789, including in Italy, and subsequently political innovation with the first patriotic ferments addressed to the national self-determination that later led to the Italian unification on the Italian peninsula. For this reason, the French blue, white and red flag became the first reference of the Italian Jacobins and subsequently a source of inspiration for the creation of an Italian identity flag.

On 12 July 1789, two days before the storming of the Bastille, the revolutionary journalist Camille Desmoulins, while hailing the Parisian crowd to revolt, asked the protesters what colour to adopt as a symbol of the French Revolution, proposing green, a symbol of hope or the blue of the American Revolution, a symbol of freedom and democracy. The protesters replied &quot;The green! The green! We want green cockades!&quot; Desmoulins then seized a green leaf from the ground and pointed it to the hat as a distinctive sign of the revolutionaries. The green, in the primitive French cockade, was immediately abandoned in favour of blue and red, the ancient colours of Paris, because it was also the colour of the king&#x27;s brother, Count of Artois, who became monarch after the First Restoration with the name of Charles X of France. The French tricolour cockade was then completed on 17 July 1789 with the addition of white, the colour of the House of Bourbon, in deference to King Louis XVI of France, who still ruled despite the violent revolts that raged in the country; the French monarchy was abolished on 10 August 1792.
The first documented use of Italian national colours is dated 21 August 1789. In the historical archives of the Republic of Genoa it is reported that eyewitnesses had seen some demonstrators hanging a red, white and green cockade on their clothes. The Italian gazettes of the time had created confusion about the facts of French Revolution, especially on the replacement of green with blue, reporting that the French tricolour was green, white and red. When the correct information on the chromatic composition of the French tricolour arrived in Italy, the Italian Jacobins decided to keep green instead of blue, because it represented nature and therefore metaphorically, also natural rights, or social equality and freedom, both principles dear to them.

The red, white and green cockade then reappeared several years later on 13–14 November 1794 worn by a group of students of the University of Bologna, led by Luigi Zamboni and Giovanni Battista De Rolandis who attempted to plot a popular riot to topple the Catholic government of Bologna, a city which was part of the Papal States at the time. Zamboni and De Rolandis defined themselves as &quot;patriots&quot; and wore tricolour cockades to signal they were inspired by Jacobin revolutionary ideals, but modified them also to distinguish themselves from the French cockade.

The red, white and green cockade appeared, after the events of Bologna, during Napoleon&#x27;s entry into Milan, which took place on 15 May 1796. These cockades, having the typical circular shape, possessed red on the outside, green on an intermediate position, and white on the centre. These ornaments were worn by the rioters even during the religious ceremonies officiated inside the Milan Cathedral as thanks for the arrival of Napoleon, who was seen, at least initially, as a liberator. The tricolour cockades then became one of the official symbols of the Milanese National Guard, which was founded on 20 November 1796, and then spread elsewhere along the Italian peninsula. Later the green, white and red cockade spread to a greater extent, gradually becoming the only ornament used in Italy by the rioters. The patriots began to call it &quot;Italian cockade&quot; making it become one of the symbols of the country. The green, white and red tricolour thus acquired a strong patriotic value, becoming one of the symbols of national awareness, a change that gradually led it to enter the collective imagination of the Italians.

=== The Napoleonic era ===

The oldest documented mention of the Italian tricolour flag is linked to Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s first descent into the Italian peninsula. The first territory to be conquered by Napoleon was Piedmont; in the historical archive of the Piedmontese municipality of Cherasco is preserved a document attesting, on 13 May 1796, on the occasion of the Armistice of Cherasco between Napoleon and the Austro-Piedmontese troops, the first mention of the Italian tricolour, referring to municipal banners hoisted on three towers in the historic centre. On the document the term &quot;green&quot; was subsequently crossed and replaced by &quot;blue&quot;, the colour that forms – together with white and red – the French flag.

With the start of the first campaign in Italy, in many places the Jacobins of the Italian peninsula rose up, contributing, together with the Italian soldiers framed in the Napoleonic army, to the French victories. This renewal was accepted by the Italians despite being linked to the conveniences of Napoleonic France, which had strong imperialist tendencies because the new political situation was seen as better than the previous one. However, this double-threaded link with France was more acceptable than the previous centuries of absolutism.
On 11 October 1796, Napoleon communicated to the Directorate the birth of the Lombard Legion, a military unit constituted by the General Administration of Lombardy, a government that was headed by the Transpadane Republic (1796–1797). On this document, with reference to its war flag, which followed the French tricolour and which was proposed to Napoleon by the Milanese patriots, it is reported that this military unit would have had a red, white and green banner, colours formerly used by Milanese National Guard as well as on the cockades. In a ceremony at the Piazza del Duomo on 16 November 1796, a military flag was presented to the Lombard Legion. The Lombard Legion was therefore the first Italian military department to equip itself, as a banner, with a tricolour flag. The first official approval of the Italian flag by the authorities was therefore as a military insignia of the Lombard Legion and not yet as the national flag of a sovereign Italian state.

With the succession of Napoleon&#x27;s military victories and the consequent founding of republics favourable to revolutionary ideals, red, white and green were adopted on military banners as a symbol of social and political innovation in many Italian cities. On 19 June 1796, Bologna was occupied by Napoleon&#x27;s troops. On 18 October 1796, together with the establishment of the Italian Legion (the military banner of this military unit was composed of a red, white and green tricolour, probably inspired by the similar decision of the Lombard Legion), the wire Napoleonic congregation of magistrates, and deputies of Bologna, decided to create a civic banner of red, white and green, this time released from military use. Following the adoption by the Bolognese congregation, the Italian flag became a political symbol of the struggle for the independence of Italy from foreign powers, supported by its use also in the civil sphere.

The first red, white and green national flag of a sovereign Italian state was adopted on 7 January 1797, when the Fourteenth Parliament of the Cispadane Republic (1797), on the proposal of deputy Giuseppe Compagnoni, decreed &quot;to make universal the ... standard or flag of three colours, green, white, and red ...&quot;: 


For having proposed the green, white and red tricolour flag, Giuseppe Compagnoni is considered the &quot;father of the Italian flag&quot;. The congress decision to adopt a green, white and red tricolour flag was then greeted by a jubilant atmosphere, such was the enthusiasm of the delegates, and by a peal of applause. The adoption of the Italian flag by a sovereign Italian state, the Cispadane Republic, was inspired by this Bolognese banner, linked to a municipal reality and therefore still having a purely local scope, and to the previous military banners of the Lombard Legion and Italian Legion. In particular, the Italian Legion was formed by soldiers coming from Emilia and Romagna. The flag of the Cispadane Republic was a horizontal square with red uppermost and, at the heart of the white fess, an emblem composed of a garland of laurel decorated with a trophy of arms and four arrows, representing the four provinces that formed the Republic. In France, due to the Revolution, the flag went from having a &quot;dynastic&quot; and &quot;military&quot; meaning to a &quot;national&quot; one, and this concept, still unknown in Italy, was transmitted by the French to the Italians.
The Cispadane Republic and the Transpadane Republic merged in 1797 into the Cisalpine Republic (1797–1802) and adopted the vertical square tricolour without badge in 1798. Originally the colours of the flag of the Cisalpine Republic were arranged horizontally, with green at the top, but on 11 May 1798, the Grand Council of the newborn State chose, as the national banner, an Italian tricolour with the colours arranged vertically. At the formal celebration of the birth in the new republic, which took place on 9 July in Milan, 300,000 people took part, including ordinary citizens, French soldiers and representatives of the major municipalities of the republic. The event was characterised by a riot of tricolour flags and cockades. On this occasion, Napoleon solemnly gave to the military units of the newborn republic, after having reviewed them, their tricolour banners.

The flag of the Cisalpine Republic was maintained until 1802, when it was renamed the Napoleonic Italian Republic (1802–1805), and a new flag was adopted, this time with a red field carrying a green square within a white lozenge; the presidential standard of Italy in use since 14 October 2000 was inspired by this flag.

It was during this period that the green, white and red tricolour predominantly penetrated the collective imagination of the Italians, becoming an unequivocal symbol of Italianness. In less than 20 years, the red, white and green flag had acquired its own peculiarity from a simple flag derived from the French one, becoming very famous and known.

In 1799, the independent Republic of Lucca came under French influence and horizontally adopted the vertical green, white and red flag, with green at the top; this lasted until 1801. In 1805, Napoleon installed his sister, Elisa Bonaparte Baciocchi, as Princess of Lucca and Piombino. This affair is commemorated in the opening of Leo Tolstoy&#x27;s &quot;War and Peace&quot;.

In the same year, after Napoleon had crowned himself as the first French Emperor, the Italian Republic was transformed into the first Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy (1805–1814), or &quot;Italico&quot;, under his direct rule. The flag of the Kingdom of Italy was that of the Republic in rectangular form, charged with the golden Napoleonic eagle. This remained in use until the fall of Napoleon in 1814.

=== Italian unification ===
==== The revolutions of the 19th century ====

With the fall of Napoleon and the restoration of the absolutist monarchical regimes, the Italian tricolour went underground, becoming the symbol of the patriotic ferments that began to spread in Italy and the symbol which united all the efforts of the Italian people towards freedom and independence. In the Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia, a state dependent on the Austrian Empire born after the fall of Napoleon, those who exhibited the Italian tricolour were subject to the death penalty. The Austrians&#x27; objective was in fact, quoting the textual words of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria:

Between 1820 and 1861, a sequence of events led to the independence and unification of Italy (except for Veneto and the province of Mantua, Lazio, Trentino-Alto Adige and Julian March, known as &quot;Italia irredenta&quot;, which were united with the rest of Italy in 1866 after the Third Italian War of Independence, in 1870 after the capture of Rome, and in 1918 after World War I respectively); this period of Italian history is known as the &quot;Risorgimento&quot;. The Italian tricolour waved for the first time in the history of the &quot;Risorgimento&quot; on 11 March 1821 in the Cittadella of Alessandria, during the revolutions of the 1820s, after the oblivion caused by the restoration of the absolutist monarchical regimes. 
The green, white and red flag reappeared during the revolutions of 1830, mainly due to Ciro Menotti, the patriot who started the rebellion in Italy. Menotti, in particular, argued that the best form of state for a united Italy was the monarchy with a sovereign chosen by a national congress. The main points of this idea were Rome as the capital of Italy and the tricolour flag as a national banner. On 5 February 1831, during the Forlì uprisings, the patriot Teresa Cattani wrapped herself in the tricolour flag during the assault on the building that was the seat of the Legation of Romagna, challenging the shots of the papal soldiers.

In 1831, the tricolour was chosen by Giuseppe Mazzini as the emblem of Young Italy. An original flag of Young Italy is kept at the Museum of the Risorgimento and Mazzinian institute in Genoa. From 1833 to 1834, the symbolism of the tricolour spread more and more along the Italian peninsula, starting from northern and central Italy. Mazzini, regarding the reason why the Italian patriots had participated in the uprisings of 1830–1831, said:

The Italian flag also spread among political exiles, becoming the symbol of the struggle for independence and the claim to have more liberal constitutions. In 1834 the tricolour was adopted by the rioters who tried to invade Savoy, while the tricolour flag of Young Italy was brought to South America in 1835 by Giuseppe Garibaldi during his exile.
The Italian flag was also waved during the uprisings of 1837 in Sicily, of 1841 in Abruzzo and of 1843 in Romagna. In 1844, a tricolour of Young Italy accompanied the Bandiera brothers in their failed attempt to raise the population of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. The patriots following the two brothers wore a uniform consisting of a blue and green shirt, white trousers, red handguards, a red and green collar, a red leather belt and a cap with an Italian tricolour cockade pinned.

Italian tricolours waved, challenging the authorities, who had decreed the ban, also on the occasion of the commemoration of the revolt of the Genoese quarter of Portoria against the Habsburg occupiers during the War of the Austrian Succession. During this event, which took place on 10 December 1847 in Genoa at the square of the &quot;santuario della Nostra Signora di Loreto&quot; of the Genoese district of Oregina, by Goffredo Mameli and Michele Novaro played for the first time in history; it would become the Italian national anthem from 1946. , in a verse, quotes the Italian flag:

These verses, which can be read in the second verse, recall the hope that Italy, still divided into the pre-unification states, would be united in a single nation, gathering under a single flag. Starting from this period the strawberry tree plant began to be considered a national symbol of Italy due to the green leaves, white flowers and red berries, which recall the colours of the Italian flag. The strawberry tree is the national tree of Italy.
The Italian flag was a symbol of the revolutions of 1848. In March 1848, the Five Days of Milan, an armed insurrection which led to the temporary liberation of the city from Austrian rule, were characterised by a profusion of flags and tricolour cockades. On 20 March, during furious fighting, with the Austrians barricaded in the Castello Sforzesco and within the defensive systems of the city walls, the patriots Luigi Torelli and Scipione Bagaggia managed to climb on the roof of the Milan Cathedral and hoist the Italian flag on the highest spire of the church, the one on which the &quot;Madonnina&quot; stands. At the moment of the appearance of the tricolour on the spire of the &quot;Madonnina&quot;, the crowd below greeted the event with a series of enthusiastic &quot;Hurray!&quot; This historic flag is kept inside the Museum of the Risorgimento in Milan. The patriot Luciano Manara then managed to hoist the tricolour, amidst the Austrian artillery shots, on the top of Porta Tosa. The abandonment of the city by the Austrian troops of field marshal Josef Radetzky, on 22 March, determined the immediate establishment of the provisional government of Milan chaired by the podestà Gabrio Casati, who issued a proclamation that read:

The process of transforming the flag of Italy into one of the Italian national symbols was completed, definitively consolidating itself, during the Milanese uprisings.
The following day King Charles Albert of Piedmont-Sardinia assured the provisional government of Milan that his troops, ready to come to his aid by starting the First Italian War of Independence, would use a tricolour defaced with the Savoyan coat of arms superimposed on the white as a war flag. In his proclamation to the Lombard–Venetian people, Charles Albert said:

As the arms, blazoned &quot;gules a cross argent&quot;, mixed with the white of the flag, it was &quot;fimbriated azure&quot;, blue being the dynastic colour, although this does not conform to the heraldic rule of tincture. The rectangular civil and state variants were adopted in 1851.

A makeshift tricolour consisting of redshirts, green displays and a white sheet was hoisted on the flagpole of the ship that brought Giuseppe Garibaldi back to Italy from South America shortly after the outbreak of the First Italian War of Independence. The patriots who had gathered at the port of Genoa to welcome her return gave Anita Garibaldi, in front of 3,000 people, a tricolour to be given to Giuseppe Garibaldi so that he could plant it on Lombard soil.

The Grand Duchy of Tuscany in the act of granting the constitution (17 February 1848) did not change the national banner (&quot;The State retains its flag and its colours&quot;) but later granted the Tuscan militias, by decree, the use of a tricolour scarf next to the symbols of the Grand Duchy (25 March 1848). The Grand Duke, following the pressure of the Tuscan patriots, then adopted the tricolour flag also as a state banner and as a military banner for the troops sent to help Charles Albert of Piedmont-Sardinia. Similar measures were adopted by the Duchy of Parma and Piacenza and by the Duchy of Modena and Reggio.
The flag of the Constitutional Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, a white field charged with the coats of arms of Castile, Leon, Aragon, Two Sicilies, and Granada, was modified by Ferdinand II through the addition of a red and green border. This flag lasted from 3 April 1848 until 19 May 1849. The Provisional Government of Sicily, which lasted from 12 January 1848 to 15 May 1849 during the Sicilian Revolution, adopted the Italian tricolour, defaced with the trinacria, or triskelion.

The Republic of San Marco, proclaimed independent in 1848 by the Austrian Empire, also adopted the tricolour. The flags that they adopted marked the link to Italian independence and unification efforts. The former, the Italian tricolour undefaced, and the latter, charged with the winged lion of St. Mark, from the flag of the Republic of Venice (maritime republic which existed from 697 AD until 1797 AD), on a white canton. A chronicler of the time described the final moments of the subsequent capitulation of the Republic of San Marco by the Austrian troops, which took place on 22 August 1849:

The tricolour flag of 1848 that greeted the expulsion of the Austrians from Venice is kept in the Museum of the Risorgimento and the Venetian 19th century.
In 1849, the Roman Republic, formed following the revolt against the Papal State that dethroned the Pope, adopted as its national banner a green, white and red flag with a republican Roman eagle at the tip of the pole. This lasted for four months, while the Papal States of the Church was in abeyance. The Roman Republic resisted until 4 July 1849, when it was capitulated by the French Army. The troops from beyond the Alps, as a last act, entered the municipality of Rome where the last members of the republican assembly not yet captured were barricaded. Their secretary Quirico Filopanti surrendered wearing a tricolour scarf.

The tricolour also flew over the barricades of the Ten Days of Brescia, a revolt of the citizens of the Lombard city against the Austrian Empire, and in many other centres such as Varese, Gallarate, Como, Melegnano, Cremona, Monza, Udine, Trento, Verona, Rovigo, Vicenza, Belluno and Padua. This spread throughout the Italian peninsula and demonstrated that the tricolour flag had by then assumed a consolidated symbolism valid throughout the national territory. The iconography of the Italian flag then began to spread not only in the vexillological and military fields, but also in some everyday objects such as scarves and clothing fabrics.

This turning point lasted until the failure of revolutions and the end of the First Italian War of Independence (1849), which ended with the defeat of the Piedmont-Sardinian Army of Charles Albert; after this, the ancient flags were restored. Only the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia confirmed the Italian tricolour as the national flag of the state even after the First Italian War of Independence ended. After the defeat in the First Italian War of Independence in 1849, Charles Albert abdicated in favour of his son Victor Emmanuel II.

==== From the unification of Italy to the World War I ====
On 14 April 1855, before the departure for the Crimean War, the Italian tricolour flags were solemnly entrusted to the soldiers of the Sardinian Expeditionary Corps in the Crimean War by King Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont-Sardinia with the following farewell sentence:

One of the Italian flags that participated in the Crimean War is kept in the Royal Armoury of Turin. In 1857, an Italian flag with the pole surmounted by a Phrygian cap and with an archipendulum, a symbol of social balance, was a symbol of the Sapri expedition, or rather the failed attempt to trigger a revolt in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies perpetrated by Carlo Pisacane. In order not to be captured, Pisacane committed suicide, and was reported to be bandaged with the tricolour flag.

On 10 January 1859, King Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont-Sardinia, in front of the members of parliament, announced the imminent entry into war of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia against the Austrian Empire:


When the Second Italian War of Independence (1859) broke out, volunteers from all over Italy were enrolled in the Piedmont-Sardinian army.

During the Second Italian War of Independence the cities that were gradually conquered by Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont-Sardinia and Napoleon III of France greeted the two sovereigns as liberators in a riot of flags and tricolour cockades; even the centres about to ask for annexation to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia through plebiscites underlined their desire to be part of a united Italy with the waving of the tricolour. The Italian flag waved in Lombardy, annexed following the victory of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia in the Second Italian War of Independence, as well as in Tuscany, Emilia, Marche and Umbria, annexed in the following year to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia through plebiscites, but also in cities that would have had to wait some time before being annexed, such as Rome and Naples.

The enthusiasm of the population toward the tricolour grew in addition to the army of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia and the troops of volunteers who participated in the Second Italian War of Independence, the green, white and red flag spread widely available in newly conquered or annexed regions by plebiscites, appearing on house windows, in shop windows and in public places such as hotels and taverns.

The tricolour was also the flag of the United Provinces of Central Italy, a short-lived military government established by the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia that was formed by a union of the former Grand Duchy of Tuscany, Duchy of Parma, Duchy of Modena, and the Papal Legations, after their monarchs were ousted by popular revolutions. The United Provinces of Central Italy existed from 1859 to 1860, when they were annexed to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia.
The tricolour accompanied, although not officially, also the volunteers of the Expedition of the Thousand (1860–1861) led by Giuseppe Garibaldi, whose goal was to conquer the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Garibaldi, in particular, had an absolute deference and respect for the Italian flag. Shortly after the loss of Sicily, on 25 June 1860, trying to limit the damage given the growing participation of the population in the Expedition of the Thousand, King Francis II of the Two Sicilies, decreed that the green, white and red flag was also the official banner of his Kingdom, with the House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies coat of arms superimposed on the white. Adopted on 21 June 1860, this lasted until 17 March 1861, when the Two Sicilies was incorporated into the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, after its defeat in the Expedition of the Thousand. Ironically, in the final phase of the Expedition of the Thousand, the tricolour of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies fluttered in antagonism to the tricolour flag of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia. Two of the original tricolours that flew on the &quot;Lombardo&quot; steamship that participated, together with &quot;Piedmont&quot;, in the Expedition of the Thousand, are preserved, respectively, inside the Central Museum of the Risorgimento at the Vittoriano in Rome and the Museum of the Risorgimento in Palermo.
On 17 March 1861, there was the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy, a formal act that sanctioned, with a normative act of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, the birth of the unified Kingdom of Italy. On 15 April 1861, the flag of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia was declared the flag of the newly formed Kingdom of Italy. The tricolour therefore continued to be the national flag also of the new State, although not officially recognised by a specific law, but regulated with regard to the shape of military banners. This Italian tricolour, with the armorial bearings of the former Royal House of Savoy, was the first national flag and lasted in that form for 85 years until the birth of the Italian Republic in 1946.
The &quot;tricolore&quot; had a universal, transversal meaning, shared by both monarchists and republicans, progressives and conservatives and Guelphs as well as by the Ghibellines. The tricolour was chosen as the flag of a united Italy also for this reason. After the Unification of Italy, the use of the tricolour became increasingly widespread among the population as the flag and its colours began to appear on the labels of commercial products, school notebooks, the first cars and cigar packages. Even among the aristocrats it was successful; the most important families often had a flag bearer installed on the main façade of their mansions where they placed the Italian tricolour. It then began to appear outside public buildings, schools, judicial offices and post offices. During this period, tricolour bands were introduced for mayors and the jurors of the assize court during this period.

Following the Third Italian War of Independence in 1866, Veneto and Friuli were annexed to the Kingdom of Italy; the entry of the Italian Army troops into Venice, which took place on 19 October 1866, was greeted by a profusion of tricolour flags. Since the promulgation of a resolution of its municipal council, dated 5 November 1866, Vicenza is the only city in Italy to have adopted the tricolour flag as its own gonfalon, instead of the civic banner, loaded with the coat of arms of the municipality. The Venetian city decided to patriotically change the nature of its sign shortly before the visit of King Victor Emmanuel II, who arrived in the city for the awarding of the Gold Medal of Military Valour earned by the Venetian municipality with the battle of Monte Berico, fought on 10 June 1848 in the outskirts of the city. The occasion of the Sovereign&#x27;s visit, Vicenza presented Victor Emmanuel II not with his own banner but, a decision from which his subsequent resolution was to originate, the Italian tricolour.
During the battle of Custoza (24 June 1866), part of the Third Italian War of Independence, near Oliosi, today part of the municipality of Castelnuovo del Garda, the soldiers of the 44th regiment of the &quot;Forlì&quot; brigade saved the tricolour war flag from the capture of the Austro-Hungarian Army. In order not to hand over their military banner to the enemy, they tore the drape of the tricolour flag into 13 pieces, divided among those present, and hid those shreds of cloth under the jacket. After the war it was possible to recover 11 of the 13 portions of the cloth and thus reconstruct the flag, named &quot;Tricolore di Oliosi&quot;. Every year, on the third Sunday in June, the remembrance of the war episode is celebrated in Oliosi. At the military parade on 2 June 2011, held in via dei Fori Imperiali in Rome on the occasion of the celebrations for the 150th anniversary of the unification of Italy, the &quot;Tricolore di Oliosi&quot; was paraded on a cannon carriage along with five other historic Italian flags.

Massimo d&#x27;Azeglio was among the first to recognize the importance of the tricolour flag as a tool for forming a widespread national awareness. In this regard he declared: &quot;The flag is a privileged symbol in the pedagogy of a nation&quot;. Tricolour flags then greeted the Italian Army during the march toward Rome, which ended with the capture of Rome on 20 September 1870, and the annexation of Lazio to the Kingdom of Italy. Rome officially became the capital of Italy on 1 January 1871, while the establishment of the royal court and the Savoy government took place on 6 July of the same year. From this date, the Italian flag flies from the highest flagpole of the Quirinal Palace.
The first Italian colony was founded in 1882, the Assab bay, which became the first outpost of the future Italian Eritrea, where the flag of Italy waved in an Italian colony for the first time. Subsequently, the tricolour also waved in the Italian Somaliland, in the Italian Libya, in the Italian concession of Tientsin and in the Italian Islands of the Aegean.

In 1897, the Italian flag had its 100th anniversary. The centennial celebration in Reggio Emilia, where the tricolour was created on 7 January 100 years earlier, Giosuè Carducci, who later became the first Italian to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1906, defined the flag as &quot;blessed&quot; and kissed it at the end of the speech.
Around 1880 began large waves of Italian diaspora, especially towards the Americans. The tricolour, often carried in the suitcases of migrants, began to wave outside the national borders, especially in the Little Italies that were forming around the world. This bond with the land of origin did not fade with the passing of generations—often still alive in the third or fourth generation. Several years earlier in 1861, U.S. president Abraham Lincoln reviewed some military units that were participating in the American Civil War—among them was a Garibaldi Guard, made up of Italian immigrants, which had as its military banner the tricolour flag.

In 1885, the tricolour jersey was introduced for the cyclist who won the title of champion of Italy. Conceptually, this recognition is similar to the placement of a tricolour shield, the &quot;scudetto&quot;, on the jerseys of the team champion of Italy in football, rugby, volleyball and basketball. The idea of affixing a &quot;scudetto&quot; on the shirts of the winning sports teams of the respective national championships was Gabriele D&#x27;Annunzio. In football, the first sport to use it, it was introduced in 1924.

In 1889, in the culinary field, the pizza Margherita was invented, named in honour of Queen Margherita of Savoy, whose main ingredients recall the tricolour flag. Green for the basil, white for the mozzarella and red for the tomato sauce. With the first trade union struggles at the end of the 19th century, the Italian flag began to wave in the hands of the demonstrators during strikes. Even during the struggles perpetrated by the Fasci Siciliani between 1892 and 1894 there was a profusion of Italian flag. They were contrasted by the tricolours of the police sent by the government to quell the trade union revolts. On 25 April 1900, the Italian flag flew in the Franz Josef Land, an archipelago located north of the Russian Empire between the Arctic Ocean and the Kara Sea, an expedition organized in the arctic areas led by explorer Umberto Cagni.

On 29 July 1900, King Umberto I of Italy, who succeeded his father Victor Emmanuel II in 1878, was assassinated in Monza at a public ceremony with the streets flagged with tricolours. The king was shot four times by the Italian-American anarchist Gaetano Bresci. Bresci claimed he wanted to avenge the people killed in Milan during the suppression of the riots of May 1898. Umberto I was succeeded by his son Victor Emmanuel III of Italy.

=== The two world wars and the interwar period ===
Italy entered World War I in 1915 with the aim of completing national unity, and for this reason, the Italian intervention in World War I is also considered the Fourth Italian War of Independence in a historiographical perspective that identifies in the latter the conclusion of the unification of Italy, whose military actions began during the revolutions of 1848 with the First Italian War of Independence. King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy, the day the Kingdom of Italy entered the war, appeared from the balcony of the Quirinal Palace while waving the tricolour shouting &quot;Long live Italy&quot;. Victor Emmanuel III then made an official proclamation shortly before leaving for the Italian war front, which read, in its final part:

The tricolour flag was a symbol in both the trenches and in the civil sphere. The colours green, white and red were widely used as a stimulus to the general mobilization and moral sustenance of the civilian population, which was climbing a path that would have led to a very difficult situation, characterized by many deprivations. In the trenches, the tricolour was a fundamental symbol to spur the soldiers, while on the home front it was important for compacting and strengthening civil society.
During the flight over Vienna, on 9 August 1918 aerial flyer Gabriele D&#x27;Annunzio launched the tricolour leaflet over Vienna with which he exhorted the enemy to surrender and end the war. The Italian troops then entered Trieste in November 1918 following the victory in the battle of Vittorio Veneto, which ended the conflict with the retreat and the definitive defeat of the Austrians. The War Bulletin No. 1267 of 3 November 1918 by General Armando Diaz announced the &quot;Bollettino della Vittoria&quot; and the &quot;Bollettino della Vittoria Navale&quot; by few days, read:

After World War I, the Italian flag was also a symbol of the &quot;Impresa di Fiume&quot;, led by D&#x27;Annunzio, and a consequence of the so-called &quot;mutilated victory&quot;, a term used to describe the dissatisfaction concerning territorial rewards in favour of Italy at the end of World War I, shouted: &quot;raise the flag: wave the tricolour!&quot; During the Italian Regency of Carnaro (1919–1920), a state entity that administered the city of Fiume, now part of modern-day Croatia, D&#x27;Annunzio defined the Italian flag &quot;the garment of the eternal nation&quot; and urged the Italians to rebel against those responsible for the defeat of Caporetto by waving the &quot;tricolour across the sky&quot;.

In particular, Italy, as a peace agreement at the conclusion of World War I, signed the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919) and the Treaty of Rapallo (1920), which allowed the annexation of Trentino Alto-Adige, Julian March, Istria, Kvarner, with the cities of Trieste, Trento, Gorizia, Pola, as well as the Dalmatian city of Zara. The subsequent Treaty of Rome (1924) led to the annexation of the city of Fiume to Italy.

The coffin of the Italian Unknown Soldier was placed on the gun carriage of a cannon and wrapped in a tricolour flag during its journey from the Basilica di Santa Maria Assunta, Aquileia to the Altare della Patria in Rome, which took place in 1921 on a railway hearse. This historic flag is kept inside the Central Museum of the Risorgimento at the Vittoriano in Rome.
With the March on Rome in 1922, and the establishment of the fascist dictatorship, the Italian flag lost its symbolic uniqueness partly obscured by the iconography of the regime. When it was used, as the symbol of the National Fascist Party, its history was distorted, given that the tricolour was born as a symbol of freedom and civil rights. Despite this supporting role, with the royal decree nº 2072 of 24 September 1923 and subsequently with the law nº2264 of 24 December 1925, the tricolour officially became the national flag of the Kingdom of Italy. On 31 January 1923, the salute to the flag by the students of Italian schools was instituted by the Ministry of Public Education whereby every Saturday morning, at the end of the lesson, the students paid homage to the flag with the Roman salute and with the performance of patriotic musical pieces.

In 1926, the Fascist regime attempted to have the Italian national flag redesigned by having the fasces, the symbol used by the Fascist movement, included on the flag. However, this attempt by the Fascist government to change the Italian flag to incorporate the fasces was stopped by strong opposition to the proposal by Italian monarchists. Afterwards, the Fascist government raised the national tricolour flag along with a Fascist black flag in public ceremonies.
In 1926, an Italian flag was first brought to the North Pole by the Norge airship during the expedition led by Umberto Nobile and Roald Amundsen; the tricolours then greeted Italo Balbo in his oceanic seaplane crossings.

The Azione Cattolica, which made the Italian flag its banner in 1931, grouped the children of its organization dedicated to children into three categories, which were based on age group and colours of the Italian flag: &quot;green flames&quot;, &quot;white flames&quot; and &quot;red flames&quot;. In August 1933, the Italian ocean liner SS Rex, which had just won the Blue Riband, arrived in New York City setting the record for Atlantic Ocean crossing in the shortest time (four days) was greeted by the waving of tricolour flags.

Trains covered with tricolour flags carried the settlers to the new cities founded after the reclamation of the Pontine Marshes, while on 5 May 1936 there was the solemn flag-raising in Addis Ababa, Italian Ethiopia, which greeted the founding of the Italian Empire. The flag in Addis Ababa was then lowered in November 1941 at the end of the East African campaign, which was fought during World War II.
Italy entered World War II on 10 June 1940 with the speech by Benito Mussolini delivered from the main balcony of Palazzo Venezia in Rome; the climate, however, was very different from that which characterized Italy&#x27;s entry into World War I. The king did not appear on the balcony of the Quirinal Palace waving the flag as he did in 1915.

During World War II, the Italian flag came back strongly after the Armistice of Cassibile of 8 September 1943, where it was taken as a symbol by the two sides who faced each other in the Italian Civil War in an attempt to recall the unification of Italy and its cultural tradition. In particular, it was used by the partisans as a symbol of the struggle against tyrants and emblem of the dream of a free Italy. Even the communist partisan brigades, which had the red flag as the official banner, often waved the Italian flag.

Tricolour flags were also the official banners of the Italian Partisan Republics and of the National Liberation Committee, as well as their antagonists, the Republicans in an attempt to recall the period of the unification of Italy and its cultural background. The national flag of the short-lived Fascist state in northern Italy, the Italian Social Republic (1943–1945), or &quot;Republic of Salò&quot; as it was commonly known, was identical to the flag of the modern Italian Republic, as both republics used the previous flag of the Kingdom of Italy with the coat of arms of Savoy removed.

This flag was somewhat rarely seen, however, while the war flag, charged with a silver/black eagle clutching horizontally placed &quot;fascio littorio&quot; (literally, bundles of the lictors), was very common in propaganda. Italian fascism derived its name from the fasces, which symbolised &quot;imperium&quot;, or power and authority, in ancient Rome. Roman legions had carried the &quot;aquila&quot;, or eagle, as &quot;signa militaria&quot;.

The Italian tricolour was also used for propaganda. The Italian Social Republic, for example, used it on a poster depicting Goffredo Mameli, the author of the lyrics of , the national anthem of Italy from 1946, with an unsheathed sword and a tricolour behind him while he launches towards an assault. This poster bears the words &quot;Brothers of Italy / Italy has woken!&quot; and &quot;1849–1944 The spirit of Goffredo Mameli/Defend the Social Republic&quot;.
On 25 April 1945, the government of Mussolini fell. This event is commemorated by Liberation Day. With the liberation, the tricolour appeared in public places such as the towers of town halls, on bell towers of churches, and in factories. Remembering these events, Francesco Cossiga, at the time president of the Senate of the Republic, in a speech delivered on 28 June 1984, said:

In the eastern Italian territories occupied by the Yugoslav partisan militias, the Italian flag was used with a red star in the centre as a model of the flag used by the partisan Garibaldi Brigades initially in the city of Fiume in 1943, then extended to all the territories where the Italian ethnic minority (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians) resided. Having entered Yugoslavia, this flag remained official until 1992, when it was officially replaced by the flag adopted by the Italian state.

Following the defeat of Italy in World War II and the Paris Treaties of 1947, Istria, Kvarner and most of Julian March, with the cities of Pola, Fiume and Zara, passed to Yugoslavia, and after the latter&#x27;s dissolution, to Croatia, causing the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus which led to the emigration of between 230,000 and 350,000 of local ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians), the others being ethnic Slovenians, ethnic Croatians, and ethnic Istro-Romanians, choosing to maintain Italian citizenship. After World War II, Gorizia was divided in two: one part remained with Italy while the other, which was renamed &quot;Nova Gorica&quot;, passed first to Yugoslavia and then to Slovenia.

=== Italian Republic ===

On 13 June 1946, the Italian Republic was officially founded and the last king of Italy Umberto II, who succeeded his father Victor Emmanuel III on 9 May 1946, left the country on 13 June into exile. On the same day, the tricolour with the Savoy coat of arms in the centre was lowered from the Quirinal Palace. The Italian flag was modified with the decree of the president of the Council of Ministers No. 1 of 19 June 1946. Compared to the monarchic banner, the Savoy coat of arms was eliminated. This decision was later confirmed in the session of 24 March 1947 by the Constituent Assembly, which decreed the insertion of article 12 of the Italian Constitution, subsequently ratified by the Italian Parliament, which states:

The members of the Constituent Assembly were deeply moved when they approved this article, and as a sign of joy and respect, stood up and applauded at length shortly after the approval. Shortly before the officialisation of the flag in the constitution, on 7 January 1947, the tricolour turned 150. The role of master of ceremonies that belonged to Giosuè Carducci 50 years earlier was assumed by Luigi Salvatorelli, whose speech, uttered during the Reggio Emilia official celebrations in the presence of Enrico De Nicola, Provisional Head of State, alluded to the delicate phase that post-war Italy was going through with particular reference to the humiliations suffered by the country in World War II: 

The Republican tricolour was then officially and solemnly delivered to the Italian military corps on 4 November 1947 on the occasion of National Unity and Armed Forces Day. The universally adopted ratio is 2:3, while the war flag is squared (1:1). Each &quot;comune&quot; also has a &quot;gonfalone&quot; bearing its coat of arms. On 27 May 1949, a law was passed that described and regulated the way the flag was displayed outside public buildings and during national holidays.

During the republican era, the tricolour greeted important events in Italian history. The flag was hoisted at the top of K2 during the Italian expedition in 1954 that led Achille Compagnoni and Lino Lacedelli to be the first people to reach the summit of this mountain—the second highest in the world after Mount Everest, and was brought in 2011 to the International Space Station by astronaut Roberto Vittori on the occasion of the 150th anniversary of the unification of Italy. A profusion of Italian flags greeted the return of Trieste to Italy in 1954, which took place following the agreements signed between the governments of Italy, the United Kingdom, the United States and Yugoslavia concerning the status of the Free Territory of Trieste, an independent territory situated between northern Italy and Yugoslavia. The territory, under the direct responsibility of the United Nations Security Council in the aftermath of World War II, established on 10 February 1947 by a protocol of the Treaty of Peace with Italy.

The Italian naval ensign comprises the national flag defaced with the arms of the Italian Navy; the mercantile marine (and private citizens at sea) use the civil ensign, differenced by the absence of the mural crown and the lion holding open the gospel, bearing the inscription, instead of a sword. The shield is quartered, symbolic of the four great thalassocracies of Italy, the &quot;repubbliche marinare&quot; of Venice (represented by the lion &quot;passant&quot;, top left), Genoa (top right), Amalfi (bottom left), and Pisa (represented by their respective crosses); the &quot;rostrata&quot; crown was proposed by Admiral Cavagnari in 1939 to acknowledge the Navy&#x27;s origins in ancient Rome.

The tricolour flag was the official banner of the Italian Trust Administration of Somalia (1950–1960), which was granted on a UN mandate, and which was the first peacekeeping mission of the Italian Army. The tricolour continues to represent Italy in all peacekeeping missions in which the Italian Armed Forces participate.
In 1997, on its bicentenary, 7 January was declared Tricolour Day; it is intended as a celebration, though not a public holiday. On 31 December 1996, with the same law that established the Tricolour Day, a celebration held on 7 January of each year in memory of the adoption of the red, white and green flag by the Cispadane Republic (7 January 1797), established a national committee of 20 members that would have the objective of organising the first solemn commemoration of the birth of the Italian flag.

Among the events celebrating the bicentenary of the Italian flag, was the longest tricolour in history, which also entered the &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; at long, wide and had an area of , and paraded in Rome from the Colosseum to the Capitoline Hill.

During the celebrations for the 140 years of national unity, on 4 November 2001, in San Martino della Battaglia, during the National Unity and Armed Forces Day, in reference to the tricolour, the former president of the Italian Republic, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, said:

In 2003, a state ensign was created specifically for non-military vessels engaged in non-commercial government service whereby the Italian tricolour is defaced with the national coat of arms. Since 1914, the Italian Air Force have also used a roundel of concentric rings in the colours of the tricolour as aircraft marking, substituted, from 1923 to 1943, by encircled fasces. The , officially known as the 313º Gruppo Addestramento Acrobatico, is its aerobatic demonstration team.

The law n. 222 of 23 November 2012, concerning &quot;Rules on the acquisition of knowledge and skills in the field of&quot; Citizenship and Constitution &quot;and on the teaching of the Mameli hymn in schools&quot;, prescribes the study in schools of the Italian flag and other national symbols of Italy.

==Historical evolution of the flag==

== Description ==
===Colours===
The colours of the Italian flag are indicated in article 12 of the Constitution of the Italian Republic, published in the &quot;Gazzetta Ufficiale&quot; No. 298, extraordinary edition, of 27 December 1947, and came into force on 1 January 1948:
* green;
* white;
* red.

If the flag is exposed horizontally, the green part should be placed at the hoist side, with the white one in a central position and the red one outside, while if the banner is exposed vertically the green section should be placed above.

===Chromatic definition===

The need to precisely define the colours was born from an event that happened at the Justus Lipsius building, seat of the Council of the European Union, of the European Council and of their Secretariat, when an Italian MEP, in 2002, noticed that the colours of the Italian flag were unrecognizable with red, for example, which had a shade that turned towards orange. For this reason the government, following the report of this MEP, decided to specifically define the colours of the Italian national flag.

The shades of green, white and red were first specified by these official documents:
* circulaire of the Undersecretary of State for the Presidency of the Council of Ministers of 18 September 2002;
* circulaire by the State Secretary for the Presidency of the Council of Ministers of 17 January 2003;
** 

New documents then replaced the previous ones:
* circulaire of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers No. EU 3.3.1 / 14545/1 of 2 June 2004;
* decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 14 April 2006, &quot;General provisions relating to ceremonial and precedence among public offices&quot;
** 

The chromatic tones of the three colours, on polyester stamina, are enshrined in paragraph 1 of article n. 31 &quot;Colour definition of the colours of the flag of the Republic&quot;, of Section V &quot;Flag of Republic, National Anthem, National Feasts and State Funeral&quot;, of Chapter II &quot;General provisions relating to ceremonial&quot;, of the annex &quot;Presidency of the Council of Ministers – State Ceremonial Department&quot;, to the decree of the president of the Council of Ministers of 14 April 2006 &quot;General provisions on ceremonial and precedence between public offices&quot;, published in the &quot;Gazzetta Ufficiale&quot; No. 174 of 28 July 2006.

== Other official flags ==
=== Presidential and other standards ===
The president of the Italian Republic has an official standard. The current version is based on the square flag of the Napoleonic Italian Republic, on a field of blue, charged with the emblem of Italy in gold. The square shape with a Savoy blue border symbolise the four Italian Armed Forces, namely the Italian Air Force, the Carabinieri, the Italian Army and the Italian Navy, of which the president is the commander. Blue in heraldry also metaphorically symbolizes command.

The first version of the standard, adopted in 1965 and used until 1990 was very similar to the current version only without the red, white and green. The emblem was also much larger. This version of the standard was replaced in 1990 by then President Francesco Cossiga. Cossiga&#x27;s new version of the standard contained the same royal blue background but now with a squared Italian national flag in the centre and no emblem. This version was short lived however as only two years later it was replaced by the 1965 standard, only with a smaller emblem. This version lasted until 2000 from when it was replaced by the current version.

After the Republic was proclaimed, the national flag was provisionally adopted as the head of state in place of the royal standard. On the initiative of the Ministry of Defence, a project was prepared in 1965 to adopt a distinct flag. Opportunity suggested the most natural solution was the Italian tricolour defaced with the coat of arms; however, under conditions of poor visibility, this could easily be mistaken for the standard of the president of Mexico, which is also that country&#x27;s national flag. The standard is kept in the custody of the Commander of the Reggimento Corazzieri of the Arma dei Carabinieri, along with the war flag (assigned to Regiment in 1878).

The Italian Constitution does not make provision for a vice-president. However, separate insignia for the president of the Senate, in exercise of duties as acting head of state under Article 86, was created in 1986. This has a white square on the blue field, charged with the arms of the Republic in silver. Distinguishing insignia for former presidents of the Republic was created in 2001; a tricolour in the style of the presidential standard, it is emblazoned with the Cypher of Honour of the president of the Republic.

The standard of president of the Council of Ministers of Italy, introduced for the first time in 1927 by Benito Mussolini, in its first form a littorio beam appeared in the middle of the drape. The sign was abolished in 1943, while the current one was defined in 2008 by Silvio Berlusconi. It consists of a blue drapery bordered by two gold-colored borders in the center of which stands the emblem of the Republic. The banner should be exposed to every official engagement of the president and on the vehicles that carry it, however it is almost never used. The main colours are blue and gold, which have always been considered colours linked to the command.

===Naval insignia===
The naval ensigns are defaced to distinguish themselves from the flag of Mexico:
* the naval ensign bears the arms of the Navy: a shield, surmounted by a turreted and rostrum crown, which brings together in four parts the arms of four ancient maritime republics: Republic of Venice (where the Lion of Saint Mark carries the sword), Republic of Genoa, Republic of Pisa and Republic of Amalfi;
* the civil ensign bears a coat of arms identical to that of the Navy, but without a crown and in which the lion of Saint Mark carries the book;
* the government ensign, adopted in 2003, bears the emblem of the Italian Republic.

== Protocol ==
=== Obligation to exhibit ===


The law, implementing Article 12 of the Constitution and following of Italy&#x27;s membership of the European Union, lays down the general provisions governing the use and display of the flag of the Italian Republic and the flag of European Union (in its territory). In particular, in public buildings the flag of the Italian Republic, the flag of the European Union and the portrait of the president of the Italian Republic must be displayed in the offices of the most important Italian institutional offices.

The flag of Italy must also be displayed outside all schools of all levels, outside university complexes, outside the buildings that host the voting operations, outside the prefectures, police headquarters, palaces of justice and outside the central post offices. The flag of Italy must also be displayed on all public offices on the Tricolour Day (7 January), the Anniversary of the Lateran Treaty (11 February), the Anniversary of the Liberation (25 April), the Labour Day (1 May), the Europe Day (9 May), the Feast of the Italian Republic (2 June), the commemoration of the Four days of Naples (28 September), the feast of the patron saint of Italy (Francis of Assisi, 4 October), United Nations Day (24 October; here the tricolour must fly together with the flag of the United Nations) and National Unity and Armed Forces Day (4 November).

When displayed alongside other flags, the flag of Italy takes the position of honour; it is raised first and lowered last. Other national flags should be arranged in alphabetical order. Where two (or more than three) flags appear together, the national flag should be placed to the right (left of the observer); in a display of three flags in line, the national flag occupies the central position. The European flag is also flown from government buildings on a daily basis. In the presence of a foreign visitor belonging to a member state, this takes precedence over the Italian flag. As a sign of mourning, flags flown externally shall be lowered to half-mast; two black ribbons may be attached to those otherwise displayed.

===Exposure mode===
The tricolour flags displayed must always be in excellent condition, fully extended and must never touch water or land. In no case can figures and writings be written or printed on the cloth. Furthermore, the Italian flag can never be used as a simple drapery or as a fabric in common use (e.g. to cover tables or as curtains).

In the event of public mourning the banner can be raised at half-mast and two strips of black velvet can be affixed to the cloth; the latter are instead mandatory when the tricolour participates in funeral ceremonies. In public ceremonies, the tricolour must always parade first.

===Flag-folding===
There is a precise way to fold the tricolour correctly, by taking into account the three vertical bands of which the banner is composed.

The flag must be folded according to the boundaries of the colour bands: first the red band and then the green band must be folded over the white one in order to leave only the latter two colours visible; only subsequently should it be folded further in order to completely cover the red and white with green—the only colour that must be visible at the time of the closure of the cloth.

===Legal protection===
Article 292 of the Italian Penal Code (&quot;Insult or damage to the flag or other emblem of the State&quot;) protects the Italian flag by providing for the crime of insulting it, or other banners bearing the national colours, thus providing:

== Flag-raising ==
The flag-raising of the tricolour takes place at the first light of dawn, with the flag which is made to slide quickly and resolutely up to the end of the flagpole. In the military sphere, it is announced by trumpet blasts and is performed on the notes of the national anthem.

The flagship, which takes place in the evening, is instead slower and more solemn so as not to make it seem a rapid lowering. The tricolour can be exposed also during the night only if the place where it is flying is conveniently illuminated.

In the presence of other flags, as well as receiving the most important honour position, it must be hoisted first and lowered last.

==Meaning of colours==

As the similarity suggests, the Italian tricolour derives from the flag of France, which was born during the French Revolution from the union of white – the colour of the monarchy – with red and blue – the colours of Paris, and which became the symbol of social and political renewal perpetrated by the original Jacobinism.

Green, the first Italian tricolour cockades, symbolised natural rights, namely social equality and freedom. After various events it came to 7 January 1797, the date of the adoption of the tricolour flag by the Cispadane Republic, the first Italian sovereign state to make use of it. During the Napoleonic period, the three colours acquired a more idealistic meaning for the population: the green represents hope, the white represents faith and the red represents love.

Other less probable conjectures that explain the adoption of the green hypothesise a tribute that Napoleon wanted to give to Corsica, where he was born, or to a possible reference to the verdant Italian landscape. For the adoption of greenery there is also the so-called &quot;Masonic hypothesis&quot;: even for Freemasonry, green was the colour of nature, a symbol of human rights, which are naturally inherent in the human being, as much as of the florid Italian landscape. This interpretation, however, is opposed by those who maintain that Freemasonry, as a secret society, did not have such an influence at the time that inspired Italian national colours.

Another hypothesis that attempts to explain the meaning of the three Italian national colours would, without historical bases, be that the green is linked to the colour of the meadows and the Mediterranean maquis, the white to that of the snows of the Alps and the red to the blood spilt in the Wars of Italian Independence and Unification.

A more religious and philosophical interpretation is that green represents hope, white represents faith, and red represents charity (love), in reference to the three theological virtues.

== Tricolour Day ==

To commemorate the birth of the Italian flag, the Tricolour Day was established on 31 December 1996, which is known in Italian as the &quot;Festa del Tricolore&quot;. It is celebrated every year on 7 January, with the official celebrations being organised in Reggio nell&#x27;Emilia, the city where the first official adoption of the tricolour was declared as a national flag by an Italian sovereign state, the Cispadane Republic, which took place on 7 January 1797.

In Reggio nell&#x27;Emilia, the Festa del Tricolore is celebrated in Piazza Prampolini, in front of the town hall, in the presence of one of the highest offices of the Italian Republic (the president of the Italian Republic or the president of one of the chambers), who attends the flag-raising on the notes of and which renders military honours a reproduction of the flag of the Cispadane Republic.

In Rome, at the Quirinal Palace, the ceremonial foresees instead the change of the Guard of honour in solemn form with the deployment and the parade of the Corazzieri Regiment in gala uniform and the Fanfare of the Carabinieri Cavalry Regiment. This solemn rite is carried out only on three other occasions, during the anniversary of the unification of Italy (17 March), the Festa della Repubblica (2 June) and the National Unity and Armed Forces Day (4 November).

== The flag in museums ==

There are many museums that host at least one historic Italian flag. Located throughout the Italian peninsula, they are mainly located in northern Italy.

The most important exhibition space that hosts Italian tricolour flags is found in the architectural complex of the Altare della Patria in Rome. Inside the &quot;Central Museum of the Risorgimento at the Vittoriano&quot;, there are about 700 historical flags belonging to the Italian Army, Italian Navy and Italian Air Force departments, as well as the tricolour flag with which it was wrapped in 1921 coffin of the Unknown Soldier on his journey to the Altar of the Patria. The oldest tricolour preserved in the Central Museum of the Risorgimento dates back to 1860: it is one of the original tricolours that flew on the &quot;Lombardo&quot; steamship which, together with &quot;Piedmont&quot; steamship, participated in the expedition of the Thousand. The Vittoriano also houses the Flag Memorial (&quot;Sacrario delle Bandiere&quot;), the museum that collects and preserves disused Italian war flags.
Other exhibition spaces that also host historical tricolour flags in Rome include, the Historical Museum of the Carabinieri, the Historical Museum of the Bersaglieri, the Historical Museum of the Infantry, the Historical Museum of the Sardinian Grenadiers, the Historical Museum of the Military engineering, the Historical Museum of the Guardia di Finanza and the Historical Museum of Military Motorization.

The Tricolour Flag Museum in Reggio nell&#x27;Emilia, the city that saw the birth of the Italian flag in 1797, was founded in 2004. It is located within the town hall of the Emilian city, adjacent to the &quot;Sala del Tricolore&quot; where documents and memorabilia attributable to the period between the arrival of Napoleon Bonaparte in Reggio (1796) and 1897, the year of the first centenary of the Italian flag are kept.

Other exhibition spaces that also host historical tricolour flags in Emilia-Romagna are the Museum of the Risorgimento and of the Resistance in Ferrara, the Civic Museum of the Risorgimento in Modena, the Museum of the Resistance in Montefiorino, the Civic Museum of the Risorgimento in Bologna, the Museum of the Risorgimento in Imola and the Museum of the Risorgimento in Piacenza. 
The National Museum of the Italian Risorgimento in Turin, the only one of Risorgimento that officially has the title of &quot;national&quot;, house a rich collection of tricolours, including some dating back to the revolutions of 1848. Among the relics of the Royal Armory of Turin there is a flag of 1855, a relic in the Crimean War, in which the Russian Empire lost to an alliance of the Ottoman Empire, France, Britain and Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia. In Piedmont, there are also other museums that host Italian flags in their collections: the National Historical Museum of Artillery in Turin, the Historical Museum of the Cavalry in Pinerolo and the Badogliano Historical Museum in Grazzano Badoglio.

In Liguria, there is the Museum of the Risorgimento and Mazzinian Institute in Genoa which preserves, among other things, an original flag of the Young Italy, while in La Spezia there is the Naval Technical Museum of the Navy, founded in the 15th century by Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy.
The Museum of the Risorgimento in Milan houses several tricolours from the Napoleonic era, including a flag of the Lombard Legion dating back to 1797 and delivered to the cohort of hunters on horseback only after the aforementioned ceremony in Piazza del Duomo, Milan, on 6 November 1796. Inside the Milanese museum there is also the tricolour flag dating back to the Five Days of Milan that flew from the Milan Cathedral on 20 March 1848.

Near Mantua, in Solferino, is the Museum of the Risorgimento of Solferino and San Martino, which celebrates the 1859 military battle of the same name and which houses many relics of the event, including several tricolour flags.

Other exhibition spaces that also host historical tricolour flags in Lombardy include the International Museum of the Red Cross in Castiglione delle Stiviere, the Museum of the Risorgimento in Bergamo, the Museum of the Risorgimento in Brescia, the Museum of the Risorgimento in Como, the Vittoriale degli Italiani in Gardone Riviera, the Museum of the Risorgimento in Mantua, the Museum of the Risorgimento in Pavia and the Museum of the Risorgimento in Voghera.
In Venice, the Museum of the Risorgimento and the Venetian 19th century preserves the tricolour flag of 1848 which greeted the expulsion of the Austrians from the city; Venice also hosts the Naval History Museum, which has an importance comparable to the homonymous exhibition space in La Spezia. The description of the Triveneto museums is completed by the Italian War History Museum in Rovereto, dedicated to World War I, which houses many relics, including several tricolour flags; the Historical Museum of Trento, which preserves items dedicated to the Alpini troops, the Museum of the Risorgimento and of the contemporary age in Padua, the Museum of the Risorgimento and of the Resistance in Vicenza. In Trieste, there is the Museum of the Risorgimento and the shrine of Oberdan.

In Sardinia, in addition to the Museum of the Risorgimento of the State Archives in Cagliari, there is the Museum of the Risorgimento Duca d&#x27;Aosta in Sanluri, set up at the castle of Eleonora D&#x27;Arborea, which preserves, among the numerous patriotic and the historical flags, the tricolour that on 3 November 1918 flew first in the Trieste just reconquered by Italy after the victory in World War I.

Other exhibition spaces that also host historical tricolour flags in other regions of Italy include the Domus Mazziniana in Pisa, the Marche museum of the Risorgimento and the Resistance in Macerata, the Museum of the Risorgimento in Palermo, which also preserves one of the original tricolour flags belonging to the &quot;Lombardo&quot; steamship which participated in the Expedition of the Thousand, and the museum of the State Archives in Naples which houses, among other things, twelve of the twenty-one tricolour flags requisitioned by the Bourbon general Carlo Filangieri from the Sicilian patriots of Caltagirone, Catania, Leonforte and Syracuse during the Sicilian revolution of 1848.

== Similar national flags ==
The Italian national flag belongs to the family of flags derived from the French tricolour, with all the meanings attached, as mentioned, to the ideals of the French Revolution.

Due to the common arrangement of the colours, at first sight, it seems that the only difference between the Italian and the Mexican flag is only the coat of arms of Mexico present in the latter; in reality the Italian tricolour uses lighter shades of green and red, and has different proportions than the Mexican flag—those of the Italian flag are equal to 2:3, while the proportions of the Mexican flag are 4:7. The similarity between the two flags posed a serious problem in maritime transport, given that originally the Mexican mercantile flag was devoid of arms and therefore was consequently identical to the Italian Republican tricolour of 1946; to obviate the inconvenience, at the request of the International Maritime Organization, both Italy and Mexico adopted naval flags with different crests.

Also due to the Italian layout, the Italian flag is also quite similar to the flag of Ireland, with the exception of orange instead of red (although the shades used for these two colours are very similar) and proportions (2:3 against 1:2).
The Hungarian flag has the same colours as the Italian one, but on the Magyar banner the red, white and green tricolour is arranged horizontally. Another banner chromatically similar to the Italian one is the flag of Bulgaria; similarly to the Hungarian flag, the Bulgarian banner has the white, green and red tricolour (starting from the top) in horizontal stripes, and therefore also in this case there is no confusion with the Italian tricolour.

Similar to the Hungarian banner is the flag of Iran, but green and red are reversed. In the flag of Madagascar green and red are in horizontal bands while white is in vertical band. The flag of Oman is similar to the Bulgarian banner, but the green and red colors are reversed (the flag of Oman may also be similar to the flag of Hungary, but the red and white colors are reversed), while the flag of Tajikistan is similar to the Hungarian banner.

Finally, they present other combinations of the three colours, the flags of Madagascar, Suriname, and Burundi. The flag of Suriname has a very specific composition of horizontal tricolor bands: the central red band (loaded with a gold star) and flanked by white and green bands. The flag of Burundi instead has a white Saint Andrew&#x27;s Cross that divides the cloth into four triangular sections, the upper and lower ones red and the lateral ones green.

== The flag in the arts ==
=== In the visual arts ===


Famous paintings dating back to the unification of Italy whose subject revolves around the tricolour are &quot;Pasquale Sottocorno assaulting the Military Engineering Palace during the Five Days of Milan&quot; (1860) by Pietro Bouvier, &quot;Charles Albert of Piedmont-Sardinia on the balcony of the Greppi Palace&quot; (1848) by Carlo Bossoli, &quot;Little patriots&quot; (1862) by Gioacchino Toma, &quot;Garibaldi lands in Marsala&quot; (late 19th century), &quot;The departure of the volunteers&quot; (1877–1878), &quot;The departure of the Garibaldine&quot; (1860), &quot;The departure of the conscripts in 1866&quot; (1878) &quot;The return of the wounded soldier&quot; (1854), all by Gerolamo Induno, &quot;The first Italian flag brought to Florence&quot; (1859) by Francesco Saverio Altamura, &quot;The wounded soldier&quot; (1865–1870) by Angelo Trezzini, &quot;Episode of the Five Days in Piazza Sant&#x27;Alessandro&quot; by Carlo Stragliati (late 19th century), &quot;Fighting at Litta Palace&quot; (half 19th century) by Baldassare Verazzi, &quot;The brothers are in the field! Remembrance of Venice&quot; (1869) by Mosè Bianchi, &quot;The breach of Porta Pia&quot; (1880) by Carlo Ademollo, &quot;On 26 April 1859&quot; (1861) by Odoardo Borrani, and &quot;Garibaldi&#x27;s Burial&quot; (1862–64) by Filippo Liardo.

The tricolour often recurs in the paintings of Italian painters adhering to futurism. In particular, Giacomo Balla has often used the symbol of the Italian flag in some patriotic works such as &quot;Flag Waving&quot;, &quot;Interventionist Demonstration&quot; and &quot;Demonstration 20th September&quot;.

=== In music ===
The first songs on the tricolour started to be composed shortly after its official adoption on 7 January 1797. The most famous popular musical composition written in this period and dedicated to the Italian flag is &quot;To the tricolour&quot;, which reads:

However, most of the songs dedicated to the Italian flag were written during the unification of Italy. The most famous is &quot;The flag of the three colours&quot;, sung in all Italian primary schools for decades:

During the battle of Aspromonte (29 August 1862), the notes of &quot;The tricolour flag&quot;, by an unknown author, rang out; the flag is also mentioned in &quot;Garibaldi&#x27;s hymn&quot;, a 1859 song by Luigi Mercantini, which accompanied the Expedition of the Thousand. Other pieces from the unification of Italy celebrating the tricolour are Giuseppe Bertoldi&#x27;s &quot;Liberation of Milan&quot;, &quot;O Ardent young people&quot; by an anonymous author and Luigi Mercantini&#x27;s &quot;War Hymn of 1848–49&quot;.

The Italian flag is then mentioned in the musical composition &quot;The bell of San Giusto&quot; and in the piece &quot;Faccetta Nera&quot;, written by Renato Micheli and set to music by Mario Ruccione in April 1935 on the occasion of the Second Italo-Ethiopian War (1935–1936).

The 1961 song &quot;The Flag&quot; by Domenico Modugno was also dedicated to the flag. In 1965, singer Ivan Della Mea recalled the tricolour as a symbol of national unity in the song &quot;9th May&quot;. The song refers to the event organized on 9 May 1965 in memory of the 20eth anniversary of the Liberation of Italy (1943–1945).

In March 2007, singer-songwriter Graziano Romani published the album &quot;Three colours&quot;, inspired by the Italian flag and the occasion in which the tricolour was adopted in his hometown, Reggio Emilia.

=== In literature ===
Many romantic poets treated the tricolour flag in their literary works, drawing juxtapositions and symbolisms:



== See also ==

* Cockade of Italy
* Flags of Napoleonic Italy
* Flags of regions of Italy
* List of Italian flags
* National symbols of Italy
* Sala del Tricolore
* Tricolour Day
* Tricolour Flag Museum
* Flag of Mexico

==Notes==
==References==

== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* La Bandiera degli italiani Presidenza della Repubblica, Palazzo del Quirinale
* Centro Italiano Studi Vessillologici (Italian Centre for the Study of Vexillology)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42876" start="4" end="17" title="Flag of Italy" label="flag of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876" start="45" end="58" title="Flag of Italy" label="The Tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q593676" start="114" end="119" title="Pale (heraldry)" label="pales"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="211" end="247" title="Constitution of the Italian Republic" label="Constitution of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426793" start="341" end="362" title="Flag desecration" label="crime of insulting it"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961014" start="435" end="460" title="national symbols of Italy" label="national symbols of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916333" start="475" end="483" title="Flag Day" label="Flag Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743904" start="490" end="503" title="Tricolour Day" label="Tricolour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q463289" start="720" end="738" title="Cispadane Republic" label="Cispadane Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q472538" start="753" end="768" title="sister republic" label="sister republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="772" end="792" title="Revolutionary France" label="Revolutionary France"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360" start="814" end="827" title="Reggio Emilia" label="Reggio Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="888" end="905" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="962" end="980" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="1042" end="1047" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681911" start="1053" end="1070" title="Cockade of Italy" label="tricolour cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q602300" start="1166" end="1174" title="war flag" label="war flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270222" start="1201" end="1215" title="Lombard Legion" label="Lombard Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1219" end="1224" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="1373" end="1392" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922436" start="1437" end="1473" title="proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy" label="proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="1686" end="1702" title="history of Italy" label="history of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919464" start="1785" end="1800" title="Tricolour (flag)" label="tricolour flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q43192" start="1821" end="1831" title="Flag of France" label="French one"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1851" end="1861" title="French Revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="1873" end="1884" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679542" start="1956" end="1966" title="Jacobin (politics)" label="Jacobinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1986" end="2013" title="French Revolution" label="French revolutionary events"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="2106" end="2157" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="2285" end="2303" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="2326" end="2345" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="2353" end="2370" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="2601" end="2625" title="storming of the Bastille" label="storming of the Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q249313" start="2656" end="2674" title="Camille Desmoulins" label="Camille Desmoulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q190507" start="2829" end="2833" title="hope" label="hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088" start="2841" end="2845" title="blue" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2853" end="2872" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091434" start="2886" end="2893" title="freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="2898" end="2907" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981220" start="3142" end="3156" title="Cockade of France" label="French cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925366" start="3215" end="3239" title="Coat of arms of Paris" label="ancient colours of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q135302" start="3300" end="3315" title="Count of Artois" label="Count of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453757" start="3346" end="3363" title="First Restoration" label="First Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="3381" end="3400" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="3512" end="3528" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="3551" end="3560" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995869" start="3667" end="3694" title="Abolition of monarchy" label="abolished on 10 August 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100652" start="3724" end="3748" title="National colours of Italy" label="Italian national colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="3808" end="3825" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681911" start="3897" end="3925" title="Cockade of Italy" label="red, white and green cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="4374" end="4388" title="Natural law" label="natural rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="4393" end="4408" title="social equality" label="social equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091434" start="4413" end="4420" title="freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="4580" end="4601" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="4732" end="4739" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="4770" end="4782" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="5107" end="5115" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="5134" end="5139" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18068" start="5415" end="5430" title="Milan Cathedral" label="Milan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="5690" end="5707" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681911" start="5879" end="5894" title="Cockade of Italy" label="Italian cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961014" start="5929" end="5951" title="National symbols of Italy" label="symbols of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518716" start="6123" end="6145" title="Imaginary (sociology)" label="collective imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="6153" end="6161" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="6265" end="6273" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="6314" end="6331" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="6385" end="6393" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q19946" start="6456" end="6464" title="Cherasco" label="Cherasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q748110" start="6539" end="6560" title="Armistice of Cherasco" label="Armistice of Cherasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263697" start="6932" end="6955" title="Italian campaigns of the French Revolutionary Wars" label="first campaign in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="7445" end="7455" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="7506" end="7517" title="French Directory" label="Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270222" start="7535" end="7549" title="Lombard Legion" label="Lombard Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="7612" end="7620" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q729481" start="7658" end="7678" title="Transpadane Republic" label="Transpadane Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q602300" start="7732" end="7740" title="war flag" label="war flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q51108" start="8022" end="8038" title="Piazza del Duomo, Milan" label="Piazza del Duomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912707" start="8062" end="8075" title="military flag" label="military flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q186516" start="8382" end="8395" title="national flag" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="8704" end="8711" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537106" start="9079" end="9091" title="Gonfalon" label="civic banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q463289" start="9510" end="9528" title="Cispadane Republic" label="Cispadane Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770345" start="9563" end="9582" title="Giuseppe Compagnoni" label="Giuseppe Compagnoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135779" start="10368" end="10374" title="Emilia (region of Italy)" label="Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="10379" end="10386" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088484" start="10497" end="10501" title="fess" label="fess"/>
<link wikidata="Q213353" start="10964" end="10982" title="Cisalpine Republic" label="Cisalpine Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q723118" start="11853" end="11880" title="Italian Republic (Napoleonic)" label="Napoleonic Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q263555" start="11988" end="11995" title="Lozenge (heraldry)" label="lozenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973088" start="12001" end="12031" title="presidential standard of Italy" label="presidential standard of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961014" start="12248" end="12269" title="National symbols of Italy" label="symbol of Italianness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235720" start="12463" end="12480" title="Republic of Lucca" label="Republic of Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q151083" start="12661" end="12676" title="Elisa Bonaparte" label="Elisa Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13373" start="12703" end="12708" title="Lucca" label="Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q157824" start="12713" end="12721" title="Piombino" label="Piombino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="12769" end="12780" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161531" start="12794" end="12807" title="War and Peace" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="12882" end="12896" title="First French Empire" label="French Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q223936" start="12950" end="12977" title="Kingdom of Italy (Napoleonic)" label="Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424805" start="13117" end="13124" title="charge (heraldry)" label="charged"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="13345" end="13375" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolutist monarchical regimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q209857" start="13600" end="13627" title="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia" label="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="13654" end="13669" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="13765" end="13778" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="13860" end="13885" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="13943" end="13980" title="Italian unification" label="independence and unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="13993" end="13999" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204" start="14008" end="14026" title="province of Mantua" label="province of Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="14028" end="14033" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="14035" end="14054" title="Trentino-Alto Adige" label="Trentino-Alto Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="14059" end="14071" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299884" start="14088" end="14104" title="Italian irredentism" label="Italia irredenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248722" start="14171" end="14204" title="Third Italian War of Independence" label="Third Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604547" start="14224" end="14239" title="capture of Rome" label="capture of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14259" end="14270" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="14339" end="14351" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q15210713" start="14477" end="14502" title="Cittadella of Alessandria" label="Cittadella of Alessandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289594" start="14515" end="14539" title="Revolutions during the 1820s" label="revolutions of the 1820s"/>
<link wikidata="Q849378" start="14678" end="14697" title="revolutions of 1830" label="revolutions of 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093070" start="14713" end="14725" title="Ciro Menotti" label="Ciro Menotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q786534" start="15199" end="15218" title="Legation of Romagna" label="Legation of Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="15303" end="15319" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q938903" start="15337" end="15348" title="Young Italy" label="Young Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="15451" end="15456" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="15935" end="15940" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="15997" end="16010" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="16022" end="16040" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="16123" end="16129" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="16142" end="16149" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="16165" end="16172" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q503060" start="16226" end="16243" title="Bandiera brothers" label="Bandiera brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="16299" end="16326" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681911" start="16514" end="16539" title="Cockade of Italy" label="Italian tricolour cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="16732" end="16740" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="16762" end="16792" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q721738" start="16972" end="16987" title="Goffredo Mameli" label="Goffredo Mameli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407455" start="16992" end="17006" title="Michele Novaro" label="Michele Novaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="17073" end="17088" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435724" start="17244" end="17266" title="List of historic states of Italy" label="pre-unification states"/>
<link wikidata="Q329046" start="17365" end="17380" title="Arbutus unedo" label="strawberry tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q329046" start="17410" end="17436" title="Strawberry Tree (national symbol of Italy)" label="a national symbol of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235701" start="17566" end="17579" title="national tree" label="national tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="17583" end="17588" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="17627" end="17646" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q623164" start="17667" end="17685" title="Five Days of Milan" label="Five Days of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="17696" end="17708" title="insurrection" label="insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q23354" start="17921" end="17939" title="Castello Sforzesco" label="Castello Sforzesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18068" start="18077" end="18092" title="Milan Cathedral" label="Milan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842780" start="18183" end="18192" title="Madonnina (statue)" label="Madonnina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867927" start="18421" end="18456" title="Museum of the Risorgimento (Milan)" label="Museum of the Risorgimento in Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281273" start="18573" end="18583" title="Porta Vittoria" label="Porta Tosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="18639" end="18652" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153500" start="18653" end="18667" title="Josef Radetzky" label="Josef Radetzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q694019" start="18775" end="18782" title="podestà" label="podestà"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="19027" end="19062" title="Charles Albert of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Charles Albert of Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q920894" start="19165" end="19198" title="First Italian War of Independence" label="First Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899714" start="19222" end="19229" title="Defacement (flag)" label="defaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="19388" end="19396" title="blazoned" label="blazoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920168" start="19478" end="19488" title="fimbriated" label="fimbriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="19517" end="19525" title="dynastic" label="dynastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q772296" start="19581" end="19597" title="rule of tincture" label="rule of tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627502" start="19699" end="19708" title="Redshirts (Italy)" label="redshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="19796" end="19814" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515803" start="19954" end="19967" title="port of Genoa" label="port of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q636688" start="19995" end="20010" title="Anita Garibaldi" label="Anita Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="20132" end="20154" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Grand Duchy of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="20686" end="20713" title="Duchy of Parma and Piacenza" label="Duchy of Parma and Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="20725" end="20751" title="Duchy of Modena and Reggio" label="Duchy of Modena and Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="20784" end="20811" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q332717" start="20927" end="20939" title="Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies" label="Ferdinand II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708273" start="21140" end="21159" title="Sicilian revolution of 1848" label="Sicilian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="21223" end="21233" title="triskelion" label="triskelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037576" start="21240" end="21261" title="Republic of San Marco" label="Republic of San Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="21301" end="21316" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="21563" end="21581" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="21583" end="21600" title="Maritime republics" label="maritime republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="21624" end="21626" title="AD" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267314" start="21654" end="21660" title="Canton (heraldry)" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072140" start="22005" end="22019" title="Roman Republic (19th century)" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="22061" end="22072" title="Papal State" label="Papal State"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="22092" end="22096" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532405" start="22164" end="22186" title="Aquila (Roman)" label="republican Roman eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054657" start="22675" end="22694" title="Ten Days of Brescia" label="Ten Days of Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285" start="22804" end="22810" title="Varese" label="Varese"/>
<link wikidata="Q40854" start="22812" end="22821" title="Gallarate" label="Gallarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308" start="22823" end="22827" title="Como" label="Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q42932" start="22829" end="22838" title="Melegnano" label="Melegnano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231" start="22840" end="22847" title="Cremona" label="Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252" start="22849" end="22854" title="Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790" start="22856" end="22861" title="Udine" label="Udine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376" start="22863" end="22869" title="Trento" label="Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="22871" end="22877" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572" start="22879" end="22885" title="Rovigo" label="Rovigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="22887" end="22894" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558" start="22896" end="22903" title="Belluno" label="Belluno"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="22908" end="22913" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="23785" end="23803" title="Victor Emmanuel II of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="23912" end="23923" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694075" start="24000" end="24048" title="Sardinian Expeditionary Corps in the Crimean War" label="Sardinian Expeditionary Corps in the Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="24057" end="24096" title="Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623078" start="24213" end="24235" title="Royal Armoury of Turin" label="Royal Armoury of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q350060" start="24317" end="24330" title="archipendulum" label="archipendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q81654" start="24380" end="24385" title="Sapri" label="Sapri"/>
<link wikidata="Q735241" start="24497" end="24511" title="Carlo Pisacane" label="Carlo Pisacane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="24819" end="24834" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q540978" start="24847" end="24881" title="Second Italian War of Independence" label="Second Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="25112" end="25134" title="Napoleon III of France" label="Napoleon III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="25566" end="25573" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135779" start="25575" end="25581" title="Emilia (region)" label="Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="25583" end="25589" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="25594" end="25600" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="25776" end="25780" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="25785" end="25791" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268597" start="26243" end="26276" title="United Provinces of Central Italy" label="United Provinces of Central Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="26292" end="26311" title="Military occupation" label="military government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="26331" end="26359" title="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="26401" end="26423" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Grand Duchy of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="26425" end="26439" title="Duchy of Parma" label="Duchy of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="26441" end="26456" title="Duchy of Modena" label="Duchy of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q786534" start="26466" end="26481" title="Papal Legations" label="Papal Legations"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="26744" end="26770" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="26790" end="26808" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="26840" end="26867" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q206223" start="27123" end="27153" title="Francis II of the Two Sicilies" label="Francis II of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q895188" start="27252" end="27281" title="House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies" label="House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="27428" end="27456" title="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="27777" end="27786" title="steamship" label="steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="27917" end="27969" title="Museum of the Risorgimento (Rome)" label="Central Museum of the Risorgimento at the Vittoriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="28016" end="28023" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922436" start="28057" end="28093" title="proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy" label="proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="28260" end="28288" title="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="28615" end="28629" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="28706" end="28735" title="birth of the Italian Republic" label="birth of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="28824" end="28835" title="Monarchism" label="monarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="28840" end="28851" title="Republicanism" label="republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="28853" end="28865" title="Progressivism" label="progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="28870" end="28883" title="Conservatism" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="28888" end="28925" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphs as well as by the Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248722" start="29661" end="29694" title="Third Italian War of Independence" label="Third Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="29704" end="29710" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q160570" start="29715" end="29721" title="Friuli" label="Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="29777" end="29789" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="29802" end="29808" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="29982" end="29989" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537106" start="30062" end="30070" title="gonfalon" label="gonfalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042072" start="30325" end="30354" title="Gold Medal of Military Valour" label="Gold Medal of Military Valour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30400" end="30422" title="battle of Monte Berico" label="battle of Monte Berico"/>
<link wikidata="Q48163" start="30687" end="30704" title="Battle of Custoza (1866)" label="battle of Custoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q46722" start="30815" end="30836" title="Castelnuovo del Garda" label="Castelnuovo del Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="30863" end="30871" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="30897" end="30904" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="30958" end="30979" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q802461" start="31432" end="31462" title="Festa della Repubblica" label="military parade on 2 June 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031951" start="31472" end="31494" title="via dei Fori Imperiali" label="via dei Fori Imperiali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618109" start="31553" end="31592" title="anniversary of the unification of Italy" label="anniversary of the unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="31647" end="31653" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163915" start="31654" end="31662" title="Gun carriage" label="carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604547" start="32056" end="32071" title="capture of Rome" label="capture of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="32116" end="32121" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="32389" end="32404" title="Quirinal Palace" label="Quirinal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="32416" end="32430" title="Italian Empire" label="Italian colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q738496" start="32456" end="32461" title="Assab" label="Assab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232988" start="32512" end="32527" title="Italian Eritrea" label="Italian Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="32646" end="32664" title="Italian Somaliland" label="Italian Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="32673" end="32686" title="Italian Libya" label="Italian Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q961423" start="32695" end="32725" title="Italian concession of Tientsin" label="Italian concession of Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q555185" start="32737" end="32766" title="Italian Islands of the Aegean" label="Italian Islands of the Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360" start="32852" end="32865" title="Reggio Emilia" label="Reggio Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43440" start="32931" end="32946" title="Giosuè Carducci" label="Giosuè Carducci"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="32994" end="33019" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="33142" end="33158" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="33315" end="33329" title="Little Italy" label="Little Italies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="33529" end="33543" title="president of the United States" label="U.S. president"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="33544" end="33559" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="33620" end="33638" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598978" start="33656" end="33671" title="Garibaldi Guard" label="Garibaldi Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718511" start="33951" end="33959" title="scudetto" label="scudetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="34015" end="34023" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="34025" end="34030" title="Rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="34032" end="34042" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="34047" end="34057" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q193236" start="34190" end="34214" title="Gabriele D&amp;#x27;Annunzio" label="Gabriele D&amp;#x27;Annunzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q500724" start="34320" end="34336" title="pizza Margherita" label="pizza Margherita"/>
<link wikidata="Q135631" start="34376" end="34395" title="Margherita of Savoy" label="Margherita of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38859" start="34461" end="34466" title="basil" label="basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088" start="34482" end="34492" title="mozzarella" label="mozzarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596097" start="34509" end="34521" title="tomato sauce" label="tomato sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="34538" end="34549" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="34664" end="34671" title="Strike action" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248707" start="34718" end="34733" title="Fasci Siciliani" label="Fasci Siciliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q185018" start="34952" end="34968" title="Franz Josef Land" label="Franz Josef Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="35006" end="35020" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="35033" end="35045" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q33629" start="35054" end="35062" title="Kara Sea" label="Kara Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="35095" end="35107" title="Arctic" label="arctic areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q491081" start="35124" end="35137" title="Umberto Cagni" label="Umberto Cagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="35162" end="35180" title="Umberto I of Italy" label="Umberto I of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252" start="35255" end="35260" title="Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="35360" end="35376" title="Italian-American" label="Italian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="35377" end="35386" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q378693" start="35387" end="35401" title="Gaetano Bresci" label="Gaetano Bresci"/>
<link wikidata="Q687490" start="35495" end="35512" title="Bava Beccaris massacre" label="riots of May 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="35549" end="35577" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="35645" end="35656" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788665" start="35792" end="35826" title="Fourth Italian War of Independence" label="Fourth Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="35914" end="35934" title="unification of Italy" label="unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="35976" end="35995" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q920894" start="36005" end="36038" title="First Italian War of Independence" label="First Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="36045" end="36073" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q659745" start="36321" end="36338" title="Italian front (World War I)" label="Italian war front"/>
<link wikidata="Q775793" start="36882" end="36900" title="flight over Vienna" label="flight over Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q193236" start="36932" end="36956" title="Gabriele D&amp;#x27;Annunzio" label="Gabriele D&amp;#x27;Annunzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="37095" end="37102" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q662961" start="37149" end="37174" title="battle of Vittorio Veneto" label="battle of Vittorio Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q333778" start="37318" end="37330" title="Armando Diaz" label="Armando Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641757" start="37351" end="37376" title="Bollettino della Vittoria" label="Bollettino della Vittoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15918639" start="37397" end="37429" title="Bollettino della Vittoria Navale" label="Bollettino della Vittoria Navale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423581" start="37523" end="37539" title="Impresa di Fiume" label="Impresa di Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557053" start="37612" end="37629" title="mutilated victory" label="mutilated victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423581" start="37826" end="37852" title="Italian Regency of Carnaro" label="Italian Regency of Carnaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="37911" end="37916" title="Fiume" label="Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="37941" end="37948" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="38103" end="38122" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="defeat of Caporetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="38264" end="38295" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q871407" start="38311" end="38328" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1920)" label="Treaty of Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="38369" end="38388" title="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol" label="Trentino Alto-Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="38390" end="38402" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="38404" end="38410" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="38412" end="38419" title="Kvarner Gulf" label="Kvarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="38440" end="38447" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376" start="38449" end="38455" title="Trento" label="Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596" start="38457" end="38464" title="Gorizia" label="Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656" start="38466" end="38470" title="Pula" label="Pola"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="38487" end="38495" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="38505" end="38509" title="Zadar" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262485" start="38526" end="38540" title="Treaty of Rome (1924)" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047436" start="38620" end="38643" title="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier (Italy)" label="Italian Unknown Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163915" start="38662" end="38674" title="gun carriage" label="gun carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="38680" end="38686" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q810128" start="38747" end="38788" title="Basilica di Santa Maria Assunta, Aquileia" label="Basilica di Santa Maria Assunta, Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="38796" end="38815" title="Altare della Patria" label="Altare della Patria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166501" start="38855" end="38869" title="Goods wagon" label="railway hearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="38909" end="38961" title="Museum of the Risorgimento (Rome)" label="Central Museum of the Risorgimento at the Vittoriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="38980" end="38993" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="39032" end="39052" title="Italian fascism" label="fascist dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="39189" end="39211" title="National Fascist Party" label="National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="39301" end="39313" title="Civil and political rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858490" start="39629" end="39657" title="Ministry of Public Education (Italy)" label="Ministry of Public Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q841184" start="39762" end="39774" title="Roman salute" label="Roman salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q328712" start="39927" end="39933" title="fasces" label="fasces"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="40346" end="40356" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500359" start="40364" end="40377" title="Norge (airship)" label="Norge airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q291200" start="40407" end="40421" title="Umberto Nobile" label="Umberto Nobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="40426" end="40440" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056" start="40470" end="40481" title="Italo Balbo" label="Italo Balbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="40497" end="40505" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318304" start="40522" end="40538" title="Azione Cattolica" label="Azione Cattolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q697196" start="40844" end="40855" title="ocean liner" label="ocean liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739279" start="40856" end="40862" title="SS Rex" label="SS Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q815532" start="40887" end="40898" title="Blue Riband" label="Blue Riband"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="40911" end="40924" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756467" start="41164" end="41179" title="Pontine Marshes" label="Pontine Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="41238" end="41249" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q328478" start="41251" end="41267" title="Italian Ethiopia" label="Italian Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="41303" end="41317" title="Italian Empire" label="Italian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="41395" end="41416" title="East African campaign (World War II)" label="East African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="41442" end="41454" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="41518" end="41534" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123879" start="41570" end="41585" title="Palazzo Venezia" label="Palazzo Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="41868" end="41890" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118964" start="41988" end="42005" title="Italian Civil War" label="Italian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="42117" end="42126" title="Italian resistance movement" label="partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="42221" end="42230" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644666" start="42231" end="42248" title="Italian partisan brigades" label="partisan brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q517327" start="42264" end="42272" title="Red flag (politics)" label="red flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456497" start="42382" end="42408" title="Italian Partisan Republics" label="Italian Partisan Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q547858" start="42420" end="42449" title="National Liberation Committee" label="National Liberation Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="42539" end="42559" title="unification of Italy" label="unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="42643" end="42657" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="42663" end="42686" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="42798" end="42814" title="Italian Republic" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="42864" end="42880" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="42906" end="42911" title="House of Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59671" start="43106" end="43113" title="lictors" label="lictors"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="43220" end="43228" title="imperium" label="imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="43263" end="43275" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532405" start="43307" end="43325" title="Aquila (Roman)" label="&amp;quot;aquila&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q721738" start="43494" end="43509" title="Goffredo Mameli" label="Goffredo Mameli"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="43545" end="43560" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851732" start="43914" end="43928" title="Liberation Day (Italy)" label="Liberation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230" start="44097" end="44114" title="Francesco Cossiga" label="Francesco Cossiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7477985" start="44128" end="44167" title="President of the Senate (Italy)" label="president of the Senate of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925322" start="44394" end="44412" title="Garibaldi Brigades" label="Garibaldi Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="44438" end="44443" title="Fiume" label="Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="44525" end="44541" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="44546" end="44564" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="44590" end="44600" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="44771" end="44793" title="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947" label="Paris Treaties of 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="44795" end="44801" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="44803" end="44810" title="Kvarner Gulf" label="Kvarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="44823" end="44835" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="44965" end="44989" title="Istrian-Dalmatian exodus" label="Istrian-Dalmatian exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="45065" end="45073" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="45075" end="45091" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="45096" end="45114" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295763" start="45182" end="45197" title="Istro-Romanians" label="Istro-Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018" start="45359" end="45370" title="Nova Gorica" label="Nova Gorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="45417" end="45425" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="45475" end="45514" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="Italian Republic was officially founded"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="45528" end="45541" title="king of Italy" label="king of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="45542" end="45552" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053185" start="46025" end="46045" title="Constituent Assembly of Italy" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="46096" end="46116" title="Italian Constitution" label="Italian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="46147" end="46165" title="Italian Parliament" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q43440" start="46531" end="46546" title="Giosuè Carducci" label="Giosuè Carducci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266536" start="46579" end="46597" title="Luigi Salvatorelli" label="Luigi Salvatorelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245" start="46687" end="46703" title="Enrico De Nicola" label="Enrico De Nicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765912" start="47025" end="47060" title="National Unity and Armed Forces Day" label="National Unity and Armed Forces Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="47148" end="47154" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537106" start="47178" end="47187" title="gonfalone" label="gonfalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43512" start="47490" end="47492" title="K2" label="K2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966442" start="47504" end="47530" title="1954 Italian Karakoram expedition to K2" label="Italian expedition in 1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q386889" start="47540" end="47558" title="Achille Compagnoni" label="Achille Compagnoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q381456" start="47563" end="47577" title="Lino Lacedelli" label="Lino Lacedelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="47676" end="47689" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="47722" end="47749" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q448520" start="47763" end="47778" title="Roberto Vittori" label="Roberto Vittori"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618109" start="47808" end="47847" title="anniversary of the unification of Italy" label="anniversary of the unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="48013" end="48027" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="48033" end="48046" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q391980" start="48091" end="48116" title="Free Territory of Trieste" label="Free Territory of Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q555866" start="48216" end="48237" title="List of United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1 to 100" label="direct responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="48245" end="48276" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="48364" end="48390" title="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947" label="Treaty of Peace with Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27077627" start="48405" end="48417" title="naval ensign" label="naval ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q833040" start="48475" end="48487" title="Italian Navy" label="Italian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="48493" end="48510" title="mercantile marine" label="mercantile marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q429340" start="48597" end="48608" title="mural crown" label="mural crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="48744" end="48759" title="thalassocracy" label="thalassocracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="48780" end="48800" title="repubbliche marinare" label="repubbliche marinare"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="48810" end="48816" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="48874" end="48879" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80563" start="48893" end="48899" title="Amalfi" label="Amalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="48919" end="48923" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370061" start="48977" end="48985" title="rostrata" label="rostrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q325973" start="49014" end="49031" title="Domenico Cavagnari" label="Admiral Cavagnari"/>
<link wikidata="Q616221" start="49147" end="49186" title="Trust Territory of Somaliland" label="Italian Trust Administration of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q985073" start="49223" end="49233" title="United Nations trust territories" label="UN mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q219575" start="49259" end="49271" title="United Nations peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="49287" end="49299" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743904" start="49472" end="49485" title="Tricolour Day" label="Tricolour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="50155" end="50164" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="50172" end="50187" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q104577" start="50274" end="50301" title="San Martino della Battaglia" label="San Martino della Battaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765912" start="50314" end="50349" title="National Unity and Armed Forces Day" label="National Unity and Armed Forces Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224" start="50428" end="50448" title="Carlo Azeglio Ciampi" label="Carlo Azeglio Ciampi"/>
<link wikidata="Q199432" start="50626" end="50647" title="coat of arms of Italy" label="national coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q381576" start="50665" end="50682" title="Aeronautica Militare" label="Italian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681911" start="50700" end="50759" title="Cockade of Italy" label="roundel of concentric rings in the colours of the tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961014" start="51218" end="51243" title="national symbols of Italy" label="national symbols of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="51383" end="51419" title="Constitution of the Italian Republic" label="Constitution of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q371338" start="51444" end="51462" title="Gazzetta Ufficiale" label="Gazzetta Ufficiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133" start="51563" end="51568" title="green" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444" start="51572" end="51577" title="white" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="51581" end="51584" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714471" start="51939" end="51962" title="Justus Lipsius building" label="Justus Lipsius building"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="51976" end="52005" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="52014" end="52030" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067116" start="52044" end="52055" title="General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union" label="Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="52073" end="52076" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q186516" start="52345" end="52358" title="national flag" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167720" start="52448" end="52458" title="circulaire" label="circulaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q114836270" start="52466" end="52536" title="Secretary of the Council of Ministers of Italy" label="Undersecretary of State for the Presidency of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740905" start="52734" end="52772" title="Presidency of the Council of Ministers (Italy)" label="Presidency of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="52814" end="52820" title="decree" label="decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="53024" end="53033" title="polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621157" start="53034" end="53041" title="Cheesecloth" label="stamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q371338" start="53605" end="53623" title="Gazzetta Ufficiale" label="Gazzetta Ufficiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="53728" end="53761" title="president of the Italian Republic" label="president of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q723118" start="53843" end="53870" title="Italian Republic (Napoleonic)" label="Napoleonic Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q199432" start="53909" end="53924" title="emblem of Italy" label="emblem of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641120" start="53958" end="53968" title="Savoy blue" label="Savoy blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q349511" start="53995" end="54015" title="Italian Armed Forces" label="Italian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q381576" start="54028" end="54045" title="Italian Air Force" label="Italian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="54051" end="54062" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="54068" end="54080" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q833040" start="54089" end="54101" title="Italian Navy" label="Italian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="54152" end="54160" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230" start="54453" end="54470" title="Francesco Cossiga" label="Francesco Cossiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q186516" start="54878" end="54891" title="national flag" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855201" start="54996" end="55015" title="Ministero della Difesa" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131933" start="55420" end="55430" title="Corazzieri" label="Corazzieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739328" start="55989" end="55995" title="royal cypher" label="Cypher"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="56057" end="56103" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="president of the Council of Ministers of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="56146" end="56162" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="56312" end="56329" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122462" start="56787" end="56801" title="flag of Mexico" label="flag of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="56852" end="56858" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q429340" start="56876" end="56884" title="Mural crown" label="turreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q593235" start="56889" end="56902" title="Naval crown" label="rostrum crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="56965" end="56983" title="maritime republics" label="maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="56985" end="57003" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861098" start="57015" end="57033" title="Lion of Saint Mark" label="Lion of Saint Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="57054" end="57071" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="57073" end="57089" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Republic of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q686312" start="57094" end="57112" title="Duchy of Amalfi" label="Republic of Amalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="57230" end="57240" title="Mark the Evangelist" label="Saint Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q199432" start="57311" end="57341" title="Emblem of Italy" label="emblem of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="57431" end="57443" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="57492" end="57506" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q122482" start="57615" end="57637" title="flag of European Union" label="flag of European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="57782" end="57815" title="president of the Italian Republic" label="president of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q861581" start="57956" end="57977" title="Education in Italy" label="schools of all levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412224" start="58110" end="58128" title="Tribunal" label="palaces of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743904" start="58237" end="58250" title="Tricolour Day" label="Tricolour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="58287" end="58301" title="Lateran Treaty" label="Lateran Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851732" start="58321" end="58350" title="Liberation Day (Italy)" label="Anniversary of the Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10901070" start="58367" end="58377" title="Labour Day" label="Labour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q207811" start="58391" end="58401" title="Europe Day" label="Europe Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q802461" start="58415" end="58444" title="Festa della Repubblica" label="Feast of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635328" start="58480" end="58499" title="Four days of Naples" label="Four days of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="58556" end="58573" title="Francis of Assisi" label="Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q210016" start="58587" end="58605" title="United Nations Day" label="United Nations Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q172446" start="58665" end="58691" title="flag of the United Nations" label="flag of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765912" start="58697" end="58732" title="National Unity and Armed Forces Day" label="National Unity and Armed Forces Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q186516" start="58877" end="58890" title="national flag" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053885" start="59399" end="59408" title="half-mast" label="half-mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="59840" end="59855" title="State funeral" label="public mourning"/>
<link wikidata="Q243519" start="59918" end="59924" title="velvet" label="velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q805079" start="60222" end="60227" title="Bend (heraldry)" label="bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426793" start="60830" end="60851" title="Flag desecration" label="crime of insulting it"/>
<link wikidata="Q43192" start="61682" end="61696" title="flag of France" label="flag of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925366" start="61821" end="61837" title="Coat of arms of Paris" label="colours of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679542" start="61927" end="61937" title="Jacobin (politics)" label="Jacobinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="61996" end="62010" title="Natural law" label="natural rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="62019" end="62034" title="social equality" label="social equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091434" start="62039" end="62046" title="freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q463289" start="62150" end="62168" title="Cispadane Republic" label="Cispadane Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190507" start="62347" end="62351" title="hope" label="hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="62374" end="62379" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q316" start="62403" end="62407" title="love" label="love"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="62535" end="62542" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="62722" end="62733" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="62779" end="62791" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q667552" start="63264" end="63284" title="Mediterranean maquis" label="Mediterranean maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="63324" end="63328" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="63367" end="63411" title="Italian unification" label="Wars of Italian Independence and Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q190507" start="63489" end="63493" title="hope" label="hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="63512" end="63517" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q456673" start="63538" end="63545" title="Charity (virtue)" label="charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147007" start="63574" end="63599" title="three theological virtues" label="three theological virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743904" start="63673" end="63686" title="Tricolour Day" label="Tricolour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360" start="63882" end="63905" title="Reggio nell&amp;#x27;Emilia" label="Reggio nell&amp;#x27;Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186516" start="63985" end="63998" title="national flag" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q463289" start="64034" end="64052" title="Cispadane Republic" label="Cispadane Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113678" start="64236" end="64275" title="Italian order of precedence" label="highest offices of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="64281" end="64314" title="President of Italy" label="president of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="64322" end="64354" title="Italian Parliament" label="president of one of the chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="64508" end="64523" title="Quirinal Palace" label="Quirinal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060409" start="64575" end="64590" title="Guard of honour" label="Guard of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131933" start="64648" end="64667" title="Corazzieri" label="Corazzieri Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3599217" start="64707" end="64735" title="Carabinieri Cavalry Regiment" label="Carabinieri Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618109" start="64811" end="64850" title="anniversary of the unification of Italy" label="anniversary of the unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q802461" start="64867" end="64889" title="Festa della Repubblica" label="Festa della Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765912" start="64907" end="64942" title="National Unity and Armed Forces Day" label="National Unity and Armed Forces Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="65077" end="65094" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="65123" end="65137" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="65256" end="65275" title="Altare della Patria" label="Altare della Patria"/>
<link wikidata="Q506234" start="65302" end="65354" title="Museum of the Risorgimento (Rome)" label="Central Museum of the Risorgimento at the Vittoriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="65416" end="65428" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q833040" start="65430" end="65442" title="Italian Navy" label="Italian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q381576" start="65447" end="65464" title="Italian Air Force" label="Italian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047436" start="65556" end="65571" title="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier (Italy)" label="Unknown Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="65675" end="65687" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="65783" end="65792" title="steamship" label="steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="65866" end="65892" title="expedition of the Thousand" label="expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q602300" start="66033" end="66041" title="war flag" label="war flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="66156" end="66167" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q827218" start="66198" end="66209" title="Bersaglieri" label="Bersaglieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="66240" end="66248" title="Infantry" label="Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q452156" start="66279" end="66299" title="Mechanized Brigade &amp;quot;Granatieri di Sardegna&amp;quot;" label="Sardinian Grenadiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="66330" end="66350" title="Military engineering" label="Military engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552861" start="66381" end="66399" title="Guardia di Finanza" label="Guardia di Finanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867985" start="66457" end="66478" title="Tricolour Flag Museum" label="Tricolour Flag Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360" start="66482" end="66505" title="Reggio nell&amp;#x27;Emilia" label="Reggio nell&amp;#x27;Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945249" start="66663" end="66681" title="Sala del Tricolore (Reggio Emilia)" label="Sala del Tricolore"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="66770" end="66778" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263" start="66948" end="66962" title="Emilia-Romagna" label="Emilia-Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="67009" end="67019" title="Italian resistance movement" label="Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="67023" end="67030" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="67072" end="67078" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q100070" start="67112" end="67124" title="Montefiorino" label="Montefiorino"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873699" start="67130" end="67173" title="Museum of the Risorgimento, Bologna" label="Civic Museum of the Risorgimento in Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q50195" start="67209" end="67214" title="Imola" label="Imola"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="67253" end="67261" title="Piacenza" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062079" start="67268" end="67320" title="Museum of the Risorgimento (Turin)" label="National Museum of the Italian Risorgimento in Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="67338" end="67350" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="67479" end="67498" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="67586" end="67597" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="67612" end="67626" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="67654" end="67668" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="67670" end="67676" title="Second French Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="67678" end="67685" title="British Empire" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="67690" end="67718" title="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="67723" end="67731" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="67842" end="67851" title="Artillery" label="Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="67891" end="67898" title="Cavalry" label="Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9573" start="67902" end="67910" title="Pinerolo" label="Pinerolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="67919" end="67929" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Badogliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q17814" start="67951" end="67968" title="Grazzano Badoglio" label="Grazzano Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="67974" end="67981" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="68027" end="68036" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Mazzinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="68050" end="68055" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q938903" start="68117" end="68128" title="Young Italy" label="Young Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="68139" end="68148" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312636" start="68229" end="68256" title="Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy" label="Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867927" start="68262" end="68297" title="Museum of the Risorgimento (Milan)" label="Museum of the Risorgimento in Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122204616" start="68333" end="68347" title="Napoleonic era" label="Napoleonic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270222" start="68373" end="68387" title="Lombard Legion" label="Lombard Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51108" start="68502" end="68525" title="Piazza del Duomo, Milan" label="Piazza del Duomo, Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q623164" start="68626" end="68644" title="Five Days of Milan" label="Five Days of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18068" start="68664" end="68679" title="Milan Cathedral" label="Milan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="68704" end="68710" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q42788" start="68715" end="68724" title="Solferino" label="Solferino"/>
<link wikidata="Q324916" start="68816" end="68848" title="Battle of Solferino" label="military battle of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="68997" end="69005" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="69046" end="69055" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q42890" start="69059" end="69085" title="Castiglione delle Stiviere" label="Castiglione delle Stiviere"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="69121" end="69128" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="69164" end="69171" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308" start="69207" end="69211" title="Como" label="Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547160" start="69217" end="69242" title="Vittoriale degli Italiani" label="Vittoriale degli Italiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q104619" start="69246" end="69261" title="Gardone Riviera" label="Gardone Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="69297" end="69303" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="69339" end="69344" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39981" start="69383" end="69390" title="Voghera" label="Voghera"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="69395" end="69401" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="69536" end="69545" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641492" start="69712" end="69721" title="Triveneto" label="Triveneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q279373" start="69780" end="69788" title="Rovereto" label="Rovereto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376" start="69902" end="69908" title="Trento" label="Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550449" start="69949" end="69955" title="Alpini" label="Alpini"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="70026" end="70031" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="70089" end="70096" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="70101" end="70108" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q683579" start="70168" end="70175" title="Guglielmo Oberdan" label="Oberdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="70181" end="70189" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="70262" end="70270" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13656" start="70333" end="70340" title="Sanluri" label="Sanluri"/>
<link wikidata="Q155244" start="70366" end="70389" title="Eleonora D&amp;#x27;Arborea" label="Eleonora D&amp;#x27;Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="70663" end="70679" title="regions of Italy" label="regions of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="70712" end="70716" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="70722" end="70728" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q13135" start="70778" end="70786" title="Macerata" label="Macerata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="70822" end="70829" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="70926" end="70935" title="steamship" label="steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="70962" end="70988" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="71030" end="71036" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q895188" start="71133" end="71140" title="House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q521725" start="71149" end="71165" title="Carlo Filangieri" label="Carlo Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q478258" start="71196" end="71207" title="Caltagirone" label="Caltagirone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="71209" end="71216" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q56205" start="71218" end="71227" title="Leonforte" label="Leonforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="71232" end="71240" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708273" start="71252" end="71279" title="Sicilian revolution of 1848" label="Sicilian revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="71470" end="71487" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q122462" start="71614" end="71626" title="Flag of Mexico" label="Mexican flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q170867" start="71639" end="71661" title="coat of arms of Mexico" label="coat of arms of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="72194" end="72229" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q82205" start="72375" end="72390" title="flag of Ireland" label="flag of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81970" start="72541" end="72555" title="Flag of Hungary" label="Hungarian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q225360" start="72746" end="72762" title="flag of Bulgaria" label="flag of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q126622" start="73026" end="73038" title="flag of Iran" label="flag of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q103019" start="73079" end="73097" title="flag of Madagascar" label="flag of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165550" start="73173" end="73185" title="flag of Oman" label="flag of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q165550" start="73269" end="73281" title="flag of Oman" label="flag of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q81970" start="73309" end="73324" title="flag of Hungary" label="flag of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q160124" start="73380" end="73398" title="flag of Tajikistan" label="flag of Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="73512" end="73522" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="73524" end="73532" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="73538" end="73545" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180725" start="73551" end="73567" title="flag of Suriname" label="flag of Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q103084" start="73719" end="73734" title="flag of Burundi" label="flag of Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201960" start="73755" end="73780" title="Saltire" label="Saint Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="73985" end="74005" title="unification of Italy" label="unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74169" end="74183" title="Pietro Bouvier" label="Pietro Bouvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659111" start="74279" end="74292" title="Carlo Bossoli" label="Carlo Bossoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764856" start="74332" end="74347" title="Gioacchino Toma" label="Gioacchino Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q708498" start="74639" end="74654" title="Gerolamo Induno" label="Gerolamo Induno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085855" start="74721" end="74747" title="Francesco Saverio Altamura" label="Francesco Saverio Altamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849508" start="74796" end="74811" title="Angelo Trezzini" label="Angelo Trezzini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74884" end="74900" title="Carlo Stragliati" label="Carlo Stragliati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880664" start="74982" end="75000" title="Baldassare Verazzi" label="Baldassare Verazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141251" start="75077" end="75089" title="Mosè Bianchi" label="Mosè Bianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065068" start="75137" end="75151" title="Carlo Ademollo" label="Carlo Ademollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056323" start="75192" end="75207" title="Odoardo Borrani" label="Odoardo Borrani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75262" end="75276" title="Filippo Liardo" label="Filippo Liardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="75355" end="75363" title="futurism" label="futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q368254" start="75380" end="75393" title="Giacomo Balla" label="Giacomo Balla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604547" start="75563" end="75577" title="Capture of Rome" label="20th September"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366" start="75613" end="75617" title="song" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="75943" end="75963" title="unification of Italy" label="unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="76047" end="76061" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118637" start="76088" end="76108" title="battle of Aspromonte" label="battle of Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839886" start="76284" end="76300" title="Luigi Mercantini" label="Luigi Mercantini"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="76324" end="76350" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76425" end="76442" title="Giuseppe Bertoldi" label="Giuseppe Bertoldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390941" start="76722" end="76735" title="Faccetta Nera" label="Faccetta Nera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76754" end="76768" title="Renato Micheli" label="Renato Micheli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76789" end="76803" title="Mario Ruccione" label="Mario Ruccione"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="76841" end="76867" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Second Italo-Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q201392" start="76920" end="76936" title="Domenico Modugno" label="Domenico Modugno"/>
<link wikidata="Q249841" start="76985" end="76999" title="Ivan Della Mea" label="Ivan Della Mea"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="77181" end="77200" title="Liberation of Italy" label="Liberation of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77248" end="77263" title="Graziano Romani" label="Graziano Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360" start="77409" end="77422" title="Reggio Emilia" label="Reggio Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735649" start="77452" end="77466" title="Romantic poetry" label="romantic poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="77546" end="77552" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681911" start="77579" end="77595" title="Cockade of Italy" label="Cockade of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456971" start="77598" end="77623" title="Flags of Napoleonic Italy" label="Flags of Napoleonic Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q926065" start="77626" end="77651" title="Flags of regions of Italy" label="Flags of regions of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574865" start="77654" end="77675" title="List of Italian flags" label="List of Italian flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961014" start="77678" end="77703" title="National symbols of Italy" label="National symbols of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945249" start="77706" end="77724" title="Sala del Tricolore" label="Sala del Tricolore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743904" start="77727" end="77740" title="Tricolour Day" label="Tricolour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867985" start="77743" end="77764" title="Tricolour Flag Museum" label="Tricolour Flag Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122462" start="77767" end="77781" title="Flag of Mexico" label="Flag of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q186083" start="78018" end="78029" title="Vexillology" label="Vexillology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297856" wikidata="Q443411" url="?curid=297856" title="Strafford">
<text>Strafford may refer to:

==Places==
In the United States:
* Strafford, Missouri, a city
* Strafford, New Hampshire, a town
* Strafford, Pennsylvania
* Strafford, Vermont, a town
* Strafford County, New Hampshire

==Other==
*Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford (1593–1641), politician impeached and executed in 1641 
*Earl of Strafford, a title that has been created several times in British history
*Stephen Strafford, British air marshal
*&quot;Strafford&quot; (play), written in 1837 by Robert Browning
*Strafford Moss, musical theatre tenor

==See also==
*Stafford (disambiguation)
*Stratford (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q443411" start="0" end="9" title="Strafford" label="Strafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q962738" start="60" end="79" title="Strafford, Missouri" label="Strafford, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419045" start="90" end="114" title="Strafford, New Hampshire" label="Strafford, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620932" start="125" end="148" title="Strafford, Pennsylvania" label="Strafford, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305933" start="151" end="169" title="Strafford, Vermont" label="Strafford, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q54441" start="180" end="211" title="Strafford County, New Hampshire" label="Strafford County, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q336091" start="224" end="263" title="Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford" label="Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q545060" start="321" end="338" title="Earl of Strafford" label="Earl of Strafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610614" start="404" end="421" title="Stephen Strafford" label="Stephen Strafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q108391870" start="444" end="472" title="Strafford (play)" label="&amp;quot;Strafford&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q233265" start="493" end="508" title="Robert Browning" label="Robert Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q64006367" start="510" end="524" title="Strafford Moss" label="Strafford Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q232413" start="563" end="588" title="Stafford (disambiguation)" label="Stafford (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q224954" start="590" end="616" title="Stratford (disambiguation)" label="Stratford (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297859" wikidata="Q469752" url="?curid=297859" title="Marie Marvingt">
<text>Marie Marvingt (20 February 1875 – 14 December 1963) was a French athlete, mountaineer, aviator, and journalist. She won numerous prizes for her sporting achievements including those of swimming, cycling, mountain climbing, winter sports, ballooning, flying, riding, gymnastics, athletics, rifle shooting, and fencing. She was the first woman to climb many of the peaks in the French and Swiss Alps. She was a record-breaking balloonist, an aviator, and during World War I she became the first female combat pilot. She was also a qualified surgical nurse, was the first trained and certified flight nurse in the world, and worked for the establishment of air ambulance services throughout the world. In 1903 M. Château de Thierry de Beaumanoir named her the fiancée of danger, which newspapers used to describe her for the rest of her life. It is also included on the commemorative plaque on the façade of the house where she lived at 8 Place de la Carrière, Nancy.

==Biography==

===Early life===
Marie Félicie Élisabeth Marvingt was born at 6:30 p.m on 20 February 1875, in Aurillac, the prefecture of the French department of Cantal. Her father was Félix Constant Marvingt, a senior postmaster, and her mother was Élisabeth Brusquin. They married in Metz on 16 July 1861 when he was 48 and she was 32. Before Marie was born, the couple lost three sons in infancy.

The family, including younger brother Eugène (born 1878), lived in Metz, at that time part of Germany, from 1880 to 1889. When Marie&#x27;s mother died in 1889, the fourteen-year-old found herself in charge of the household, and the family moved to Nancy, where she remained for the rest of her life.

Félix Marvingt was a local billiards and swimming champion, and a dedicated sports fan. With his only son in fragile health, he shared his love of sports with Marie and encouraged her already apparent abilities. By the age of four, she could swim 4 kilometres. She grew to also enjoy many other sports: mountaineering, riflery, gymnastics, horseriding, fencing, tennis, skiing, luging, ice skating, boxing, martial arts, golf, hockey, and football. In 1890, at the age of 15, she canoed over 400 kilometres from Nancy to Koblenz, Germany. She had also learned a number of circus skills, and obtained a driver&#x27;s license by 1899.

===Sporting successes===
Marvingt became a world-class athlete who won numerous prizes in swimming, fencing, riflery, shooting, skiing, speed skating, luge and bobsledding. She was also a skilled mountaineer and between 1903 and 1910 she became the first woman to climb most of the peaks in the French and Swiss Alps including the Aiguille des Grands Charmoz and the Grépon Pass from Chamonix in a single day. In 1905 she became the first Frenchwoman to swim the length of the Seine through Paris. The newspapers nicknamed her &quot;the red amphibian&quot; from the color of her swimming costume.

In 1907 she won an international military shooting competition using a French army carbine and became the only woman ever awarded the &quot;palms du Premier Tireur&quot; by a French Minister of War. She dominated the 1908 to 1910 winter sports seasons at Chamonix, Gérardmer, and Ballon d&#x27;Alsace, where she achieved first place on more than 20 occasions. On 26 January 1910, she won the Léon Auscher Cup in the women&#x27;s bobsledding world championship.

She enjoyed cycling and rode from Nancy, France, to Naples, Italy, to see a volcanic eruption. In 1908 she was refused permission to participate in the Tour de France because the race was open only to men. Marvingt chose to cycle the course anyway, riding some distance behind the entrants. She successfully completed the grueling ride, a feat which only 36 of 114 male riders had managed that year. On 15 March 1910 the French Academy of Sports awarded her a gold medal &quot;for all sports,&quot; the only multi-sport medal they have ever awarded.

===Achievements in early aviation===

====Ballooning====
Marie Marvingt ascended as a passenger in a free-flight balloon for the first time in 1901. On 19 July 1907, she piloted one. On 24 September 1909, she made her first solo flight as a balloon pilot, and on 26 October 1909, Marvingt became the first woman to pilot a balloon (&quot;The Shooting Star&quot;) across the North Sea from Europe to England. She won prizes for ballooning in 1909, 1910, and 1911. On 18 July 1914, competing in the 10th Grand Prix of the French Air Club, she became the first woman to cross the English Channel in a balloon. She earned her balloon pilot&#x27;s license (#145) from the Stella Aero Club in 1910, the second woman to do so (the first was Marie Surcouf).

====Fixed-wing powered flight====
In September 1909, Marie Marvingt experienced her first flight as a passenger in an aeroplane piloted by Roger Sommer. During 1910, she studied fixed-wing aviation with Hubert Latham, the Anglo-French rival of Louis Blériot, in an Antoinette aeroplane. She piloted, soloed, and passed her license requirements on the difficult-to-fly Antoinette, the first woman to do so.

Marie Marvingt received a pilot&#x27;s license from the &quot;Aéro-Club de France&quot; (Aero Club of France) on 8 November 1910. Licensed No. 281, she was the third Frenchwoman to be registered after Raymonde de Laroche (No. 36) and Marthe Niel (No. 226). In her first 900 flights she never &quot;broke wood&quot; in a crash, a record unequaled at that time.

Marie flew in a number of air meets, bombed a German airbase twice as an unofficial pilot in World War I (see below), flew on reconnaissance missions in the &quot;pacification&quot; of North Africa, and was the only woman to hold four pilot&#x27;s licenses simultaneously: balloon, airplane, hydroplane, helicopter (in her 80s, Marie flew a jet-engined helicopter, and renewed her pilot&#x27;s license).

====Femina Cup====
On 27 November 1910, Marie Marvingt set the world&#x27;s first aviation records for women in time aloft and distance flown. Until that time, women&#x27;s activities had not been recorded. Marie insisted that this flight be officially timed, measured, and verified—first, to establish the need to include women in the record books and, second, because she was competing for the Femina Cup. Recently offered by Pierre Lafitte, owner of the women&#x27;s magazine Femina, the Femina Cup was to be awarded to the Frenchwoman, duly licensed by the French Air Club, who by the end of 1910 had flown the longest distance in a nonstop flight. Although Marie made another flight bettering her own record, on 21 December 1910, Hélène Dutrieu, cycling champion and fourth woman in the world to obtain a pilot&#x27;s license, flew even farther. Marie made a last attempt to win the Cup on 30 December 1910 but mechanical failure forced her to land short of her goal. Hélène Dutrieu won the cup. The importance of the Femina Cup lay in initiating recordkeeping for women and in introducing women in the air to the world; international interest had surrounded women competing for the Cup.

===Air ambulances===
Marie Marvingt proposed the development of fixed-wing aircraft as air ambulances to the French government as early as 1910. With the help of Deperdussin company engineer Louis Béchereau (who also designed the SPAD fighter), she drew up the first prototype for the first practical air ambulance. By means of her popular conferences, she raised money to purchase one for the French military and the Red Cross. In 1912 she ordered an air ambulance from Deperdussin, but before it could be delivered, the company went bankrupt when the owner, Armand Deperdussin, embezzled company money. (In 1914 Marvingt was drawn by Émile Friant with her proposed air ambulance.)

Marvingt devoted the remainder of her long life to the concept of aeromedical evacuation, giving more than 3,000 conferences and seminars on the subject on at least four continents. She was co-founder of the French organization &quot;Les Amies De L&#x27;Aviation Sanitaire&quot; (Friends of Medical Aviation) and was also one of the organizers behind the success of the First International Congress on Medical Aviation in 1929.

In 1931 she created the &quot;Challenge Capitaine-Écheman&quot; (Captain Écheman Challenge), which awarded a prize for the best civil aircraft transformable into an air ambulance. In 1934 she established a civil air ambulance service in Morocco and was subsequently awarded the &quot;Médaille de la Paix du Maroc&quot; (Medal of Peace of Morocco). In the same year she developed training courses for the &quot;Infirmières de l&#x27;Air&quot; (Nurses of the Air) and in 1935 became the first person certified as a Flight Nurse. In 1934 and 1935 she wrote, directed and appeared in two documentary films about the history, development and use of air ambulances: &quot;Les Ailes qui Sauvent&quot; (&quot;The Wings That Save&quot;) and &quot;Sauvés par la Colombe&quot; (&quot;Saved by the Dove&quot;).

The Flying Ambulance Corps, operated by women pilots and staffed by doctors and trained nurses, was intended to rescue the wounded on the battlefield using aircraft, landing at designated ground stations with crews of nurses, stretcher-bearers, and effective medical aid. By 1939, it appeared vital again and Marie Marvingt had been working on this and similar schemes for nearly thirty years. While organizing &quot;L&#x27;Aviation Sanitaire,&quot; recruiting women pilots and nurses, she made several visits to the United States to confer with government officials. In France itself, she had been supported by authorities including Marshals Foch and Joffre. Her schemes caught the imagination of the young women of her country and at the start of WW II, this escalated. More than five hundred nurses with at least ten hours&#x27; flying experience joined a new corps of flying nurses, some of whom were also parachutists. On 30 January 1955, she received the &quot;Deutsch de la Meurthe&quot; grand prize from the &quot;Fédération Nationale d&#x27;Aéronautique&quot; (French National Federation of Aeronautics) at the Sorbonne for her work in aviation medicine.

===War activities===
During World War I, she disguised herself as a man and, with the connivance of a French infantry lieutenant, served on the front lines as a &quot;Chasseur 2ième Classe&quot; (Soldier, 2nd Class) in the &quot;42ième Bataillon de Chasseurs à Pied&quot; (42nd Battalion of Foot Soldiers). She was discovered and sent home but later participated in military operations with the Italian &quot;3º Reggimento Alpini&quot; (3rd Regiment of Alpine Troops) in the Italian Dolomites at the direct request of Marshal Foch. She also served as a Red Cross surgical nurse, as a war correspondent on the Italian front, and as a probable gatherer of information for military authorities.

In 1915 Marvingt became the first woman in the world to fly combat missions when she became a volunteer pilot flying bombing missions over German-held territory and she received the &quot;Croix de guerre&quot; (Military Cross) for her aerial bombing of a German military base in Metz. Between the two World Wars she worked as a journalist, war correspondent, and medical officer with French Forces in North Africa. While in Morocco she came up with the idea of using metal skis for air ambulances so that they could land on desert sand. She also ran a ski school in the desert, teaching people to ski on sand dunes.

In World War II, she resumed work as a Red Cross nurse with the rank of corporal, she continued her promotion of the ambulance-airplane, and she founded and maintained a home for wounded aviators. She also fought in the Resistance, for which she was given a medal with a star (indicating exceptional contributions). A plaque in Saint-Alvère reads: &quot;Marie Marvingt, Resistance Fighter, Is Honored.&quot;

===Death and posthumous recognition===
Marie Marvingt died on 14 December 1963, aged 88, in Laxou, a small commune in the Meurthe-et-Moselle department in northeastern France. Her funeral was on 17 December in Saint-Epvre, and she is buried in the Cimetière de Préville, Nancy, France.

In France, there are streets, gymnasia, schools, flying clubs, scout groups, and an apartment complex named after her. In 1987, she was named to the International Women&#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame. France issued an airmail stamp in her honor on 29 June 2004. Several annual awards are given in her memory including those of the Soroptimist Club of Aurillac, France, and one sponsored by the French Aviation and Space Medicine Association (SOFRAMAS) through the United States Aerospace Medical Association.

===Philately===
In 2004, Marie Marvingt was commemorated by a French Airmail stamp bearing the face value of €5.00.
* Designed by Christophe Drochon and engraved by André Lavergne.
* Date of issue 7 May 2004 – Withdrawal date 8 May 2005.
* Horizontal format, 47 x 27 mm; perforations included 52 x 31 mm.
* Two bars phosphorescent.
* Print Mixed – Intaglio / offset; colour polychrome.
* Perforations 13 x 13 1/2
* Issued in a souvenir sheet of ten.
* Michel Catalogue No. 3832.

==Works==

===Published works===

* &quot;La Fiancée du Danger&quot; (Fiancée of Danger) and &quot;Ma Traversée de la Mer du Nord en Ballon&quot; (My Crossing of the North Sea in a Balloon) won first prizes in 1948 and 1949 in an international literary competition sponsored by the Women&#x27;s Aeronautical Association of Los Angeles. Although they are referenced in many newspaper articles and books, neither has ever been located (note that after Marvingt&#x27;s death, all her possessions were disposed of, and few have ever surfaced).
* &quot;Les Ailes qui Sauvent&quot; (The Wings That Save) and &quot;Sauvés par la Colombe&quot; (Saved by the Dove) are mentioned by contemporaries, but they are most likely her notes and scenarios for the two similarly named films she produced. No copies have ever been located.

As a working journalist all her life, most of Marvingt&#x27;s nonfiction writing consists of the numerous newspaper articles she wrote, sometimes under her pseudonym &quot;Myriel.&quot; Although she is said to have written fiction and poetry, this was not an important part of her life and only several
poems survive in print.

===Films===
* &quot;Les Ailes qui Sauvent&quot; (The Wings That Save), 1934, and &quot;Sauvés par la Colombe&quot; (Saved by the Dove), 1935, were both planned, produced, and acted in by Marie Marvingt. She was also the North African location scout, and she directed filming from a plane flying next to the one carrying cinematographer Gaston Chelle. The first film has been preserved in French military archives. The whereabouts of the second are unknown.

==Awards==

Marvingt was highly decorated, with more than 34 decorations, awards, and medals. Among them:
* Legion of Honor: &quot;Chevalier&quot; 1935; &quot;Officier&quot; 1949
* &quot;Croix de Guerre&quot; 1914–1918 with palms
* Gold medal from the French Academy of Sports for excellence in all sports (1910)
* &quot;Médaille de la Résistance&quot; (avec étoile) for Resistance work in World War II
* &quot;Deutsch de la Meurthe&quot; grand prize for her work in aviation medicine, 1955 
* &quot;Chevalier dans l&#x27;Ordre de la Santé publique&quot; (Chevalier of the Order of Public Health, 1937)
* &quot;Palms du Premier Tireur&quot; (First-Class Gunner)
* &quot;Coupe Léon Auscher&quot; (first international women&#x27;s bobsledding championship)
* &quot;Médaille de la Paix du Maroc&quot; (Morocco&#x27;s Peace Medal)
* &quot;Commandeur du Mérite Sportif&quot;
* &quot;Prix de l&#x27;Académie Stanislas&quot;
* &quot;Médaille d&#x27;or de la reconnaissance de l&#x27;aviation sanitaire&quot;
* Gold medal from the Académie Internationale des Sports
* Officier de l&#x27;instruction publique
* &quot;Palmes Académiques&quot; (Academic Palms)
* Médaille de l&#x27;Aéronautique (Aeronautics Medal)
* &quot;Médaille de la Ville de Nancy&quot; (Nancy&#x27;s Medal of Honor, 1950)
* &quot;Médaille d&#x27;Argent du Service de Santé de l&#x27;Air&quot; (Air Force Medical Service&#x27;s silver medal, 1957)
* &quot;Médaille d&#x27;Or de l&#x27;Éducation Physique&quot; (Gold Medal for Physical Education, 1957)
* Honorary diploma and bronze medal from the Ligue Aéronautique de France
* Named to the International Women&#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame, 1987
* International literary prize in 1948 and in 1949 from the Women&#x27;s Aeronautical Association of Los Angeles
* Twenty gold medals in Winter Sports, 1908, 1909, 1910

==References==
==Further reading==
* Baron Boilley, Françoise, A l&#x27;aventure du sport (Éditions l&#x27;Harmattan, 2013).
* Granjon, Serge, &quot;Les pionniers du ciel forézien,&quot; Osmose, 7 rue des Creuses, 42000 Saint Étienne, France, 2005. 
* Maggio, Rosalie, Marie Marvingt, Fiancée of Danger (McFarland, 2019).
* Maggio, Rosalie, and Marcel Cordier, Marie Marvingt: La femme d&#x27;un siècle (Éditions Pierron, 1991). 
* Nicolaou, Stéphane, and Élisabeth Misme-Thomas, Aviatrices: Un siècle d&#x27;aviation féminine française (Éditions Altipresse, 2004).

==External links==

* Lam, David M., &quot;Marie Marvingt and the Development of Aeromedical Evacuation,&quot; &quot;Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine,&quot; Aerospace Medical Association 74 (8): 863-868 (August 2003). Retrieved 9 January 2007. 
* &quot;Marie Marvingt,&quot; aviation-ancienne.fr, 23 April 2006. Retrieved 5 November 2006. 
* Marie Marvingt chronology from CRI Nancy-Lorraine. 
* Trailer for documentary film &quot;Marie Marvingt, La Fiancée du Danger&quot; by Michèle Larue and Noël Burch (2006).
* &quot;Marie Marvingt,&quot; Cantal Magazine, 20 March 2010. 
* Marie Marvingt birth certificate from the Archives Nationales, Dossier #19800035/445/59623. Retrieved 15 April 2013.
* Himsl, Sharon, &quot;M Is for Marie Marvingt,&quot; 15 April 2016.
* Russel, Shahan, &quot;Marie Marvingt -- An Incredible Overachiever in World War One and Beyond,&quot; 23 September 2017. 
* Trouillard, Stéphanie, &quot;Grande Guerre: Marie Marvingt, la fiancée du danger,&quot; France24.com, 11 October 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q469752" start="0" end="14" title="Marie Marvingt" label="Marie Marvingt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="75" end="86" title="Mountaineering" label="mountaineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="88" end="95" title="aviator" label="aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="394" end="398" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q183951" start="426" end="436" title="Balloon (aircraft)" label="balloonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413988" start="508" end="513" title="World War I Aviation" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="549" end="554" title="nurse" label="nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="655" end="668" title="air ambulance" label="air ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="959" end="964" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174234" start="1077" end="1085" title="Aurillac" label="Aurillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="2395" end="2403" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="2405" end="2412" title="fencing (sport)" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="2414" end="2421" title="riflery" label="riflery"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="2423" end="2431" title="Shooting sports" label="shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="2433" end="2439" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="2441" end="2454" title="speed skating" label="speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q273285" start="2456" end="2460" title="luge" label="luge"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="2465" end="2476" title="Bobsleigh" label="bobsledding"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220" start="2611" end="2621" title="Swiss Alps" label="Swiss Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262" start="2632" end="2683" title="Graian Alps" label="the Aiguille des Grands Charmoz and the Grépon Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q83236" start="2689" end="2697" title="Chamonix" label="Chamonix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="2782" end="2787" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="2818" end="2826" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q183302" start="2986" end="2993" title="carbine" label="carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204686" start="3133" end="3145" title="winter sport" label="winter sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q461219" start="3168" end="3177" title="Gérardmer" label="Gérardmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334057" start="3183" end="3203" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Alsace" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="3399" end="3412" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="3417" end="3423" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575836" start="3517" end="3531" title="List of cyclists in the 1908 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183951" start="4029" end="4036" title="Balloon (aircraft)" label="balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="4290" end="4299" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292807" start="4650" end="4663" title="Marie Surcouf" label="Marie Surcouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="4845" end="4855" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q848304" start="4870" end="4883" title="Hubert Latham" label="Hubert Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396" start="4911" end="4924" title="Louis Blériot" label="Louis Blériot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854757" start="4932" end="4942" title="Antoinette (manufacturer)" label="Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478857" start="5163" end="5182" title="Aero Club of France" label="Aero Club of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q255315" start="5275" end="5294" title="Raymonde de Laroche" label="Raymonde de Laroche"/>
<link wikidata="Q941746" start="5308" end="5319" title="Marthe Niel" label="Marthe Niel"/>
<link wikidata="Q236446" start="6575" end="6589" title="Hélène Dutrieu" label="Hélène Dutrieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="7121" end="7134" title="air ambulance" label="air ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164315" start="7196" end="7207" title="Deperdussin" label="Deperdussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261383" start="7225" end="7240" title="Louis Béchereau" label="Louis Béchereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164315" start="7264" end="7268" title="Société Pour L&amp;#x27;Aviation et ses Dérivés" label="SPAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164315" start="7505" end="7516" title="Société Pour L&amp;#x27;Aviation et ses Dérivés" label="Deperdussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861834" start="7594" end="7612" title="Armand Deperdussin" label="Armand Deperdussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207755" start="7670" end="7682" title="Émile Friant" label="Émile Friant"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="7784" end="7806" title="air ambulance" label="aeromedical evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="8312" end="8325" title="air ambulance" label="air ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="8384" end="8391" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="8731" end="8748" title="documentary films" label="documentary films"/>
<link wikidata="Q192615" start="9581" end="9594" title="Ferdinand Foch" label="Marshals Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207958" start="9599" end="9605" title="Joseph Joffre" label="Joffre"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="10067" end="10075" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332475" start="10092" end="10109" title="aviation medicine" label="aviation medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283" start="10595" end="10604" title="Dolomites" label="Dolomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q192615" start="10630" end="10642" title="Ferdinand Foch" label="Marshal Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413988" start="10922" end="10938" title="World War I Aviation" label="bombing missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727598" start="10993" end="11008" title="Croix de guerre 1914–1918 (France)" label="Croix de guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="11084" end="11088" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="11229" end="11236" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="11278" end="11281" title="ski" label="ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="11938" end="11945" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q12626" start="11953" end="11971" title="Meurthe-et-Moselle" label="Meurthe-et-Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="11972" end="11982" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q21832" start="12041" end="12052" title="Saint-Epvre" label="Saint-Epvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="12102" end="12107" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174234" start="12465" end="12473" title="Aurillac" label="Aurillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957668" start="15863" end="15894" title="Médaille de l&amp;#x27;Aéronautique" label="Médaille de l&amp;#x27;Aéronautique"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16788" end="16803" title="Maggio, Rosalie" label="Maggio, Rosalie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16860" end="16875" title="Maggio, Rosalie" label="Maggio, Rosalie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297861" wikidata="Q3473424" url="?curid=297861" title="Sarah Records">
<text>Sarah Records was a British independent record label active in Bristol between 1987 and 1995, best known for its recordings of indie pop, which it released mostly on 7&quot; singles. On reaching the catalogue number SARAH 100, the label celebrated its 100th release by throwing a party and shutting itself down. In March 2015, &quot;NME&quot; declared Sarah to be the second greatest indie label of all time, behind only 4AD.

==Origins==
The label was formed in Bristol in 1987 by Clare Wadd and Matt Haynes and grew out of the fanzine scene at the time, Haynes having previously edited &quot;Are You Scared To Get Happy?&quot; and Wadd &quot;Kvatch&quot;. Both these fanzines had given away flexidiscs, with &quot;Are You Scared To Get Happy?&quot; being part of the Sha-la-la organisation, a record label set up solely to produce flexidiscs. Several Sarah releases were fanzines and flexidiscs as, along with the 7&quot;s, it was thought they summed up the aesthetic and politics of the label better than 12&quot; singles and albums. The label also refused to participate in the multi-formatting that was common at the time, or even include singles on albums, feeling that these practices were unfair on fans. In 1990 Wadd and Haynes told &quot;Melody Maker&quot; that it was &quot;a record company run from a record buyer’s point of view ... you shouldn’t rip off the people who support you&quot;.

==Music==
Sarah Records was usually perceived as being grounded in the jangly indie-pop sensibility of C86 – though greater influences included the late Seventies DIY scene and stylish, imaginative independent labels such as Postcard Records, Factory and Creation; as well as mid-Eighties fanzine culture. Many Sarah bands, notably The Field Mice and The Orchids, also experimented with dance sounds. Other bands on the label included Heavenly, East River Pipe, The Hit Parade, Even As We Speak, Boyracer, Brighter, Blueboy, Another Sunny Day, Shelley and St. Christopher.

==Politics==
&quot;It&#x27;s just POLITICS, not as some distant unreal end, but as something encaptured in everyday life&quot; declared the sleevenotes to the label&#x27;s first compilation LP, &quot;Shadow Factory&quot;, and the label always saw itself as political, a response to its years of operation being &quot;the years when CDs took over and vinyl died, when majors set up fake indies and indie became a genre not an ideology ... the years of Margaret Thatcher and John Major, of Clause 28 and the Poll Tax; the years when Lad Culture took hold.&quot; Because much of the politics was represented by the label&#x27;s actions rather than its music, this aspect of Sarah was often missed; but Wadd and Haynes always hoped that those buying the records would discover the politics “by osmosis. One day, they’d suddenly stop and think, ‘Hang on, why do I have to spend £3.49 on this Pastels twelve-inch from Creation when the Sea Urchins seven-inch on Sarah only costs £1.49 and they both have three songs on?’ And then they’d set fire to the Houses of Parliament.” Haynes did admit, though, that &quot;few people spotted that our sleeves didn’t use the female image as decoration, that singles didn’t appear on albums (except compilations), and that compilations didn’t include ‘previously unreleased’ tracks, so maybe our politics was too subtle.&quot; The politics was also always tempered by humour: 12&quot; singles were used as a self-consciously hyperbolic metaphor for capitalism, the capitalist mindset of record collectors was mocked by randomly distributing postcards that formed a jigsaw of Bristol Temple Meads railway station in the sleeves of ten 7&quot;s whose labels featured photos of consecutive stations on the local Severn Beach Line, and the label announced its Autumn 1992 release schedule by taking out quarter-page adverts in the music press, denouncing capitalism and the refusal of bands to accept responsibility for their own marketing practices.

==Bristol==
Being based in Bristol was very important to Sarah; despite neither being from Bristol, both Wadd and Haynes loved the city and wanted to make the political point that to run a successful record label you didn&#x27;t have to move to London. Each 7&quot; single featured a picture of the city on its centre label, the label&#x27;s compilation albums were named after places in and around Bristol (and numbered after the buses that went there) and the city&#x27;s road layout provided the board for Saropoly – the board game about running an indie record label (packaged as a 7&quot; single) that was the label&#x27;s fiftieth release.

==Press response==
Although Sarah releases were featured 15 times as Singles of the Week in &quot;NME&quot; and &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, the UK press was mostly hostile, something Wadd and Haynes attributed to male journalists missing the point, being annoyed by it, or worrying that liking a label with a girl&#x27;s name, co-run by a woman, would bring their own masculinity into question.

The sexism of the music press was a major issue for the label. As Wadd wrote in a letter to &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, &quot;your treatment of women reinforces the status quo of a woman’s role being largely decorative – an object, a stage-prop to be placed at the front of photos … a puppet to smile and dance while the boys at the back (the &#x27;brains&#x27;) pull the strings. It’s hard enough for a woman to carve herself an independent role in music. Stupid basic things like going to gigs on your own and getting back afterwards have to be considered on top of society’s everyday constraints … Add to that the implicit criterion that to succeed you need to be physically desirable. What about the not-so-beautiful, the women who aren’t so confident about their appearance/sexuality? … You end up with half the population having no creative input.

&quot;Yet even that is eerily disguised because it’s always the purely stereotypical (and therefore hardly qualifying as positive discrimination) FEMALE image within a band that the male writer/camera seeks out.&quot; The label was always better received outside the UK, with bands playing to big audiences in Europe and Japan, and, after the label had ended, the attitude of the UK press gradually shifted. In March 2015, &quot;NME&quot; put Sarah at number 2 in its list of greatest indie labels of all time, saying &quot;Sarah’s legacy is in thinking gloriously big, and believing that a label is more than a catalogue of disparate releases.&quot;

==Ending and aftermath==
===A Day For Destroying Things===
Sarah ceased operations in August 1995 with the release of &quot;There and Back Again Lane&quot;, a booklet telling the story of the label along with a CD of representative tracks. A party was held on the &quot;Thekla&quot;, a boat moored in Bristol&#x27;s Floating Harbour, and half-page adverts entitled &quot;A Day For Destroying Things&quot; were taken out in both &quot;NME&quot; and &quot;Melody Maker&quot;. &quot;We don&#x27;t do encores&quot;, the advert announced, and the label has stuck by this sentiment, with no further releases.

===Retrospective film, books and exhibition===
A film about the label, &quot;My Secret World&quot;, made by Lucy Dawkins for Yes Please! Productions, was previewed at the Arnolfini Gallery in Bristol on 3 May 2014 as part of the exhibition &#x27;Between Hello and Goodbye: The Secret World of Sarah Records&#x27;, and had its official premiere at the Hackney Picturehouse in London on 12 April 2015. A book, &quot;Popkiss: The Life and Afterlife of Sarah Records&quot;, by Michael White, was published by Bloomsbury on 19 November 2015. On 16 October 2023, a second book about Sarah Records was published, called &quot;These Things Happen: The Sarah Records Story&quot;, written by Jane Duffus. This hardback book contains interviews with members of every single band signed to the label, as well as a large number of previously unseen pictures.

===Shinkansen Recordings===
After Sarah ended, Haynes established Shinkansen Recordings in 1996. Named after the Japanese &quot;bullet train&quot;, the label was originally going to be called &quot;Metropolitan&quot;, but there was already a record label of that name. Shinkansen released new recordings by ex-Sarah artists (including Blueboy and Harvey Williams) as well as other acts including Fosca, Trembling Blue Stars and Tompot Blenny. Haynes went on to edit a zine, &quot;Smoke: a London Peculiar&quot;, dedicated to writing and art inspired by London.

==See also==
* Sarah Records discography
* List of record labels
* List of independent UK record labels

==References==
== External links ==
* Sarah Records Official Website
* A Day For Destroying Things
* Fan site
* Smoke: a London Peculiar
* Shinkansen Recordings
* Sarah Records on TweeNet
* Indiepop Radio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3473424" start="0" end="13" title="Sarah Records" label="Sarah Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="28" end="52" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="63" end="70" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q842324" start="127" end="136" title="indie pop" label="indie pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="333" end="336" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="421" end="424" title="4AD" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="463" end="470" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354878" start="474" end="478" title="1987 in music" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q181298" start="529" end="536" title="fanzine" label="fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788461" start="594" end="622" title="Are You Scared To Get Happy?" label="Are You Scared To Get Happy?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288072" start="693" end="702" title="flexidisc" label="flexidisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="1248" end="1260" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="1481" end="1486" title="indie (music)" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022692" start="1506" end="1509" title="C86 (music)" label="C86"/>
<link wikidata="Q935553" start="1628" end="1644" title="Postcard Records" label="Postcard Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q578943" start="1646" end="1653" title="Factory Records" label="Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139341" start="1658" end="1666" title="Creation Records" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733724" start="1735" end="1749" title="The Field Mice" label="The Field Mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755299" start="1754" end="1765" title="The Orchids" label="The Orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q944058" start="1838" end="1846" title="Heavenly (British band)" label="Heavenly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329277" start="1848" end="1863" title="East River Pipe" label="East River Pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758411" start="1865" end="1879" title="The Hit Parade (group)" label="The Hit Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416497" start="1881" end="1897" title="Even As We Speak" label="Even As We Speak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952594" start="1899" end="1907" title="Boyracer" label="Boyracer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930275" start="1919" end="1926" title="Blueboy (band)" label="Blueboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q536403" start="1928" end="1945" title="Another Sunny Day" label="Another Sunny Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103030" start="1947" end="1954" title="Orlando (band)" label="Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587552" start="1959" end="1974" title="St. Christopher (band)" label="St. Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q800579" start="3584" end="3620" title="Bristol Temple Meads railway station" label="Bristol Temple Meads railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9335712" start="3718" end="3735" title="Severn Beach Line" label="Severn Beach Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4202" end="4208" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768639" start="6773" end="6779" title="The Thekla" label="Thekla"/>
<link wikidata="Q26874" start="6819" end="6835" title="Floating Harbour" label="Floating Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="8063" end="8100" title="Shinkansen" label="the Japanese &amp;quot;bullet train&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930275" start="8289" end="8296" title="Blueboy (band)" label="Blueboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q536403" start="8301" end="8316" title="Harvey Williams (musician)" label="Harvey Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473329" start="8350" end="8355" title="Fosca (band)" label="Fosca"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701804" start="8357" end="8377" title="Trembling Blue Stars" label="Trembling Blue Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="8422" end="8426" title="zine" label="zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941631" start="8531" end="8556" title="Sarah Records discography" label="Sarah Records discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="8559" end="8580" title="List of record labels" label="List of record labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623943" start="8583" end="8619" title="List of independent UK record labels" label="List of independent UK record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297862" wikidata="Q7888065" url="?curid=297862" title="United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest 1971">
<text>The United Kingdom was represented at the Eurovision Song Contest 1971 with the song &quot;Jack in the Box&quot;, composed by John Worsley, with lyrics by David Myers, and performed by Clodagh Rodgers. The British participating broadcaster, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), selected its entry through a national final, after having previously selected the performer internally.

==Before Eurovision==
=== &quot;A Song for Europe 1971&quot; ===
The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) held the national final on 20 February 1971 as part of the BBC1 TV series &quot;It&#x27;s Cliff Richard!&quot;, presented by Cliff Richard. Clodagh Rodgers, a singer and actress from Northern Ireland, best known for her hit singles including, 1969 hits &quot;Come Back and Shake Me&quot; and &quot;Goodnight Midnight&quot; sang all the six finalists in the contest, having been internally selected by the BBC to represent the United Kingdom, in part due to worries as to what reaction the British artist would face at the contest in Dublin. Rodgers performed the songs weekly, before showcasing all six in the &quot;Song for Europe&quot; edition of the Cliff Richard Show, where they were also immediately repeated. Due to a postal strike, viewers were unable to cast votes for the songs this year, so 8 regional juries, consisting of 10 jurors with just one vote each for their favourite song, were constructed from members of the public. These juries were located in Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Glasgow, London, Manchester, and Norwich.

=== Chart success ===
&quot;Jack in the Box&quot; was chosen as the winning song, with two songs tying for second place. Rodgers released two standard 7-inch singles of the winner, with one of the runners-up &quot;Someone to Love Me&quot; or &quot;Wind of Change&quot; on the B-Sides. She also released a three-track maxi single which included both the second placed songs. The combined sales of the three singles (which all shared the catalogue number RCA2066) reached No.4 in the UK singles chart; Rodgers last top 10 single in the UK. Later in the year, she released a fourth song from the final &quot;Look Left, Look Right&quot;, together with the three already released tracks on the LP &quot;Rodgers and Heart&quot;. &quot;Another Time, Another Place&quot; was then included on the 1972 budget LP &quot;Clodagh Rodgers&quot;, after it had become a No.13 hit single for Engelbert Humperdinck. To date, only the last place song &quot;In My World of Beautiful Things&quot; has never been officially released in any form.

==At Eurovision==
&quot;Jack in the Box&quot; won the national and went on to come 4th in the contest.

For the performance in Dublin, Rodgers wore a pink frilly top and spangled hot pants. She finished in fourth place, behind Monaco, Spain and Germany. It was the first time since 1966 that the UK had not placed first or second.

Radio 1 DJ Dave Lee Travis provided the BBC Television commentary, whilst Terry Wogan began his long running commitments with the Eurovision, providing the radio commentary for BBC Radio 1 listeners and he would commentate for both radio and television for most years until .

Each country nominated two jury members, one below the age of 25 and the other above, who voted for their respective country by giving between one and five points to each song, except that representing their own country. All jury members were colocated at the venue in Dublin, and were brought on stage during the voting sequence to present their points. The jury members from the United Kingdom were Jeremy Paterson Fox and Gay Lowe.

=== Voting ===



==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209429" start="42" end="70" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1971" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434824" start="91" end="106" title="Jack in the Box (song)" label="Jack in the Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463397" start="126" end="138" title="Les Vandyke" label="John Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q468010" start="185" end="200" title="Clodagh Rodgers" label="Clodagh Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="245" end="277" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="459" end="491" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="578" end="602" title="List of Cliff Richard television appearances#It.27s Cliff Richard: Series 2" label="It&amp;#x27;s Cliff Richard!"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="623" end="636" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q468010" start="638" end="653" title="Clodagh Rodgers" label="Clodagh Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434824" start="1577" end="1592" title="Jack in the Box (song)" label="Jack in the Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q221289" start="2424" end="2445" title="Engelbert Humperdinck (singer)" label="Engelbert Humperdinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="2906" end="2913" title="BBC Radio 1" label="Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173268" start="2917" end="2932" title="Dave Lee Travis" label="Dave Lee Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q734264" start="2980" end="2991" title="Terry Wogan" label="Terry Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="3083" end="3094" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297863" wikidata="Q518948" url="?curid=297863" title="Brett Somers">
<text>Brett Somers (born Audrey Dawn Johnston; July 11, 1924 – September 15, 2007) was a Canadian-American game-show personality, actress, and singer. Somers was best known as a panelist on the 1970s game show &quot;Match Game&quot; and for her recurring role as Blanche Madison opposite her real-life husband, actor Jack Klugman, on ABC&#x27;s &quot;The Odd Couple&quot;.

==Personal life==
Born Audrey Dawn Johnston in Halcomb, near Miramichi, New Brunswick, Canada, Somers grew up near Portland, Maine. At age 18, she moved to New York City to pursue a career in acting, settling in Greenwich Village. Her chosen first name, Brett, came from the lead female character in Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s &quot;The Sun Also Rises&quot;. Her chosen last name, Somers, was her mother&#x27;s maiden name.

After settling in New York, she married businessman Robert H. Klein in 1948. Together they had one child, Leslie Klein (who died of lung cancer in 2003), but their marriage ended in divorce. She married actor Jack Klugman in 1953; they had two sons, David and Adam.

It was long reported that Somers and Klugman separated in 1974 but remained legally married until her death; this mistaken belief was furthered by the fact that Klugman waited until after Somers died to marry his second wife. However, California court records indicate the couple actually divorced in August 1977. Somers became a U.S. citizen late in life.

==Career==
===Early career===
A member of the Actors Studio from 1952, Somers began her career in theater and made many of her initial television appearances in dramatic programs such as &quot;The Philco Television Playhouse&quot;, &quot;Kraft Television Theatre&quot;, &quot;Playhouse 90&quot;, &quot;The Naked City&quot; and &quot;Robert Montgomery Presents&quot;.

Her Broadway debut was in the play &quot;Maybe Tuesday&quot;. The show was a flop and closed after just five performances. She also appeared onstage in productions of &quot;Happy Ending&quot;, &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot;, and &quot;The Country Girl&quot;, the last opposite Klugman. She also amassed a number of film credits, including &quot;A Rage to Live&quot; and &quot;Bus Riley&#x27;s Back in Town&quot;.

===Television credits===
Somers made many appearances on episodic primetime television, including &quot;Love, American Style&quot;; &quot;The Defenders&quot;; &quot;Have Gun Will Travel&quot;; &quot;Ben Casey&quot;; &quot;CHiPs&quot;; &quot;The Love Boat&quot;; &quot;Barney Miller&quot; and &quot;The Fugitive&quot;. In 1973 she played Rhoda Morgenstern&#x27;s Aunt Rose in the season four episode &quot;Rhoda&#x27;s Sister Gets Married&quot; on &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot;.

She had a recurring role as Blanche, the former wife of Oscar Madison (played by real-life spouse Jack Klugman) on the ABC sitcom &quot;The Odd Couple&quot; in the early 1970s. In 1973 she played Perry Mason&#x27;s receptionist Gertie on &quot;The New Perry Mason&quot;, a short-lived revival of the classic TV series, with Monte Markham as Perry Mason. She played the role of Siress Belloby on the 1978 science-fiction series &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;.

===&quot;Match Game&quot;===
Somers was best known for her appearances as a panelist in the 1970s CBS game show &quot;Match Game&quot;. For her debut episodes she sat in the lower-left panel position, but for the remainder of her tenure she occupied the center seat of the upper tier, most often next to Charles Nelson Reilly, who joined as a regular around the same time as Somers and settled into the top-right seat. She was clearly left-handed as she was always seen writing her answers with her left hand.

The show became known for somewhat outlandish and risque dialogue, sometimes being described as a game played at a cocktail party. Somers was a familiar on-screen presence, wearing enormous eyeglasses and various wigs. She played foil to Charles Nelson Reilly, Betty White, Scoey Mitchell, Fannie Flagg and many others. Somers was sometimes the subject of questions on &quot;Match Game&quot;, such as &quot;You may or may not believe in reincarnation, but listen to this. In a previous life, Brett used to be a ________.&quot;

Somers was not originally considered for the celebrity panel. When spouse Jack Klugman appeared during the first week of the program in 1973, he insisted that the producers bring her aboard. She remained a regular panelist for the rest of the show&#x27;s nine-year network and syndicated run. Her appearances on &quot;Match Game&quot; led radio personality Robin Quivers to impersonate her in parodies of such game shows on &quot;The Howard Stern Show&quot;. Quivers&#x27; impersonation of Somers was featured in the film &quot;Private Parts&quot;.

==Later life and death==
In 2002, she appeared with Charles Nelson Reilly and Betty White (via videolink) as part of a &quot;Match Game&quot; reunion on the CBS program &quot;The Early Show&quot;. She appeared with Reilly on &quot;Hollywood Squares&quot; during that show&#x27;s &quot;Game Show Week&quot; in the same year. She appeared in a cabaret show &quot;An Evening with Brett Somers&quot; in 2003–04. In 2004, she appeared on the PBS concert special &quot;Magic Moments – The Best of &#x27;50s Pop&quot;. In the two-minute segment, hosted by Wink Martindale, Somers was a member of a faux quiz-show panel with Dr. Joyce Brothers and Rip Taylor. In 2006, she was a prominent interviewee in &quot;The Real Match Game Story: Behind The Blank&quot; on GSN and hosted the &quot;Match Game&quot; DVD as well.

During a 2002 interview Somers denied rumors that she had cancer, which she reiterated in later interviews. Somers had a naturally husky voice that might have caused the misconception that she suffered from a throat ailment. However, she &quot;was&quot; diagnosed with cancer in 2004. Following a period of remission, she died on September 15, 2007, at her home in Westport, Connecticut, at age 83. Her younger son, Adam, gave the cause of her death as stomach and colon cancer. GSN hosted a daylong tribute to Somers, showcasing her most memorable appearances on &quot;Match Game&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q518948" start="0" end="12" title="Brett Somers" label="Brett Somers"/>
<link wikidata="Q518948" start="19" end="39" title="Brett Somers" label="Audrey Dawn Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="194" end="203" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786214" start="210" end="220" title="Match Game" label="Match Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q286738" start="311" end="323" title="Jack Klugman" label="Jack Klugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="328" end="331" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424202" start="345" end="359" title="The Odd Couple (1970 TV series)" label="The Odd Couple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348913" start="429" end="453" title="Miramichi, New Brunswick" label="Miramichi, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="483" end="498" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="580" end="597" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="668" end="684" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q501351" start="698" end="716" title="The Sun Also Rises" label="The Sun Also Rises"/>
<link wikidata="Q286738" start="999" end="1011" title="Jack Klugman" label="Jack Klugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q216458" start="1461" end="1474" title="Actors Studio" label="Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q786306" start="1608" end="1639" title="The Philco Television Playhouse" label="The Philco Television Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066092" start="1653" end="1677" title="Kraft Television Theatre" label="Kraft Television Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248532" start="1691" end="1703" title="Playhouse 90" label="Playhouse 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587353" start="1717" end="1731" title="The Naked City" label="The Naked City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938374" start="1748" end="1774" title="Robert Montgomery Presents" label="Robert Montgomery Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763468" start="1982" end="2001" title="The Seven Year Itch (play)" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985494" start="2019" end="2035" title="The Country Girl (1950 play)" label="The Country Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006171" start="2129" end="2143" title="A Rage to Live" label="A Rage to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001193" start="2160" end="2189" title="Bus Riley&amp;#x27;s Back in Town" label="Bus Riley&amp;#x27;s Back in Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249367" start="2302" end="2322" title="Love, American Style" label="Love, American Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248754" start="2336" end="2349" title="The Defenders (1961 TV series)" label="The Defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248082" start="2363" end="2383" title="Have Gun Will Travel" label="Have Gun Will Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277494" start="2397" end="2406" title="Ben Casey" label="Ben Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023688" start="2420" end="2425" title="CHiPs" label="CHiPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="2439" end="2452" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q808487" start="2466" end="2479" title="Barney Miller" label="Barney Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q137034" start="2496" end="2508" title="The Fugitive (1963 TV series)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="2651" end="2676" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889422" start="2741" end="2754" title="Oscar Madison" label="Oscar Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2804" end="2807" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="2808" end="2814" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q377529" start="2881" end="2892" title="Perry Mason" label="Perry Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988461" start="2929" end="2948" title="The New Perry Mason" label="The New Perry Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q945099" start="3009" end="3022" title="Monte Markham" label="Monte Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367132" start="3118" end="3138" title="Battlestar Galactica (1978 TV series)" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3245" end="3248" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786214" start="3265" end="3275" title="Match Game" label="Match Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065627" start="3451" end="3472" title="Charles Nelson Reilly" label="Charles Nelson Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563727" start="3888" end="3892" title="Foil (literature)" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q373895" start="3919" end="3930" title="Betty White" label="Betty White"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475967" start="3932" end="3946" title="Scoey Mitchell" label="Scoey Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q433207" start="3948" end="3960" title="Fannie Flagg" label="Fannie Flagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352728" start="4543" end="4556" title="Robin Quivers" label="Robin Quivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987626" start="4616" end="4637" title="The Howard Stern Show" label="The Howard Stern Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q781344" start="4714" end="4727" title="Private Parts (1997 film)" label="Private Parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172728" start="4911" end="4925" title="The Early Show" label="The Early Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572270" start="4967" end="4984" title="Hollywood Squares" label="Hollywood Squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="5173" end="5176" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387831" start="5285" end="5300" title="Wink Martindale" label="Wink Martindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="5332" end="5341" title="quiz show" label="quiz-show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187222" start="5353" end="5371" title="Joyce Brothers" label="Dr. Joyce Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354181" start="5376" end="5386" title="Rip Taylor" label="Rip Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243012" start="5491" end="5494" title="Game Show Network" label="GSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q586762" start="5912" end="5933" title="Westport, Connecticut" label="Westport, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="6000" end="6007" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="6012" end="6024" title="colon cancer" label="colon cancer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297864" wikidata="Q7049470" url="?curid=297864" title="Nonlinear distortion">
<text>Nonlinear distortion is a term used (in fields such as electronics, audio and telecommunications) to describe the phenomenon of a non-linear relationship between the &quot;input&quot; and &quot;output&quot; signals of - for example - an electronic device.

==Model==
For many devices, a linear model is accurate only for small signal levels. For example, at 2 volts input, a typical audio amplifier might put out 20 V, meaning the linear gain is 10 V/V. For 3 V input, it might then output 30 V. However, the model implies that at 50 V input it would produce 500 V, which is not possible with most amplifiers.

Mathematically, the input-output relationship of many devices should be described by a polynomial or Taylor series, as shown below.

formula_1

For larger values of &quot;u&quot;, the higher order coefficients such as formula_2 and formula_3 come into play.

==Effects of nonlinearity==
Nonlinearity can have several effects, which are unwanted in typical situations. The formula_3 term for example would, when the input is a sine wave with frequency formula_5, result in an extra sine wave at formula_6, as shown below.

formula_7

In certain situations, this spurious signal can be filtered away because the &quot;harmonic&quot; formula_6 lies far outside the frequency range used, but in cable television, for example, third order distortion could cause a 200 MHz signal to interfere with the regular channel at 600 MHz. 

Nonlinear distortion applied to a superposition of two signals at different frequencies causes the circuit to act as a frequency mixer, creating intermodulation distortion.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7049470" start="0" end="20" title="Nonlinear distortion" label="Nonlinear distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="55" end="66" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173114" start="68" end="73" title="Digital audio" label="audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="78" end="96" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="360" end="364" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="389" end="398" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="698" end="708" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="712" end="725" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="1037" end="1041" title="sine" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="1227" end="1235" title="harmonic" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357187" start="1556" end="1571" title="frequency mixer" label="frequency mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142232" start="1582" end="1608" title="intermodulation distortion" label="intermodulation distortion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297866" wikidata="Q7888066" url="?curid=297866" title="United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest 1972">
<text>The United Kingdom was represented at the Eurovision Song Contest 1972 with the song &quot;Beg, Steal or Borrow&quot;, written by Tony Cole, Steve Wolfe, and Graeme Hall, and performed by The New Seekers. The British participating broadcaster, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), selected its entry through a national final, after having previously selected the performers internally. In addition, the BBC was also the host broadcaster and staged the event at the Usher Hall in Edinburgh, after the winner of the , (TMC) from , opted not to host the event.

==Before Eurovision==
=== Artist selection ===
Contemporary press reports suggested that Cliff Richard was the first artist selected to represent the UK in 1972 by the BBC, but he was already committed to a concert on the date of the contest - 25 March 1972 - and was thus unavailable. As The New Seekers were booked to appear on his 1972 UK series, the BBC opted to offer them the opportunity. The group had just spent five weeks at No.2 with the song &quot;Never Ending Song of Love&quot; when they were confirmed as the UK entrants and their single &quot;I&#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing&quot; hit No.1 for four weeks at the same week the group began presenting the six short listed songs weekly on the Cliff Richard show.

=== &quot;A Song for Europe 1972&quot; ===
The show was held on 12 February 1972 and presented by Cliff Richard as a special edition of his BBC1 TV series &quot;It&#x27;s Cliff Richard!&quot; All songs were performed by the group The New Seekers, the first group ever to represent the UK in the contest and the first quintet ever to appear in Eurovision as a group. &quot;Beg, Steal or Borrow&quot; was chosen by viewers who cast votes via postcard through the mail. The UK was undergoing national and regional power cuts during the winter of 1972, due to a coal mining strike, leading to many viewers missing the broadcast of the six songs and the result the following week. The postal vote was thus lower than in previous years, but the winner still received 62,584 votes.

=== Chart success ===
The group released all six songs from the UK final shortly after the contest. The winner, together with the runner up &quot;One By One&quot;, was released on single and spent three weeks at No. 2 in the UK singles chart. Both tracks were then included in the album &quot;We&#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing&quot;, together with the last placed song &quot;Songs of Praise&quot;. The album was also a No. 2 hit in the UK. Roy Wood who had composed the last placed entry released his own version of the track on the B-side of his 1973 No. 18 hit &quot;Dear Elaine&quot;. Later in 1972, the remaining three songs from the UK final were released by The New Seekers in the budget LP &quot;What Have They Done To My Song, Ma?&quot; released on the Contour label. In subsequent years, all six songs by the group have been released on CD compilations.

==At Eurovision==
&quot;Beg, Steal or Borrow&quot; won the national and went on to come second in the contest.

This was also the only Eurovision Song Contest between 1971 and 2008 in which Terry Wogan had no involvement with. Actor and royal commentator Tom Fleming provided the BBC Television commentary, whilst Pete Murray provided the radio commentary for BBC Radio 1 and 2 listeners.

Each country nominated two jury members, one below the age of 25 and the other above, who voted for their respective country by giving between one and five points to each song, except that representing their own country. All jury members were colocated in the Grand Hall of Edinburgh Castle. The jury members from the United Kingdom were Doreen Samuels and Robert Walker. 

=== Voting ===



==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211942" start="42" end="70" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1972" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434835" start="91" end="111" title="Beg, Steal or Borrow" label="Beg, Steal or Borrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25183158" start="130" end="139" title="Tony Cole (musician)" label="Tony Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q934498" start="188" end="203" title="The New Seekers" label="The New Seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="248" end="280" title="BBC" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636910" start="472" end="482" title="Usher Hall" label="Usher Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="486" end="495" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="655" end="668" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359154" start="1124" end="1164" title="I&amp;#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing" label="I&amp;#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1462" end="1486" title="List of Cliff Richard television appearances#It.27s Cliff Richard: Series 3" label="It&amp;#x27;s Cliff Richard!"/>
<link wikidata="Q934498" start="1531" end="1546" title="The New Seekers" label="The New Seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434835" start="1673" end="1693" title="Beg, Steal or Borrow" label="Beg, Steal or Borrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864999" start="1859" end="1877" title="UK miners&amp;#x27; strike (1972)" label="coal mining strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q130211971" start="2370" end="2411" title="We&amp;#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing" label="We&amp;#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q918484" start="2525" end="2533" title="Roy Wood" label="Roy Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756023" start="2654" end="2665" title="Dear Elaine" label="Dear Elaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q734264" start="3139" end="3150" title="Terry Wogan" label="Terry Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439661" start="3204" end="3215" title="Tom Fleming (actor)" label="Tom Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172170" start="3263" end="3274" title="Pete Murray (DJ)" label="Pete Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="3309" end="3320" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="3325" end="3326" title="BBC Radio 2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="3613" end="3629" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297868" wikidata="Q696532" url="?curid=297868" title="Gravitation (manga)">
<text>is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Maki Murakami. The story follows the attempts of Shuichi Shindo and his band, Bad Luck, to become Japan&#x27;s next musical sensation, and his struggles to capture Eiri Yuki&#x27;s heart.

The manga was published by Gentosha and was serialized on &quot;Kimi to Boku&quot; starting in 1996 and ending in 2002. The manga has been licensed and published in English by Tokyopop, as well as a light novel. There is also the &quot;Gravitation Collection&quot; which consists of 6 volumes, each of which has two original volumes of &quot;Gravitation&quot; in it. A sequel, , was published in the web magazine &quot;Genzo&quot; from 2004 to 2009 and returned in 2011 to &quot;Web Spica&quot;.

&quot;Gravitation&quot; has also been adapted into a two episode OVA series in 1999 directed by Shinichi Watanabe and a thirteen-episode anime television series directed by Bob Shirohata. The TV series aired in Japan from October 4, 2000, to January 10, 2001, on WOWOW Wednesdays at 18:30 and was reaired on Tokyo MX in 2007. The anime goes to roughly volume seven of the manga. Both have been licensed for North American release by Nozomi Entertainment and also Southeast Asian release by Medialink.

==Plot==

The story surrounds an aspiring singer, Shuichi Shindou, and his band, Bad Luck (formed with his best friend Hiroshi Nakano, who is on guitar). Shuichi wants to become Japan&#x27;s next big star, and follow in the footsteps of the famous idol Ryuichi Sakuma, lead singer of the now-disbanded legendary group Nittle Grasper. One evening, Shuichi is looking over lyrics for a song he is writing when his paper is blown away by the wind and picked up by a tall, blond-haired (light brown in the manga) stranger. The man dismisses Shuichi&#x27;s hard work as garbage, which hurts Shuichi deeply. Despite his anger, he is intrigued by the stranger. This will be their first encounter as Shuichi becomes fascinated by the stranger, who soon turns out to be the famous romance novelist Eiri Yuki (real name: Uesugi). Both the manga and the anime follow this plot.

===&quot;Gravitation EX.&quot;===
The story picks up directly after volume 12; Shuichi and Eiri find and agree to momentarily take care of Yuki Kitazawa&#x27;s son, Riku. Shuichi kisses and conducts a short affair with Ryuichi Sakuma, who announces that he has always been in love with Shuichi. Eiri is in a car accident that causes him to temporarily lose his eyesight, and Reiji announces that she&#x27;s making a movie about everything that has happened to them. Shuichi believes that this movie is the reason Ryuichi &quot;pretended&quot; to go after him, although Ryuichi&#x27;s true motives remain unknown.

==Development==
The precursor to the &quot;Gravitation&quot; manga was a series titled &quot;Help!&quot;, which followed a similar storyline but cast the characters in slightly different roles.

Murakami went to New York to research for a storyline later in &quot;Gravitation&quot; where the characters visit the city.

Murakami has created based on &quot;Gravitation&quot; which she describes as &quot;pretty hard-core, adult stuff. &quot;Remix&quot; is softcore and &quot;Megamix&quot; is much more hardcore&quot;. She created the to explore tensions between the characters. Murakami penned a thirteen-volume series called &quot;Gravitation Remix&quot; under the group Crocodile Ave. The are much more sexually explicit than the anime and deviate heavily from the manga storyline. Fans have requested that Tokyopop license &quot;Gravitation Remix&quot;, but Tokyopop regards the depiction of some characters to be too young and is concerned about themes of incest, and therefore has not licensed them.

In addition to the remixes, Murakami created four highly sexually explicit &quot;Megamix&quot; , dubbed &quot;Mega-gra&quot;, &quot;Megamix: Panda&quot;, &quot;Megamix: Kumagorou&quot;, and &quot;Megamix: Capybara&quot;. These also deviate from the storyline as the &quot;Remixes&quot; do, with &quot;Panda&quot; including content. A new &quot;Megamix&quot; is currently in the works, entitled &quot;Megamix Zebra&quot;. &quot;Megamix Zebra&quot; will feature Shuichi, Ryuichi, and Eiri in a threesome, with Shuichi as the seme.

==Media==

===Manga===

Written and illustrated by Maki Murakami, the manga was serialized in Gentosha&#x27;s &quot;Kimi to Boku&quot; magazine between 1996 and 2002. Initially, a total of eleven volumes were released by Sony Magazines between March 7, 1996, and December 25, 2000. Gentosha started to republish the series on April 24, 2002, concluding with the twelfth on August 24, 2002. A was released by Gentosha between April 25 and September 22, 2006.

Tokyopop licensed the series for an English-language release in North America and published the twelve volumes from August 5, 2003 to July 12, 2005. Tokyopop also released the series in six compilation volumes in 2009–10. Madman Entertainment distributes the series in New Zealand and Australia. Seven Seas Entertainment licensed the series in October 2023 and released omnibus volumes of the series.

A sequel to the series, &quot;Gravitation EX.&quot;, started to be serialized in Japanese and English in the online magazine &quot;Web Comic Genzo&quot;. The first volume was published simultaneously by Gentosha and Tokyopop on February 24, 2007. Madman Entertainment also distributed the series in New Zealand and Australia. In the March 2009 issue, Murakami put the series on hiatus; Murakami resumed the series on June 28, 2011, in Gentosha&#x27;s online magazine &quot;Web Spica&quot;. The second volume was published on November 24, 2011.

On May 28, 2014, Murakami published a one-shot based on &quot;Gravitation&quot;, titled , which was followed by a series of the same name on July 28 in &quot;Web Spica&quot;.

===Anime===

====OVA====
A two-part OVA adaptation was created by Plum, Animate Film, SPE Visual Works, Sony Magazines, and Movic. The first episode was released on July 23, 1999, and the second was released on September 22, 1999. It used the opening theme &quot;Blind Game Again&quot; and the ending theme &quot;Smashing Blue&quot; with the lyrics, composition, and arrangement done by Mad Soldiers and sung By Kinya Kotani. There are three insert songs, Part 1 had one called &quot;Spicy Marmalade&quot;, with the lyrics, composition, and arrangement done by Mad Soldiers and sung by Kinya Kotani. Part 2 had two, the first one &quot;In the Moonlight&quot; with the lyrics, composition, and arrangement done by Mad Soldiers and sung By Kinya Kotani and the second &quot;Shining Collection&quot; with the lyrics, composition, and arrangement and sung by Iceman. The series was released in North America on DVD by Nozomi Entertainment in 2005 under the name &quot;Gravitation: Lyrics of Love&quot;.

====TV series====
An anime television series adaptation was produced by Studio Deen, SME Visual Works, and Sony Magazines and directed by Bob Shirohata. The opening and closing themes to the TV series are &quot;Super Drive&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Glaring Dream&quot;, performed respectively by Yosuke Sakanoue and Kinya Kotani. The series was released in North America on DVD by Nozomi Entertainment in 2004.

===Drama CDs===
Eight audio dramas were produced for &quot;Gravitation&quot;, featuring most of the voice actors of the TV and OVA series. Five retell events from the manga series, while the remaining three cover new story material. The drama CDs also contain musical tracks performed by Japanese voice actors.

===Other books===
There are two novels based on &quot;Gravitation&quot;. The first one, released on November 30, 2000, follows the storyline for the OVAs. A second novel of &quot;Gravitation&quot; called was written by Jun Lennon and released on September 30, 2002; it follows Shuichi as he goes on a chase throughout Japan to find the kidnapped Yuki. Both were published in North America by Tokyopop. The first was published on March 7, 2006, and the second was published on July 11, 2006, under the name &quot;Gravitation: voice of temptation&quot;. Both the novels were remade into a edition and published on February 24, 2007.

Two were released by Sony Magazines: the first was published on March 2, 1998, and the second one was published on August 7, 2000. Additionally, a fan book on the anime series was released on March 15, 2001.

==Reception==

Almost half a million copies of the &quot;Gravitation&quot; manga have been sold from its North American release from 2003 to 2007, and in 2005 it was the top manga on BookScan with BL themes. Rachel Woods notes that even a milder manga &quot;relies on sexual innuendo, comic double entendres, and coded visual references in order to maintain an erotic undercurrent that is not sexually explicit in nature&quot;, and discusses a page from &quot;Gravitation&quot; which shows the characters kissing, but using &quot;fragmented panels&quot; which show Yuki&#x27;s &quot;wandering hand&quot; to provide a &quot;tantalizing and suggestive imagery&quot; that encourages the reader&#x27;s imagination.

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
*Official Gentosha website 
*Official Sony Music Homepage 
*Official Aniplex Homepage 
*Official AT-X OVA website 
*Official AT-X TV series Website 
*Official Tokyo MX website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="14" end="19" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q510959" start="54" end="67" title="Maki Murakami" label="Maki Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="103" end="117" title="List of Gravitation characters#Shuichi Shindo" label="Shuichi Shindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q226008" start="165" end="187" title="Japanese idol" label="next musical sensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315736" start="419" end="427" title="Tokyopop" label="Tokyopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="442" end="453" title="light novel" label="light novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="805" end="808" title="Original video animation" label="OVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006300" start="836" end="853" title="Shinichi Watanabe" label="Shinichi Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="877" end="882" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q775216" start="1003" end="1008" title="WOWOW" label="WOWOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q115146" start="1048" end="1056" title="Tokyo MX" label="Tokyo MX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333573" start="1173" end="1193" title="Nozomi Entertainment" label="Nozomi Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q15903799" start="1230" end="1239" title="Medialink" label="Medialink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164348" start="4221" end="4230" title="threesome" label="threesome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4252" end="4256" title="Boys&amp;#x27; love#Seme and uke" label="seme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634391" start="4353" end="4361" title="Gentosha" label="Gentosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634391" start="4541" end="4549" title="Gentosha" label="Gentosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q315736" start="4718" end="4726" title="Tokyopop" label="Tokyopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816526" start="4940" end="4960" title="Madman Entertainment" label="Madman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073284" start="5014" end="5038" title="Seven Seas Entertainment" label="Seven Seas Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="5703" end="5711" title="one-shot (comics)" label="one-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="5877" end="5880" title="OVA" label="OVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041890" start="5913" end="5925" title="Animate (retailer)" label="Animate Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q770328" start="5927" end="5943" title="Aniplex" label="SPE Visual Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926811" start="5965" end="5970" title="Movic" label="Movic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6228" end="6240" title="Mad Soldiers" label="Mad Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465843" start="6253" end="6265" title="Kotani Kinya" label="Kinya Kotani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465843" start="6427" end="6439" title="Kotani Kinya" label="Kinya Kotani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6554" end="6566" title="Mad Soldiers" label="Mad Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465843" start="6579" end="6591" title="Kotani Kinya" label="Kinya Kotani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998147" start="6696" end="6702" title="Iceman (Japanese band)" label="Iceman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="6731" end="6744" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333573" start="6755" end="6775" title="Nozomi Entertainment" label="Nozomi Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q507806" start="6913" end="6924" title="Studio Deen" label="Studio Deen"/>
<link wikidata="Q770328" start="6926" end="6942" title="Aniplex" label="SME Visual Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465843" start="7153" end="7165" title="Kotani Kinya" label="Kinya Kotani"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7194" end="7207" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333573" start="7218" end="7238" title="Nozomi Entertainment" label="Nozomi Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="7271" end="7282" title="audio drama" label="audio drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="7486" end="7494" title="drama CD" label="drama CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031605" start="8585" end="8593" title="BookScan" label="BookScan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297869" wikidata="Q4654005" url="?curid=297869" title="AS-level">
<text>AS-level can refer to:
*Advanced Subsidiary level, a public examination taken for the General Certificate of Education, with a smaller course content than an A level.
*Advanced Supplementary level, an old qualification which was part of the UK Advanced level system prior to 2000
*Hong Kong Advanced Supplementary Level Examination 

==See also ==
* AS (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4654005" start="0" end="8" title="AS-level" label="AS-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="24" end="49" title="Advanced Subsidiary level" label="Advanced Subsidiary level"/>
<link wikidata="Q646545" start="86" end="118" title="General Certificate of Education" label="General Certificate of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981711" start="241" end="258" title="Advanced Level (UK)" label="UK Advanced level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894193" start="281" end="331" title="Hong Kong Advanced Supplementary Level Examination" label="Hong Kong Advanced Supplementary Level Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q190580" start="350" end="369" title="AS (disambiguation)" label="AS (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297875" wikidata="Q12588" url="?curid=297875" title="La Habana Province">
<text>La Habana Province , formerly known as Ciudad de La Habana Province, is a province of Cuba that includes the territory of the city of Havana, the Republic&#x27;s capital. The province&#x27;s territory is the seat of the superior organs of the state and its provincial administration.

Between 1878 and 2010, the name referred to a different province that covered a much larger area, and after 1976 restructuring, the then-La Habana Province did not include the city of Havana. The larger province was subdivided in 2010 into the present-day provinces of Artemisa (which also took over three municipalities from Pinar del Río) and Mayabeque.

==History==
The Province of Havana was created in 1878, is one of the 6 original provinces in which the island was divided, still under Spanish colonial rule.

In the political administrative division of 1976, in which the country was divided into 14 provinces, the original Province of Havana was divided into Havana City Province (&quot;Ciudad de La Habana&quot;; the capital) and Havana Province (areas surrounding the capital). Havana City Province integrated the territories of the metropolitan region of the capital, including Havana, Marianao, Guanabacoa, Regla, and Santiago de las Vegas. From 1976 until 2010, the provincial administration of Havana Province had its headquarters located in Havana City Province, since it lacked a capital of its own.

On August 1, 2010, the National Assembly made another modification of the territorial organization of Cuba, segmenting the then-Province of Havana (the areas surrounding the capital), colloquially called &quot;Habana Campo&quot;, in two new provinces; Artemisa Province to the west, and Mayabeque Province to the east. With this change, which went into effect as of January 1, 2011, Havana City Province became known simply as Havana Province, as differentiation was no longer needed. Additionally, three municipalities of Pinar del Río Province (Bahía Honda, Candelaria and San Cristóbal) were transferred to the new Artemisa Province.

==Municipalities==
Before 1961, Havana was the official name only of the central municipality of a conurbated area that included at least 6 municipalities: Havana, Marianao, Regla, Guanabacoa, Santiago de las Vegas and Santa María del Rosario-Cotorro. Currently, the territory that occupies the old municipality of Havana (former Villa of San Cristóbal de La Habana) is divided into 6 municipalities (Plaza de la Revolución, La Habana Vieja, Centro Habana, Diez de Octubre, Cerro, Arroyo Naranjo), and Boyeros (Altahabana). The city, as it is conceived at the present time, includes all the provincial territory, also includes the territories of 9 municipalities that were not part of old Havana municipality, which are: Playa, Marianao, La Lisa, Guanabacoa, Regla, Habana del Este, San Miguel del Padrón, Cotorro and Boyeros.

===Neighborhoods===
Source: Oficina Nacional de Estadísticas 2010

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12588" start="0" end="18" title="La Habana Province" label="La Habana Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q12588" start="39" end="67" title="La Habana Province" label="Ciudad de La Habana Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q115291" start="74" end="82" title="Provinces of Cuba" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="86" end="90" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="134" end="140" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q274126" start="417" end="440" title="La Habana Province (1976–2010)" label="then-La Habana Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q115325" start="554" end="562" title="Artemisa Province" label="Artemisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115497" start="611" end="624" title="Pinar del Río Province" label="Pinar del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q115310" start="630" end="639" title="Mayabeque Province" label="Mayabeque"/>
<link wikidata="Q115291" start="893" end="902" title="Provinces of Cuba" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="1175" end="1181" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553350" start="1183" end="1191" title="Marianao" label="Marianao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723864" start="1193" end="1203" title="Guanabacoa" label="Guanabacoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066278" start="1205" end="1210" title="Regla" label="Regla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747267" start="1216" end="1237" title="Santiago de las Vegas" label="Santiago de las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q274126" start="1526" end="1549" title="La Habana Province (1976–2010)" label="then-Province of Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q115325" start="1655" end="1672" title="Artemisa Province" label="Artemisa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q115310" start="1690" end="1708" title="Mayabeque Province" label="Mayabeque Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q115497" start="1926" end="1948" title="Pinar del Río Province" label="Pinar del Río Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="2073" end="2079" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="2197" end="2203" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553350" start="2205" end="2213" title="Marianao" label="Marianao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066278" start="2215" end="2220" title="Regla" label="Regla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723864" start="2222" end="2232" title="Guanabacoa" label="Guanabacoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747267" start="2234" end="2255" title="Santiago de las Vegas" label="Santiago de las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419772" start="2260" end="2283" title="Santa María del Rosario" label="Santa María del Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646457" start="2284" end="2291" title="Cotorro" label="Cotorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099152" start="2442" end="2464" title="Plaza de la Revolución" label="Plaza de la Revolución"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165566" start="2466" end="2481" title="La Habana Vieja" label="La Habana Vieja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054312" start="2483" end="2496" title="Centro Habana" label="Centro Habana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397948" start="2498" end="2513" title="Diez de Octubre" label="Diez de Octubre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055715" start="2515" end="2520" title="Cerro, Havana" label="Cerro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936053" start="2522" end="2536" title="Arroyo Naranjo" label="Arroyo Naranjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936076" start="2543" end="2550" title="Boyeros" label="Boyeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066897" start="2762" end="2767" title="Playa, Havana" label="Playa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553350" start="2769" end="2777" title="Marianao" label="Marianao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648399" start="2779" end="2786" title="La Lisa" label="La Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723864" start="2788" end="2798" title="Guanabacoa" label="Guanabacoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066278" start="2800" end="2805" title="Regla" label="Regla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566695" start="2807" end="2822" title="Habana del Este" label="Habana del Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234391" start="2824" end="2845" title="San Miguel del Padrón" label="San Miguel del Padrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646457" start="2847" end="2854" title="Cotorro" label="Cotorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936076" start="2859" end="2866" title="Boyeros" label="Boyeros"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297880" wikidata="Q4952136" url="?curid=297880" title="Boy Scouts of the Philippines">
<text>The Boy Scouts of the Philippines (BSP) is the national scouting organization of the Philippines in the World Organization of the Scout Movement. The Scout movement was first introduced in the Philippines in 1910 during the American Occupation. It was granted &quot;Recognition as a Member Organization of the Boy Scouts International Conference with effect from October 31, 1936&quot; by virtue of certification signed by J. S. Wilson, Olave Baden-Powell, and Daniel Spry.

For most of the late 20th century and into the 21st century, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines is among the largest Scout organizations in the world, currently 4th, in terms of membership count (behind Boy Scouts of America, The Bharat Scouts and Guides of India and the co-ed Gerakan Pramuka Indonesia), largely due to the organization&#x27;s dependence on the Department of Education.

==Program sections==
* KID Scouting (Kabataang Iminumulat Diwa) is for boys 4 to 6 years old (in pre-school). They wear a light blue neckerchief.
* KAB Scouting (Kabataan Alay sa Bayan) is for boys 6 to 9 years old (grades 1 through 3). They wear a yellow neckerchief.
* Boy Scouting is for boys 9 to 11 years old (grades 4 through 6). They wear a green neckerchief.
* Senior Scouting is for boys 12 to 16 years old (grades 7 through 10). They wear a red neckerchief.
* Rover Scouting is for young men 16 to 24 years old (grades 11–12 and college level). Rovers aged 24 and above are called Rover Peers. They wear a navy-blue neckerchief.

===KAB Scout Advancement Program===
* Young USA
* Growing
* Leaping

===Boy Scout Advancement Program===
* Membership
* Tenderfoot Scout
* Second Class Scout
* First Class Scout
* Scout Service
* Scout Citizen

===Senior Scout Advancement Program===
* Membership
* Explorer
* Pathfinder
* Outdoorsman
* Venturer
* Eagle Scout

===Rover Advancement Program===
* Yellow Quadrant
* Green Quadrant
* Red Quadrant
* Blue Quadrant
* Chief Scout&#x27;s Nation Builder

All ranks wear the organizational badge, with elements from the Flag of the Philippines (the national flag forms the basis of the trefoil colors) and the green neckerchief below the trefoil, in their uniforms.

==Scout ideals==

===Vision===
: Foremost in preparing the youth to become agents of change in communities, guided by the Scout Oath and Law.

===Mission===
: To help the youth develop values and acquire competencies to become responsible citizens and capable leaders anchored on the Scout Oath and Law.

===Scout Oath===
: On my honor, I will do my best
: to do my duty to love God and my country, 
: the Republic of the Philippines, 
: and to obey the Scout Law.
: to help other people at all times,
: to keep myself physically strong, 
: mentally awake, and morally straight.

===Panunumpa ng Scout===
:Sa ngalan ng aking dangal ay gagawin ko ang buong makakaya
:Upang tumupad sa aking tungkulin sa Diyos at sa aking Bayan, ang Republika ng Pilipinas, at sumunod sa Batas ng Scout;
:Tumulong sa ibang tao sa lahat ng pagkakataon;
:Mapanatiling malakas ang aking katawan, gising ang isipan at marangal ang asal.

===Scout Law / Batas ng Scout===
===Senior Scout Code===
===Preamble===
We, the sovereign Filipino people, imploring the aid of Almighty God, in order to build a just and humane society, and establish a Government that shall embody our ideals and aspirations, promote the common good, conserve and develop our patrimony, and secure to ourselves and our posterity, the blessings of independence and democracy under the rule of law and a regime of truth, justice, freedom, love, equality, and peace, do ordain and promulgate this Constitution.

==Laws and rulings==
For most of its existence, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines was a private organization. However, this status has been officially and legally reversed with finality by Philippine Supreme Court decisions in 1991 (&quot;government-controlled corporation&quot;), 2011 (&quot;public corporation or a government instrumentality&quot;), and 2012.
==History of Scouting==

Just 3 years after the birth of the Scout Movement and just 2 years after the Boy Scouts of America was founded the first Philippine troops were organized by Elwood Stanley Brown, Physical Director of the Manila YMCA, in 1910. In 1912, Elwood Stanley Brown recognized by Baden-Powell as &quot;Chief Scoutmaster.&quot; In 1913, troops were organized by Mark Thompson, Antonio Torres, Domingo Ponce, and Francisco Varona. In 1914, the Lorillard Spencer Troop organized in November in Zamboanga City by Sherman L. Kiser, the first troop in the southern island of Mindanao.

In Jan 1922, Scouting started at Silliman Institute under the auspices of its church. They applied for registration to BSA National Headquarters, New York, in 1922, and received their document in January 1923 (some eight or nine months before the creation of the BSA Philippine Islands Council No. 545). On April 19, 1922, a certain Mr. Ong of Calivo, Capiz (now Kalibo, Aklan) organized the Boy Scouts of Calivo which the Governor-General of the Philippines Leonard Wood at that time acknowledged in his letter dated January 2, 1923. In 1923, the Rotary Club established the Boy Scouts of America Philippine Islands Council No. 545 in October as a territorial council covering troops organized nationwide (at first the council was only to cover organized Scouting in the Manila area and environs). In 1931, experimentation was conducted in Sea Scouting and Cub Scouting. In 1933, the Philippines made its first participation in an international Scout event, with the BSA Philippine Islands Council delegation embedded in the BSA contingent to the 4th World Scout Jamboree in Budapest, Hungary. In 1934 Rover Scouting was introduced.

The BSA Shanghai District was placed under the supervision of the BSA Philippine Islands Council No. 545.

===Establishment===

On October 31, 1936, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines were officially chartered under the Commonwealth of the Philippines Act No. 111. The founding BSP President and Chief Scout were Josephus Stevenot. In 1937, the BSA Philippine Islands Council No. 545, meeting in October, decided on the handover of its properties and responsibilities to the nascent BSP.

In 1938, the BSP was inaugurated by Pres. Manuel Quezon on January 1, and started functioning. Exequiél Villacorta was appointed the first &quot;Chief Scout Executive&quot; of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, in imitation of the BSA office of Chief Scout Executive. The young BSP was caught in the crossfires of the Second World War and scouting activities, which were either abolished or absorbed into the paramilitary styled activities of the current Scout Association of Japan during the Japanese-sponsored Second Republic, only resumed in most of the country by late 1945.

===Independence era===

In 1947, one year after the restoration of independence, the BSP made its first participation in an international event, with the BSP contingent to the 6th World Scout Jamboree in Moisson, France as a full member organization of the World Organization of the Scout Movement&#x27;s Asia-Pacific Region (established 1956). In 1953, the first Wood Badge course was conducted at BSP Camp Gre-Zar in Novaliches, Quezon City.

In 1954, the first BSP National Scout Jamboree was held at Rolling Hills, Balarâ, Quezon City. Dr. Mariano Villarama de Los Santos served on the World Scout Committee from 1957 until 1959 as its first Filipino member. In 1959, the 10th World Scout Jamboree was held at the National Scout Reservation, University of the Philippines, Los Baños, at the foot of Mount Makiling, in the province of Laguna. This was the first World Scout Jamboree outside Europe and Canada.

In 1960, the BSP began to indigenize its Scouting programs. That year the Cub Scout program was revised to replace American symbols (e.g. Bobcat, Bear Cub, Wolf Cub, Lion Cub) with Philippine motifs (e.g. Kawan, Mother Usa, Chief Usa, Young Usa, Lauan, Molave, Narra, Leaping Usa). A year later, the Boy Scout program was revised to replace American symbols (e.g. Eagle) with Philippine motifs (e.g. Maginoo, Jose Rizal).

In 1963, 24 members of the BSP delegation to the 11th World Scout Jamboree in Marathon, Greece, died in a plane crash in the sea off the coast of Mumbai, India. Streets in the South Triangle District of Quezon City were later named in their memory. In 1968, Boy Scouts, Rovers, and Scouters joined in the search-and-rescue operations for victims of the Ruby Tower collapse in August. For the services rendered by the Scouts, the BSP organization was awarded by President Ferdinand Marcos with a Presidential Gold Medal the following year.

In 1970, Senior Scouting was officially launched as part of the BSP program. It has three sections: Air (grey uniform), Land (dark green), and Sea (white). In 1971, Ambassador Antonio C. Delgado was elected Chairman of the World Scout Conference, becoming the first Filipino to hold this position. In 1972, BSP membership hit the one-million mark nationwide.

In 1973, the Golden Jubilee Jamboree and first Asia-Pacific Jamboree was held at the National Scout Reservation, University of the Philippines, Los Baños, Laguna. The jamboree song, &quot;Kapatirang Paglilingkod,&quot; reflected the Bagong Lipunan regime of President Marcos. In 1974–75, the Cub Scout name was Philippinised: The Pilipino alphabet at that time did not include the letter C, so &quot;Cub&quot; was replaced with &quot;Kab.&quot; However, since &quot;kab&quot; was not actually a Pilipino word, it was contrived as an acronym for &quot;Kabataan Alay sa Bayan&quot; and written in all caps. In 1975–86, in compliance with the orders of Pres. Marcos, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines was renamed &quot;Kapatirang Scout ng Pilipinas&quot; (literally meaning Scout Brotherhood of the Philippines). The Scout age groups were reduced from four to two. The Scout Oath and Scout Law were revised, and a new Scout badge was devised. President Ferdinand Marcos took the title of Chief Scout, the first Philippine head of state to hold the title.

=== Modern day scouting ===

In 1986, the Golden Jubilee of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines (1936–86) was marked. In the aftermath of the People Power Revolution, the name Kapatirang Scout ng Pilipinas was abandoned, and the organization reverted to its original name &quot;Boy Scouts of the Philippines&quot;, under its first lady Chief Scout, then President Corazon Aquino. In 1990–91, a program was created for pre-school boys and named KID Scouting. Since &quot;kid&quot; in English and not Filipino, it was contrived as an acronym for &quot;Kabataang Iminumulat Diwa&quot; and written in all caps. In 1991, the 12th Asia-Pacific Jamboree was held in Philippine Scouting Center, University of the Philippines, Los Baños, Laguna. In 1992, the old BSP badge was reinstated.

In 1993, the Philippines hosted the first ASEAN Scout Jamboree. In 1997, the 2nd World Scout Parliamentary Union held in Manila. In 1999, the first Venture Scout Jamboree was held on Ilian Hills, Iriga City, Camarines Sur, Bicol. In 2007, the BSP observed the world centennial of the Scout Movement. In 2009–10, the BSP hosted the 26th Asia-Pacific Jamboree, 28 December 2009 – 3 January 2010. This was the third APR Jamboree in the Philippines. In 2011, BSP celebrated 75 years of Philippine Scouting. In 2013, the National Peace Jamboree held on Mount Makiling in Laguna, in Capitol Hills Scout Camp in Cebu, and the BSP&#x27;s Camp Malagos in Davao.

2014 marked the Centennial (1914–2014) anniversary of the defunct Lorillard Spencer Troop, the first official troop in the islands. A &quot;Centennial Jamboree&quot; was held in three venues: Marikina (Luzon), Cebu City (Visayas), and Zamboanga City (Mindanao).

Celebrations of the centennial year of the establishment of the Philippine Islands Council BSA were marked in 2023, the first step in a years-long preparation for the BSP Centennial.

==Noted Personalities==
==Jamborees==

===National Jamborees===
===Special Jamborees===
==References==
==External links==

* Boy Scouts of the Philippines
* Merit Badge Center, Philippines
* The Scout Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4952136" start="4" end="33" title="Boy Scouts of the Philippines" label="Boy Scouts of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952136" start="35" end="38" title="Boy Scouts of the Philippines" label="BSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="56" end="64" title="scouting" label="scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="85" end="96" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="104" end="144" title="World Organization of the Scout Movement" label="World Organization of the Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="150" end="164" title="Scout movement" label="Scout movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042084" start="224" end="243" title="Insular Government of the Philippine Islands" label="American Occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q546216" start="423" end="435" title="J. S. Wilson" label="J. S. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q231525" start="437" end="455" title="Olave Baden-Powell" label="Olave Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218822" start="461" end="472" title="Daniel Spry" label="Daniel Spry"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="677" end="698" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q20582190" start="700" end="728" title="The Bharat Scouts and Guides" label="The Bharat Scouts and Guides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548845" start="752" end="777" title="Gerakan Pramuka Indonesia" label="Gerakan Pramuka Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550346" start="837" end="860" title="Department of Education (Philippines)" label="Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325252" start="1817" end="1828" title="Eagle Scout (Boy Scouts of the Philippines)" label="Eagle Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q134627" start="2029" end="2052" title="Flag of the Philippines" label="Flag of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q514212" start="3823" end="3847" title="Supreme Court of the Philippines" label="Philippine Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368319" start="4179" end="4199" title="Elwood Brown" label="Elwood Stanley Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="4292" end="4304" title="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell" label="Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629" start="4503" end="4517" title="Zamboanga City" label="Zamboanga City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23003121" start="4521" end="4537" title="Sherman L. Kiser" label="Sherman L. Kiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583940" start="4625" end="4643" title="Silliman University" label="Silliman Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534794" start="5168" end="5224" title="Boy Scouts of America Philippine Islands Council No. 545" label="Boy Scouts of America Philippine Islands Council No. 545"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124275" start="5433" end="5445" title="Sea Scouting" label="Sea Scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q592568" start="5640" end="5664" title="4th World Scout Jamboree" label="4th World Scout Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="5668" end="5676" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088426" start="5695" end="5706" title="Rover Scout" label="Rover Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="5735" end="5743" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282831" start="6039" end="6056" title="Joseph Stevenot" label="Josephus Stevenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096910" start="6460" end="6481" title="Chief Scout Executive" label="Chief Scout Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6533" end="6549" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118784" start="6670" end="6696" title="Scout Association of Japan" label="Scout Association of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q897977" start="6971" end="6995" title="6th World Scout Jamboree" label="6th World Scout Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461413" start="6999" end="7006" title="Moisson" label="Moisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="7052" end="7092" title="World Organization of the Scout Movement" label="World Organization of the Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q989467" start="7159" end="7169" title="Wood Badge" label="Wood Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="7214" end="7224" title="Quezon City" label="Novaliches"/>
<link wikidata="Q745325" start="7263" end="7286" title="Jamboree (Scouting)" label="National Scout Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q20312151" start="7314" end="7320" title="Balara Filters Park" label="Balarâ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="7322" end="7333" title="Quezon City" label="Quezon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q658984" start="7335" end="7370" title="University of Manila" label="Dr. Mariano Villarama de Los Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="7385" end="7406" title="World Scout Committee" label="World Scout Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q239021" start="7471" end="7496" title="10th World Scout Jamboree" label="10th World Scout Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q69793" start="7572" end="7581" title="Los Baños, Laguna" label="Los Baños"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551536" start="7598" end="7612" title="Mount Makiling" label="Mount Makiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="7633" end="7639" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q120997" start="7914" end="7919" title="Flock (birds)" label="Kawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="7928" end="7931" title="Deer" label="Usa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="7939" end="7942" title="Deer" label="Usa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="7950" end="7953" title="Deer" label="Usa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373994" start="7962" end="7968" title="Vitex parviflora" label="Molave"/>
<link wikidata="Q979014" start="7970" end="7975" title="Pterocarpus indicus" label="Narra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="7985" end="7988" title="Deer" label="Usa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138938" start="8181" end="8206" title="11th World Scout Jamboree" label="11th World Scout Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q212150" start="8210" end="8218" title="Marathon, Greece" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079825" start="8238" end="8249" title="United Arab Airlines Flight 869 (1963)" label="plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="8278" end="8291" title="Mumbai, India" label="Mumbai, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27246442" start="8308" end="8331" title="11th World Jamboree Memorial Rotonda" label="South Triangle District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="8335" end="8346" title="Quezon City" label="Quezon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q109537341" start="8485" end="8495" title="Ruby Tower" label="Ruby Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="8603" end="8619" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776481" start="8848" end="8866" title="Antonio C. Delgado" label="Antonio C. Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="10225" end="10248" title="People Power Revolution" label="People Power Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q746592" start="10770" end="10799" title="University of the Philippines" label="University of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q69793" start="10801" end="10818" title="Los Baños, Laguna" label="Los Baños, Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="10906" end="10911" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297882" wikidata="Q115027" url="?curid=297882" title="Isla de la Juventud">
<text>Isla de la Juventud (; ) is the second-largest Cuban island (after Cuba&#x27;s mainland) and the seventh-largest island in the West Indies (after mainland Cuba itself, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, Trinidad, and Andros Island). The island was called the Isle of Pines () until 1978. It has an area and is south of the island of Cuba, across the Gulf of Batabanó. The island lies almost directly south of Havana and Pinar del Río and is a Special Municipality (), not part of any province and is therefore administered directly by the central government of Cuba. The island has only one municipality, also named Isla de la Juventud.

The largest of the 350 islands in the Canarreos Archipelago (&quot;Archipiélago de los Canarreos&quot;), the island had an estimated population of 83,544 in 2019. The capital and largest city is Nueva Gerona in the north, and the second largest and oldest city is Santa Fe in the interior. Other communities include Columbia, La Demajagua (formerly Santa Bárbara), Mac Kinley, Cuchilla Alta, Punta del Este, Sierra de Caballos and Sierra de Casas.

== History ==
Little is known of the pre-Columbian history of the island, though a cave complex near the Punta del Este beach preserves 235 ancient drawings made by the native population, the Guanahatabey. The first written mention of these drawings comes from French traveller Charles Berchon. The caves were collectively designed as National monument in 1979.

The island was first sighted by Europeans in 1494 during Christopher Columbus&#x27;s second voyage to the New World. Columbus named the island La Evangelista, claiming it for Spain. The island was also known, at various points in its history, as Isla de Cotorras (Isle of Parrots) and Isla de Tesoros (Treasure Island).

Pirate activity in and around the area left its trace in English literature; notably, &quot;Treasure Island&quot; by Robert Louis Stevenson, and &quot;Peter Pan&quot; by J. M. Barrie, each drawing on accounts of the island and its native and pirate inhabitants, by reflecting the long dugout canoes that both pirates and the indigenous peoples used, and the American crocodile (&quot;Crocodylus acutus&quot;).

Following its defeat in the Spanish–American War and the Cuban War of Independence, Spain dropped all claims to Cuba under the terms of the 1898 Treaty of Paris. The Platt Amendment of 1901, which defined Cuba&#x27;s boundaries for the purposes of U.S. authorities, left the U.S. position on sovereignty over the then Isla de Pinos undetermined. This led to competing claims to the island by the United States and Cuba. In 1907, the U.S. Supreme Court decided, in &quot;Pearcy v. Stranahan&quot;, that control of the island was a political decision, not a judicial one. In 1916, a pamphlet titled &quot;Isle of Pines: American or What?&quot; called for the U.S. to annex or purchase the island to settle the issue.

In 1903, Cuba and the United States negotiated and signed the Hay-Quesada Treaty, which recognized Cuba&#x27;s sovereignty over the island. The U.S. Senate ratified this agreement on March 13, 1925, over the objections of some four hundred United States citizens and companies, who owned or controlled about 95% of the island&#x27;s land.

Prior to 1976, the island was part of La Habana Province. With the political and administrative reorganization of Cuban provinces in 1976, the island was given the status of &quot;special municipality&quot;; it is administratively equivalent to a province.

Fidel Castro presided at a ceremony changing the name of the island from Isla de Pinos to Isla de la Juventud on 3 August 1978. This was the realization of a promise that he had made in 1967, when he said &quot;Let’s call it the Isle of Youth when the youth have done something grand with their work here, when they have revolutionized the natural environment, when they see the fruits of their labor and have revolutionized society here.&quot;

== Geography and economy ==
Much of the island is covered in pine forests, which is the source of the island&#x27;s large lumber industry (as well as its original name). The northern region of the island has low ridges from which marble is quarried, while the southern region is an elevated plain. Agriculture and fishing are the island&#x27;s main industries, with citrus fruit and vegetables being grown. A black sand beach was formed by volcanic activity.

The island has a mild climate but is known for frequent hurricanes. It is a popular tourist destination, with many beaches and resorts, including Bibijagua Beach. Until the Cuban government expropriated all foreign-owned property in the early 1960s, much land was owned by Americans, and the island contained a branch of the Hilton Hotels chain.

== Demographics ==
In the 2012 official census, the Special Municipality of Isla de la Juventud had a population of 84,751. The racial makeup of the population was white 50,732 (59.9%), mestizo or mulatto 26,013 (30.7%) and black 8,006 (9.4%).
 With a total area of , the Municipality had a population density of .

&quot;Caimaneros&quot;, the inhabitants of the south coast of the island, are descended from settlers from the Cayman Islands and Jamaica, and are English-speaking Cubans.

== Transportation ==

The main transportation to the island is by boat or aircraft. Hydrofoils (kometas) and motorized catamarans will make the journey from Batabanó to Nueva Gerona in between two and three hours. A much slower and larger cargo ferry takes around six hours to make the crossing but is cheaper.

== Presidio Modelo ==

The Presidio Modelo was erected between 1926 and 1931. The model panopticon penitentiary is on the outskirts of Nueva Gerona. It was the place where, after leading a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks in July 1953, Fidel Castro, along with his brother Raúl Castro, was imprisoned by the regime of Fulgencio Batista from 1953 to 1955. 

Following the Cuban Revolution, the same facility was used to imprison the new regime&#x27;s enemies and political dissidents. They included Huber Matos, an officer in the revolutionary army who attempted to resign and who said he was tortured there. Armando Valladares wrote a memoir describing the prison&#x27;s harsh conditions and cruel treatment of political prisoners. Presidio Modelo ceased functioning as a prison in 1967. It has been declared a national monument and its hospital rooms converted into a museum.

==References==
==External links==
* Supreme Court decision of 1907
* Municipality page (Spanish)
* Image of the Presidio Modelo, Léopold Lambert, &quot;Weaponized Architecture: The Impossibility of Innocence&quot;, New York, 2012, p. 19.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115027" start="0" end="19" title="Isla de la Juventud" label="Isla de la Juventud"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="47" end="51" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="53" end="59" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="127" end="138" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="168" end="178" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="180" end="187" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="189" end="200" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="202" end="210" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q514070" start="216" end="229" title="Andros Island" label="Andros Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q115027" start="258" end="271" title="Isla de la Juventud" label="Isle of Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="332" end="336" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536305" start="349" end="365" title="Gulf of Batabanó" label="Gulf of Batabanó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="408" end="414" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q115497" start="419" end="432" title="Pinar del Río Province" label="Pinar del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q115291" start="483" end="491" title="Provinces of Cuba" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032819" start="675" end="696" title="Canarreos Archipelago" label="Canarreos Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q833946" start="832" end="844" title="Nueva Gerona" label="Nueva Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419477" start="901" end="909" title="Santa Fe, Cuba" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12896937" start="963" end="975" title="La Demajagua, Isle of Youth" label="La Demajagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="1123" end="1136" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="1226" end="1242" title="Cave art" label="ancient drawings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118725" start="1278" end="1290" title="Guanahatabey" label="Guanahatabey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="1506" end="1526" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578423" start="1534" end="1547" title="Voyages of Christopher Columbus" label="second voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1555" end="1564" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="1770" end="1776" title="Pirate" label="Pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="1827" end="1845" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q185118" start="1862" end="1877" title="Treasure Island" label="Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="1887" end="1909" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435337" start="1921" end="1930" title="Peter and Wendy" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="1940" end="1952" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="2062" end="2067" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q207836" start="2128" end="2146" title="American crocodile" label="American crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="2209" end="2229" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514908" start="2238" end="2263" title="Cuban War of Independence" label="Cuban War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2265" end="2270" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q847137" start="2321" end="2341" title="Treaty of Paris (1898)" label="1898 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q863445" start="2347" end="2362" title="Platt Amendment" label="Platt Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2614" end="2632" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111446" start="2651" end="2670" title="Pearcy v. Stranahan" label="Pearcy v. Stranahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983546" start="2959" end="2977" title="Hay-Quesada Treaty" label="Hay-Quesada Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3041" end="3052" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12588" start="3275" end="3293" title="La Habana Province" label="La Habana Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="3495" end="3507" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="4002" end="4006" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q995609" start="4063" end="4078" title="lumber industry" label="lumber industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="4171" end="4177" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="4181" end="4189" title="Quarry" label="quarried"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="4239" end="4250" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="4255" end="4262" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="4307" end="4319" title="citrus fruit" label="citrus fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="4324" end="4333" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="4457" end="4467" title="Tropical cyclone" label="hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="4485" end="4492" title="Tourism" label="tourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="4516" end="4521" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q875157" start="4528" end="4534" title="resort" label="resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="4591" end="4603" title="Eminent domain" label="expropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q598884" start="4726" end="4739" title="Hilton Hotels" label="Hilton Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="4912" end="4917" title="white people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="4934" end="4941" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="4945" end="4952" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q388467" start="4972" end="4977" title="Afro-Cubans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q130268556" start="5321" end="5330" title="Hydrofoil" label="Hydrofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="5356" end="5365" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q270305" start="5394" end="5402" title="Batabanó, Cuba" label="Batabanó"/>
<link wikidata="Q833946" start="5406" end="5418" title="Nueva Gerona" label="Nueva Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095161" start="5576" end="5591" title="Presidio Modelo" label="Presidio Modelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q828310" start="5637" end="5647" title="panopticon" label="panopticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211553" start="5759" end="5775" title="Moncada Barracks" label="Moncada Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="5790" end="5802" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q46809" start="5827" end="5838" title="Raúl Castro" label="Raúl Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11270" start="5872" end="5889" title="Fulgencio Batista" label="Fulgencio Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="5925" end="5941" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q946934" start="6052" end="6063" title="Huber Matos" label="Huber Matos"/>
<link wikidata="Q475295" start="6162" end="6180" title="Armando Valladares" label="Armando Valladares"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="6265" end="6284" title="political prisoners" label="political prisoners"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297883" wikidata="Q1562058" url="?curid=297883" title="Maureen Dowd">
<text>Maureen Brigid Dowd (; born January 14, 1952) is an American columnist for &quot;The New York Times&quot; and an author.

During the 1970s and early 1980s, Dowd worked for &quot;The Washington Star&quot; and &quot;Time&quot;, writing news, sports and feature articles. She joined &quot;The New York Times&quot; in 1983 as a metropolitan reporter, and became an op-ed writer in 1995. Dowd became a staff writer for &quot;The New York Times Magazine&quot; in 2014. In 1999, Dowd received a Pulitzer Prize for her series of columns on the Clinton–Lewinsky scandal.

Dowd&#x27;s columns often explore politics, Hollywood, and gender-related topics. Her writing style has been compared to political cartoons in its exaggerated satire of politics and culture. Some have criticized her writings on female public figures, particularly Monica Lewinsky and Hillary Clinton, as sexist. 

During the 2016 presidential election, Dowd penned a &quot;New York Times&quot; op-ed, titled &quot;Donald the Dove, Hillary the Hawk&quot;, which was frequently referenced by critics of Donald Trump&#x27;s foreign policy when he took actions contrary to the narrative put forth by Dowd. 

==Early life and career==
Dowd was born the youngest of five children in Washington, D.C. Her mother, Margaret &quot;Peggy&quot; (), was a housewife, and her father, Mike Dowd, worked as a Washington, D.C., police inspector. In 1969, Dowd graduated from Immaculata High School. In 1973, she received a B.A. in English from the Catholic University of America.

Dowd entered journalism in 1974 as a dictationist for the &quot;Washington Star&quot;, where she later became a sports columnist, metropolitan reporter, and feature writer. When the &quot;Star&quot; closed in 1981, Dowd worked for &quot;Time&quot;. In 1983, Dowd joined &quot;The New York Times&quot;, initially as a metropolitan reporter. Dowd began serving as a correspondent in the &quot;Times&quot; Washington bureau in 1986. In 1987, after being tipped off by Jeffrey Lord, she broke the story that Delaware Senator Joe Biden had plagiarized several speeches from other politicians. The revelation was the first in a cascading series of damaging stories that ultimately ended Biden&#x27;s first presidential campaign.

In 1991, Dowd received a Breakthrough Award from Columbia University. In 1992, she became a Pulitzer Prize finalist for national reporting, and in 1994 she won a Matrix Award from the New York Association for Women in Communications.

==&quot;New York Times&quot; columnist==
Dowd became a columnist on &quot;The New York Times&quot; op-ed page in 1995, replacing Anna Quindlen. Dowd was named a Woman of the Year by &quot;Glamour&quot; magazine in 1996, and won the 1999 Pulitzer Prize, for distinguished commentary. She won the Damon Runyon Award for outstanding contributions to journalism in 2000, and became the first Mary Alice Davis Lectureship speaker (sponsored by the School of Journalism and the Center for American History) at the University of Texas at Austin in 2005. In 2010, Dowd was ranked No. 43 on &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;″s list of the 100 most influential liberals in America; in 2007, she was ranked No. 37 on the same list.

Dowd&#x27;s columns have been described as letters to her mother, whom friends credit as &quot;the source, the fountain of Maureen&#x27;s humor and her Irish sensibilities and her intellectual take.&quot; Dowd herself has said, &quot;She is in my head in the sense that I want to inform and amuse the reader.&quot; Dowd&#x27;s columns are distinguished by an acerbic, often polemical writing style. Her columns display a critical and irreverent attitude towards powerful, mostly political, figures such as former Presidents George W. Bush and Bill Clinton. She also tends to refer to her subjects by nicknames. For example, she has often referred to Bush as &quot;W&quot; and former Vice President Dick Cheney as &quot;Big Time&quot;; and she has called former President Barack Obama &quot;Spock&quot; and &quot;Barry.&quot;

Her interest in candidates&#x27; personalities earned her criticism from some early in her career, such as this: &quot;She focuses too much on the person but not enough on policy.&quot;

Because Dowd perceives her columns to be an exploration of politics, Hollywood, and gender-related topics, she often uses popular culture to support and metaphorically enhance her political commentary. For instance, in a &quot;Times&quot; video debate she said of the North Korean government that &quot;you could look at a movie like &quot;Mean Girls&quot; and figure out the way these North Koreans are reacting,&quot; drawing out a similarity between their reaction and high school girls with nuclear weapons who just wanted attention.

Dowd&#x27;s columns have also been described as often being political cartoons that capture a caricatured view of the current political landscape with precision and exaggeration. For example, in the run-up to the 2000 presidential election she wrote that Democratic candidate &quot;Al Gore is so feminized and diversified and ecologically correct that he&#x27;s practically lactating,&quot; while referring to the Democratic Party as the &quot;mommy party.&quot; In a &quot;Fresh&quot; &quot;Dialogues&quot; interview years later, she said of Gore:I was just teasing him a little bit because he was so earnest and he could be a little righteous and self important. That&#x27;s not always the most effective way to communicate your ideas, even if the ideas themselves are right. I mean, certainly his ideas were right but he himself was—sometimes—a pompous messenger for them.In January 2014, Dowd recounted that after eating about one-fourth of a cannabis-infused chocolate bar while touring the legalized recreational cannabis industry, she was later told she should have only eaten one-sixteenth—but that this had not been in the instructions on the label. She went on to describe her negative experiences with legal cannabis in a June 3, 2014 &quot;New York Times&quot; op-ed, following up on this story in another op-ed in September 2014, this time describing a discussion of using consumable cannabis with her &quot;marijuana Miyagi&quot; Willie Nelson.

On March 4, 2014, Dowd published a column about the dominance of men in the film industry in which she quoted Amy Pascal, co-chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment. According to BuzzFeed, &quot;leaked emails from Sony&quot; suggested that Dowd had promised to provide the draft column to Pascal&#x27;s husband, Bernard Weinraub, prior to the column&#x27;s publication. BuzzFeed said the column &quot;painted Pascal in such a good light that she engaged in a round of mutual adulation with Dowd over email after its publication.&quot; Both Dowd and Weinraub have denied that Weinraub ever received the column. On December 12, 2014, &quot;Times&quot; public editor Margaret Sullivan concluded, &quot;While the tone of the email exchanges is undeniably gushy, I don&#x27;t think Ms. Dowd did anything unethical here.&quot;

In August 2014, it was announced that Dowd would become a staff writer for &quot;The New York Times Magazine.&quot; Her first article under the new arrangement was published more than a year later.

=== Controversial portrayals of Monica Lewinsky, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump ===
Dowd has been accused of sexism by Clark Hoyt, then-public editor of &quot;The New York Times&quot;. A 2017 study which examined sexualized shaming of Monica Lewinsky in mainstream news coverage stated that in Dowd&#x27;s extensive writings about Lewinsky, she repeatedly &quot;mocked and disparaged her.&quot; A 2009 study of sexism towards Hillary Clinton and Sarah Palin in the 2008 election observed that Dowd had disparaged Palin as a &quot;Barbie&quot; over her pageantry past.

Other commentators have criticized Dowd for being obsessed with Bill, especially Hillary Clinton. During the 2008 Democratic primary, Dowd published an article titled &quot;Can Hillary Clinton Cry Herself Back to the White House?&quot;, which a 2016 study said &quot;[serves] to reinforce the stereotype that tears and visible emotions are feminine traits and signs of weakness&quot;. She also published a column where she likened former Senator Clinton to the &quot;Terminator&quot;, a ruthless cyborg where &quot;unless every circuit is out, she&#x27;ll regenerate enough to claw her way out of the grave&quot;; in 2013 Jessica Ritchie, a research assistant at the University of Leicester, argued that portrayals such as these sought to portray Clinton and her presidential bid as improper and unnatural. According to then-public editor of &quot;The New York Times&quot; Clark Hoyt, Dowd&#x27;s columns about Clinton were &quot;loaded with language painting her as a 50-foot woman with a suffocating embrace, a conniving film noir dame and a victim dependent on her husband&quot;. A 2014 analysis by the advocacy group &quot;Media Matters&quot; of 21 years of Dowd&#x27;s columns about Hillary Clinton found that of the 195 columns by Dowd since November 1993 containing significant mentions of Clinton, 72 percent (141 columns) were negative towards Clinton.

During the 2016 presidential election, Dowd penned a &quot;New York Times&quot; op-ed, titled &quot;Donald the Dove, Hillary the Hawk&quot;. She argued that Donald Trump held dovish foreign policy beliefs, citing his purported opposition to the 2003 US invasion of Iraq. However, before the publication of the op-ed, it had been reported that Trump did, in fact, support the invasion, and there were no statements on the record opposing it. In 2018, Daniel W. Drezner, professor of international politics at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, wrote that Trump&#x27;s foreign policy was clearly hawkish and stated, &quot;Yes, I&#x27;m extremely angry. I have no right to ask that anyone who told you in 2016 that Trump was going to be the more dovish president should probably not talk about foreign policy for a good long while. But dear God, it would be nice.&quot; Throughout Trump&#x27;s presidency, critics of his foreign policy referenced the Dowd op-ed, claiming that many of the actions taken by Trump were entirely inconsistent with the narrative put forth by Dowd.

During the 2020 presidential election, Dowd wrote a column about Geraldine Ferraro, which initially—and incorrectly—stated that the last time a man and a woman ran on the Democratic ticket was the Mondale–Ferraro ticket, which led Clinton to joke that &quot;either Tim Kaine and [she] had a very vivid shared hallucination four years ago or Maureen had too much pot brownie before writing her column again&quot;. The &quot;New York Times&quot; later corrected the column to say that 1984 was the last time a male Democratic presidential candidate chose a woman as his running mate.

==Personal life==
Dowd is single but formerly dated Aaron Sorkin, the creator and producer of &quot;The West Wing&quot;. She was also involved with actor Michael Douglas and her fellow &quot;New York Times&quot; columnist John Tierney.

==Honors==
In 2004, Dowd received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement, presented by Awards Council member Neil Sheehan at the International Achievement Summit in Chicago.

In 2012, NUI Galway awarded her an honorary doctorate.

In addition to winning a Pulitzer Prize in 1999 for Commentary, she was also a finalist in 1992 for National Reporting.

==Bibliography==
* 

==See also==
* New Yorkers in journalism

==References==
==External links==
* Dowd&#x27;s columns at &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* Dowd participates in an extended political discussion with Andrew Rosenthal, David Brooks and Frank Rich , &quot;The New York Times&quot; video, July 17, 2006
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1562058" start="0" end="19" title="Maureen Dowd" label="Maureen Brigid Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="81" end="99" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489540" start="178" end="197" title="The Washington Star" label="The Washington Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="214" end="218" title="Time Magazine" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="488" end="502" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="536" end="560" title="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal" label="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="607" end="616" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="888" end="914" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769055" start="1421" end="1443" title="Immaculata High School (Washington, D.C.)" label="Immaculata High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1469" end="1473" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="1494" end="1524" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q650483" start="1639" end="1655" title="sports columnist" label="sports columnist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="1764" end="1768" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1803" end="1821" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889041" start="1992" end="2004" title="Jeffrey Lord" label="Jeffrey Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="2048" end="2057" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208645" start="2208" end="2248" title="Joe Biden 1988 presidential campaign" label="Biden&amp;#x27;s first presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2300" end="2319" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="2343" end="2357" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750677" start="2413" end="2425" title="Matrix Award" label="Matrix Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809537" start="2444" end="2483" title="Women in Communications" label="Association for Women in Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767426" start="2615" end="2628" title="Anna Quindlen" label="Anna Quindlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="2674" end="2681" title="Glamour (magazine)" label="Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="2994" end="3023" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="3074" end="3093" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="3135" end="3143" title="modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="3580" end="3589" title="polemical" label="polemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="3730" end="3744" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="3749" end="3761" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="3904" end="3915" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="3977" end="3989" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="3996" end="4001" title="Spock" label="Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="4288" end="4297" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375957" start="4487" end="4510" title="North Korean government" label="North Korean government"/>
<link wikidata="Q631103" start="4559" end="4569" title="Mean Girls" label="Mean Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916094" start="4818" end="4835" title="political cartoon" label="political cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="4971" end="4997" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="5013" end="5023" title="U.S. Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="5172" end="5188" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631671" start="5705" end="5735" title="Cannabis foods" label="cannabis-infused chocolate bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="5764" end="5785" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="recreational cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="6031" end="6036" title="op-ed" label="op-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383900" start="6189" end="6195" title="Kesuke Miyagi" label="Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="6202" end="6215" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q481925" start="6328" end="6338" title="Amy Pascal" label="Amy Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="6355" end="6382" title="Sony Pictures Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003490" start="6397" end="6405" title="BuzzFeed" label="BuzzFeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737259" start="6530" end="6546" title="Bernard Weinraub" label="Bernard Weinraub"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979407" start="6882" end="6899" title="Margaret Sullivan (journalist)" label="Margaret Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="7121" end="7148" title="The New York Times Magazine" label="The New York Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="7350" end="7356" title="sexism" label="sexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127281" start="7360" end="7370" title="Clark Hoyt" label="Clark Hoyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7400" end="7418" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q212659" start="7476" end="7491" title="Monica Lewinsky" label="Monica Lewinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="7687" end="7698" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q620588" start="8277" end="8287" title="Terminator (franchise)" label="Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333399" start="8477" end="8500" title="University of Leicester" label="University of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127281" start="8683" end="8693" title="Clark Hoyt" label="Clark Hoyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932985" start="8937" end="8950" title="Media Matters for America" label="Media Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="9184" end="9210" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="9330" end="9342" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="9418" end="9442" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 US invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217004" start="9623" end="9640" title="Daniel W. Drezner" label="Daniel W. Drezner"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="10286" end="10312" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="10340" end="10357" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851206" start="10472" end="10494" title="Walter Mondale 1984 presidential campaign" label="Mondale–Ferraro ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q359888" start="10540" end="10549" title="Tim Kaine" label="Tim Kaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q299194" start="10910" end="10922" title="Aaron Sorkin" label="Aaron Sorkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577037" start="10958" end="10971" title="The West Wing" label="The West Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="11012" end="11027" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513491" start="11080" end="11092" title="John Tierney (journalist)" label="John Tierney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="11159" end="11190" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238740" start="11227" end="11239" title="Neil Sheehan" label="Neil Sheehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q644478" start="11302" end="11312" title="NUI Galway" label="NUI Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q56724095" start="11506" end="11531" title="New Yorkers in journalism" label="New Yorkers in journalism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297884" wikidata="Q234200" url="?curid=297884" title="Santiago de Cuba Province">
<text>Santiago de Cuba Province is the second most populated province in the island of Cuba. The largest city Santiago de Cuba is the main administrative center. Other large cities include Palma Soriano, Contramaestre, San Luis and Songo-La Maya.

==History==
Santiago de Cuba province has been the site of many battles, both during the war for independence and the 1959 Cuban Revolution, where much of the guerrilla fighting took place in the forested and mountainous province.

Prior to 1976, Cuba was divided into six historical provinces. One of these was Oriente province, which was, prior to 1905, known as Santiago de Cuba province. The present day province comprises the south-central region of Oriente.

==Economy==
The province is rich in material resources such as iron and nickel. The economy, however, relies mostly on agriculture, with large plantations growing bananas, cacao, and coffee dotting the landscape. Industry is growing around the capital, as is tourism. The natural environment of the province attracts tourists from elsewhere in Cuba and from overseas.

==Municipalities==
:&quot;Source: Population from 2004 Census.&quot; &quot;Area from 1976 municipal re-distribution.&quot;
:&quot;Source: Onei 2023. &quot;

==Demographics==
In 2004, the province of Santiago De Cuba had a population of 1,043,202. With a total area of , the province had a population density of .

==International Relation==

===Twin Town — Sister City===
Santiago de Cuba Province is twinned with:
* Naples, Italy

==See also==

*Oriente Province

==References==
==External links==

*Santiago.cu (in Spanish)
*Travel info on Santiago de Cuba
*santiagoencuba.com (in Spanish)
*Santiago de Cuba City (in English and Spanish)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234200" start="0" end="25" title="Santiago de Cuba Province" label="Santiago de Cuba Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="81" end="85" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q117040" start="104" end="120" title="Santiago de Cuba" label="Santiago de Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q742835" start="183" end="196" title="Palma Soriano" label="Palma Soriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129122" start="198" end="211" title="Contramaestre, Cuba" label="Contramaestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q555956" start="213" end="221" title="San Luis, Santiago de Cuba" label="San Luis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193899" start="226" end="239" title="Songo-La Maya" label="Songo-La Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q178561" start="306" end="312" title="battle" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="365" end="381" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="401" end="410" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="515" end="535" title="Provinces of Cuba#History" label="historical provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500652" start="554" end="570" title="Oriente Province" label="Oriente province"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="770" end="774" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="779" end="785" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="826" end="837" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="870" end="876" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="879" end="884" title="Cocoa bean" label="cacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="890" end="896" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="966" end="973" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="1477" end="1484" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="1493" end="1499" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500652" start="1523" end="1539" title="Oriente Province" label="Oriente Province"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297886" wikidata="Q17112501" url="?curid=297886" title="Love Showdown">
<text>&quot;Love Showdown&quot; is a four-part comic book story arc, first published in 1994, featuring the characters from Archie Comics. Publicized as a possible resolution to the decades-long love triangle between Archie Andrews and his longtime sweethearts Betty Cooper and Veronica Lodge, &quot;Love Showdown&quot; received more publicity than any other event in Archie Comics history. The story, written by Bill Golliher and Dan Parent, was originally published in &quot;Archie&quot; #429, &quot;Betty&quot; #19,&quot; Betty and Veronica&quot; #82, and &quot;Veronica&quot; #39.

The storyline concluded with Archie choosing neither Betty nor Veronica, but rather Cheryl Blossom. Blossom was then an obscure character, having made some sporadic appearances in the series in the mid-1980s. The arc contributed to Blossom&#x27;s notoriety as a notable Archie Comics character, resulting in having her spun off into her own mini-series after the arc&#x27;s conclusion.

The storyline was also collected in trade paperback form, one of Archie Comics first attempts in compilation reprints.

==Plot==
===Chapter 1===
When Betty and Jughead see Archie acting all lovesick they think Veronica got to him, but when she arrives she denies even seeing him today. They decide to investigate and discover that some girl has written a letter to him. They try to find out who it is, but the letter is blown away by the wind and after running all over Riverdale it is burned in a fire. The girls then demand Archie to tell them who wrote the letter, but he has his father take him away by telling him to clean out the garage to keep them in suspense. Later, Reggie tricks both girls that the other one wrote the letter to Archie and before he can tell them who really wrote the letter they stop him. They then end their friendship and both decide to get Archie for herself.

===Chapter 2===
Betty decides to get rid of all the pictures she has of her and Veronica and gives back all the clothes she borrowed. Seeing her upset, Mr. Cooper gives her two tickets to the Lodge&#x27;s Foundation Summer Charity Dance next week and advises her to invite Archie. Betty calls Archie to invite him to the dance, and he accepts. She even decides to help fix his car to prove she is more handy to have around then Veronica. While working on the car, Veronica shows up for her date with Archie for the Lodge&#x27;s Foundation Summer Charity Dance, and tells Betty she got tickets with the wrong date. After finishing fixing Archie&#x27;s car, Betty goes to Pop Tate&#x27;s and thanks to Jughead she learns that Veronica purposely had the false tickets made. Upon realizing this, Betty decides to crash the dance.

===Chapter 3===
While dancing with Archie, Veronica learns that Betty has come to the dance and is getting a lot of attention thanks to her dress. After Betty upstages Veronica due to her dance moves, Veronica decides she has to find new ways to get Archie&#x27;s attention. She tries to make muffins for him, but they are so hard they break one of his teeth. Upon losing Archie to Betty again, Veronica begins to lose confidence in herself. Then, Reggie appears and she accepts his offers to help her get her edge back.

===Chapter 4===
While working with Reggie, Veronica gets so mad at him she throws a book at him. Reggie then tells her that she has gotten her edge back because he pushed her too far and then tells her to watch a video to learn new dance moves to dance circles around Betty. After memorizing all the moves on the tape, goes to Pop Tate&#x27;s Veronica tells Betty that Mrs. Johnson&#x27;s cat is stuck up in a tree to get her away from Archie. When Betty leaves, Veronica dances with Archie until he couldn&#x27;t dance anymore. After Betty returns, the girls decide to have a super soakers duel at Pickens Park tomorrow and the winner gets Archie to herself. During the duel, right after they fired their water guns at each other they accidentally hit Archie and Cheryl Blossom. Archie tells them that her family moved back to town and discover that she was the one who sent the letter to Archie. Upon having enough of Betty and Veronica&#x27;s immature behavior, Archie chooses Cheryl over them.

==Special==
Although the publicity surrounding &quot;Love Showdown&quot; implied a resolution to the long-running Betty vs. Veronica dilemma, a 48-page follow-up story (&quot;Archie&#x27;s Love Showdown Special&quot;) returned the love triangle to its former status quo. It was published in mid-November 1994, shortly before Thanksgiving.

===Plot===
Desperate to get Archie back from Cheryl, the girls convince Ethel to disguise herself as a Pembrooke Academy student to convince her to stop seeing Archie. The plan backfires as it only convinces her that to be with him she has to attend Riverdale High with him. The girls then come up with another plan to break them up by making Archie jealous. Betty and Veronica invite Archie and Cheryl to go to Lodge&#x27;s ski resort with them and plan to get him jealous by having him see them with Jughead and Reggie, respectively. However, Jughead asks Jason, Cheryl&#x27;s twin brother, to be Betty&#x27;s date and this causes Archie to become jealous. After Archie makes a fool of himself, Cheryl dumps him and Betty and Veronica go to comfort Jason after he gives him a black eye. Then after having a nightmare depicting Jason and Betty so in love with each other, Archie decides that Betty is the only girl for him and vows to tell her before it is too late. Upon finding her at Riverdale High he learns that Jason got on her nerves so much she almost gave him another black eye. Before he can tell her how he feels he gets distracted by a new girl, Savannah Smythe from Mississippi. Archie then gives her a tour of Riverdale High and tells Betty he will talk to her later.

==Sequel==
A sequel titled &quot;Love Showdown II&quot; was released in &quot;Betty and Veronica Spectacular&quot; #64 and &quot;Archie &amp; Friends&quot; #79.

===Chapter 1===
After Betty and Veronica learn that a movie is going to be filmed in Riverdale they decide to try to get into it as extras. The girls find out that the movie is about a red haired boy named Arnie who is a love triangle with two girls, blonde Betsy and brunette Victoria. They both think that the plot is silly, but soon discover from Archie that it is based on their lives. They soon discover that Cheryl Blossom, whose family just moved back from England, is making the movie. Upon learning who Cheryl got to play them in the movie the girls decide to sabotage it, with no success.

===Chapter 2===
Wanting to not think about Cheryl&#x27;s movie, Archie, Betty, and Veronica decide to go see a movie, but discover that Cheryl has followed them. They then decide to make a snowman, but once again Cheryl shows up and causes trouble. They then learn from Brigitte that Cheryl is really filming a reality show and is following them around to get ratings for it. The girls decide not to act mad around Cheryl and after they tell her that they now know what she is up to, her reality show is canceled. A couple of weeks later Cheryl is enrolled at Riverdale High and tells the girls that her family has hit a financial snag, so she was filming the reality show to get them out of it. After school, Betty and Veronica learn from Mr. Lodge that Cheryl&#x27;s father is his new employee.

==Impact==
The storyline was the first time Archie Comics had attempted an &quot;event&quot;—a storyline with ostensibly lasting consequences which took place over the span of multiple titles. Such events experienced a vogue in the 1990s following the success of DC Comics&#x27; &quot;Death of Superman&quot; event in 1992–93, an event to which contemporary commentators and Archie Comic Publications compared &quot;Love Showdown&quot;. According to Archie Comic Publications, sales of the series exceeded expectations, with reorders being filled at three times their normal rate.

Just months before the &quot;Love Showdown&quot; arc, Archie Comics had released a one-shot crossover comic with Marvel, &quot;Archie Meets the Punisher&quot;.

The arc came shortly after Archie Comic Publications hired King Features to manage the licensing of their intellectual property, sparking a wave of Archie-branded merchandise such as clothing, stationary, and kitchenwares. An Archie movie and musical were planned for 1995, though they failed to materialize.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17112501" start="6" end="19" title="Love Showdown" label="Love Showdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114502" start="41" end="51" title="American comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="52" end="61" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q633812" start="118" end="131" title="Archie Comics" label="Archie Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070872" start="189" end="202" title="love triangle" label="love triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860154" start="211" end="225" title="Archie Andrews" label="Archie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900232" start="255" end="267" title="Betty Cooper" label="Betty Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564252" start="272" end="286" title="Veronica Lodge" label="Veronica Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214165" start="425" end="435" title="Dan Parent" label="Dan Parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715415" start="471" end="477" title="Archie (comic book)" label="Archie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786590" start="519" end="537" title="Betty and Veronica Magazine" label="Betty and Veronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092694" start="664" end="678" title="Cheryl Blossom" label="Cheryl Blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="1003" end="1018" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188107" start="1127" end="1134" title="Jughead Jones" label="Jughead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092694" start="3973" end="3987" title="Cheryl Blossom" label="Cheryl Blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905656" start="4620" end="4625" title="Ethel Muggs" label="Ethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416772" start="7473" end="7478" title="Events from the Modern Age of Comic Books" label="event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197265" start="7671" end="7700" title="The Death of Superman" label="&amp;quot;Death of Superman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786749" start="8101" end="8126" title="Archie Meets the Punisher" label="Archie Meets the Punisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469675" start="8194" end="8207" title="King Features" label="King Features"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297899" wikidata="Q156321" url="?curid=297899" title="Jan Neruda">
<text>Jan Nepomuk Neruda (Czech: ; 10 July 1834 – 22 August 1891) was a Czech journalist, writer, poet and art critic; one of the most prominent representatives of Czech Realism and a member of the &quot;May School&quot;.

==Early life==

Jan Neruda was born in Prague, Bohemia. He was son of a small grocer who lived in the Malá Strana district. They lived in Újezd Street and from 1836 to 1838, they lived in Zásmuky, where Jan&#x27;s father was born. When he was four, they moved to Ostruhová Street (now called in his honor), where they owned a house known as &quot;U Dvou Slunců&quot; (At the Two Suns).

His studies began in 1845 at the local Grammar school then, in 1850, continued at the Academic Grammar School in Clementinum. His favourite writers at the time were Heine, Byron, Shakespeare, Karel Hynek Mácha and Václav Bolemír Nebeský.

After graduation he tried to study law, but he failed. He worked as a clerk for a short time, but was unhappy, so he decided to study philosophy and philology at Charles University. He then worked as a teacher until 1860, when he became a freelance journalist and writer.

He started his career at &quot;Národní listy&quot; (National Sheets). Later, he worked for &quot;Obrazy života&quot; (Pictures of Life) and &#x27; (Time). He also contributed to &#x27; (Blossoms) and &quot;Lumír&quot;.

He became the de facto leader of a generation of writers that included Karolina Světlá, Vítězslav Hálek, Adolf Heyduk and Karel Sabina; devoted to continuing the legacy of Karel Hynek Mácha. They published their works in the literary almanac &quot;Máj&quot;.

By 1871, various groups had labeled Neruda as a &quot;Traitor to the Nation&quot;, so he decided to spend some time away; visiting Italy, Greece, France, Germany, Hungary and Egypt. He kept detailed records of these journeys, which provide an interesting testimony to his life and times, with various insights that prove him to be a good observer.

From 1883 to his death he lived on Vladislavova Street 1382/14 in New Town, Prague.

==Personal life==
Neruda was a loner and an introvert, although he was a friend of composer Bedřich Smetana.

Neruda never married, but he had close relationships with Anna Holinová and Karolína Světlá.

Holinová was his first love. Many of his poems were meant for her. Through her father, Neruda was able to meet Božena Němcová and Karel Jaromír Erben, famous Czech nationalist writers.

His second love was Světlá, a married woman who was also a writer. They supported each other emotionally with their works. She also supported him financially. When he found himself deeply in debt, she sold a precious brooch and lent him the money. Unfortunately her husband, , found out about it and forced him to give up the relationship. He also had to give him all the letters they had written to each other. These letters became the source for the movie called &quot;Příběh lásky a cti&quot; (The Story of Love and Honor). Throughout his life, the poet had been in material need, although he was an extremely prolific and respected journalist. Once a week, for example, he wrote a column for the National Papers, worked as a theater officer and literary critic, and edited several popular science journals.

He had a close relationship with his mother. Her death in 1869 greatly affected him and brought a sadder tone to his works.

==Career==

In his work, Neruda supported the Czech National Revival and promoted Czech nationalism. He participated in all the central cultural and political struggles of his generation, and gained a reputation as a sensitive critic. Neruda became, along with Vítězslav Hálek, one of the most prominent representatives of the new literary trends.

==Death==

Beginning in 1880, he suffered from a swelling of his veins, which contributed to a number of diseases that afflicted him for the rest of his life. In the winter of 1888, he shattered his kneecap when he slipped on some ice. From that time on, he relied on messengers to deliver his articles to &quot;Národní listy&quot;.

He died on 22 August 1891 from an inflammation of his digestive tract caused by intestinal cancer.

He was buried at Vyšehrad Cemetery in Prague. His funeral became the occasion for an expression of Czech nationalist sentiment.

== Works ==

=== Poetry ===
*&quot;Hřbitovní kvítí&quot; (“Graveyard Flowers”) - His first poetry. It was published in 1858. The entire book is pessimistic, skeptical and hopeless. Verses are growing out of disappointment with contemporary life, societies, the inactivity of the Nation, resistance of the set morality. There is also a social issue, dealing with poverty. He does not trust love or people. Feelings of loneliness, fervor.
*&quot;Knihy veršů&quot; (“Books of Verses”) - published in 1867. He moderates his pessimism, finds the point of his life - at work and sacrifice to the whole Nation. It shows love for his parents.This book is much more readable than other books, the poems are of good quality. Even here we find his gloomy social ballads. This book consists of three parts: 1. Kniha veršů výpravných (“Book of Narrative Verses”), 2. Kniha veršů lyrických a smíšených (“Book of Lyrical and Mixed Verses”) 3. Kniha veršů časových a příležitostných (“Book of Time and Occasional Verses”).
*&quot;Písně kosmické&quot; (“Cosmic songs”) - published in 1878. In this books he is again discovering the meaning of his life, trying to be optimistic, responding to the development of science and technology. It celebrates cosmic bodies and human desire for knowledge. There is a materialistic understanding of the world. This work expresses feelings of the Generation called Májovci.
*&quot;Balady a romance&quot; (&quot;Ballads and Romances)&quot; - published between 1878 and 1883. He confuses ballads with romances so that they often sound like the opposites. The ballads often process national themes from the Bible or old legends, and the subject of mother-son relationships appears. Some of the favourite ballads or romances are for example Romance štědrovečerní (“Christmas Romance”), Romance o Karlu IV. (“Romance about Charles IV.”), Balada česká (“Czech Ballad”) or Balada o duši K. H. Borovského (“Ballad about the soul of K. H. Borovský”).
*&quot;Prosté motivy&quot; (&quot;Plain Themes / Simple Motifs&quot;) - published in 1883. This is his intimate diary. Natural theme is really important here. The human life coincides with a cycle of seasons. Spring = youth, summer = maturity, autumn = old age, winter = death. He describes this period.
*&quot;Zpěvy páteční&quot; (&quot;Friday Songs&quot;) - published in 1896. This is his top work. This book came out after his death, prepared by Jaroslav Vrchlický. The life of the nation is compared to the Great Fate, showing the belief that the resurrection will come. It speaks of great love for the nation and reflects on national history - it turns to Hussitism. Parts of this book are V zemi kalichu (“In the country of the cup”), Anděl strážný (“Guardian angel”), Ecce homo and Láska (“Love”).

=== Prose ===
*&quot;Arabesky&quot; - This is his first book of prose, published in 1864. This is a set of short stories, whose core consists of stories from the late 1850s and early 1860s. In the forefront of these short stories there is no plot, but descriptive characteristics, reflection and dialogue. Significant is humor, irony, sarcasm. In the foreground there are peculiar figurines that are captured in contrast to the environment they are included in. These are people from the periphery that society has eliminated. Neruda uncovers their sad and tragic moments, presenting them as full-fledged, emotionally rich. This puts them in opposition to prejudice and a time of conventional view. Neruda uses his own experiences and familiar environments, gives readers only cuts from the lives of characters. Stories Měla Gusto! and Za půl hodiny (“Within half an hour”) when sexual and erotic motifs appear at that time, they were added after Neruda&#x27;s death.
*&quot;Různí lidé&quot; (“Different People”) - Studies and pictures of the nature and fate of the people he met abroad.
*&quot;Trhani&quot; - A novel about railroad workers.
*&quot;Pražské obrázky&quot; (“Pictures of Prague”) - This book captures the lives of the poor.
*&quot;Povídky malostránské&quot; (“Tales of the Lesser Quarter”) - This is his best-known prose work, published in 1877. He created the picture of Prague&#x27;s Lesser Quarter before 1848 on the basis of his own memories. Neruda&#x27;s stories take the reader to its streets and yards, shops, churches, houses, and restaurants. It shows typical figures of Czech Bourgeoisie. With humor depicting their qualities, he criticizes local life. It uses the form of a novelistically integrated story, sometimes its narrative consists of a series of tiny shots of everyday life. Heroes are precisely characterized, each with a different expression. It was translated into English in 1957 by the novelist and mystery writer Ellis Peters.
*&quot;Praha&quot; (“Prague”)

=== Theatre plays ===
*&quot;Ženich z hladu&quot; (“Groom from hunger”)
*&quot;Prodaná láska&quot; (“Sold love”)
*&quot;Merenda nestřídmých&quot;
*&quot;Francesca di Rimini&quot;
*&quot;Žena miluje srdnatost&quot;
*&quot;Já to nejsem&quot; (“It’s not me”)

=== Feuilletons ===
*&quot;Žerty hravé a dravé&quot; (“Playful and predatory jokes”)
*&quot;Studie krátké a kratší&quot; (“Short and shorter studies”)
*&quot;Menší cesty&quot; (“Smaller trips”)
*&quot;Obrazy z ciziny&quot; (“Pictures from abroad”)

=== Journalism ===
*&quot;Obrazy z ciziny&quot; (“Pictures from abroad”)
*&quot;Rodinná kronika&quot; (“Family chronicle”)

==Legacy==

*After his death, Ostruhová Street, which was the setting for many of his stories, was renamed in his honor.
*The Chilean poet, Ricardo Eliecer Neftalí Reyes Basoalto, adopted the pseudonym Pablo Neruda, to express his admiration.
*Andrew J. Feustel took a copy of &quot;Cosmic Songs&quot; with him on space shuttle mission STS-125.
*Jan Neruda Grammar School is named for him.
*Statue of Jan Neruda, Prague
*1875 Neruda (1969 QQ), a main-belt asteroid discovered in 1969 by Luboš Kohoutek is named in his honor.
*The Neruda crater on Mercury is named in honor of both him and fellow Czech, classical composer Johann Baptist Georg Neruda.

==References==
==External links==

* 
* 
* Jan Neruda at Wikipedia (Czech) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156321" start="0" end="18" title="Jan Neruda" label="Jan Nepomuk Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="66" end="71" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164507" start="101" end="111" title="art critic" label="art critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="158" end="171" title="Literary realism" label="Czech Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428981" start="198" end="208" title="May School" label="May School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="256" end="262" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="264" end="271" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q753289" start="319" end="330" title="Malá Strana" label="Malá Strana"/>
<link wikidata="Q247006" start="405" end="412" title="Zásmuky" label="Zásmuky"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="643" end="657" title="Grammar school" label="Grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100429" start="717" end="728" title="Clementinum" label="Clementinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="769" end="774" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="776" end="781" title="Lord Byron" label="Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="783" end="794" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q361265" start="796" end="813" title="Karel Hynek Mácha" label="Karel Hynek Mácha"/>
<link wikidata="Q713848" start="818" end="840" title="Václav Bolemír Nebeský" label="Václav Bolemír Nebeský"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="977" end="987" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="992" end="1001" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="1005" end="1023" title="Charles University" label="Charles University"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="1082" end="1091" title="freelance" label="freelance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006306" start="1147" end="1160" title="Národní listy" label="Národní listy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877313" start="1322" end="1327" title="Lumír" label="Lumír"/>
<link wikidata="Q258960" start="1407" end="1422" title="Karolina Světlá" label="Karolina Světlá"/>
<link wikidata="Q594896" start="1424" end="1439" title="Vítězslav Hálek" label="Vítězslav Hálek"/>
<link wikidata="Q362154" start="1441" end="1453" title="Adolf Heyduk" label="Adolf Heyduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q740181" start="1458" end="1470" title="Karel Sabina" label="Karel Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949613" start="1584" end="1587" title="Máj (literary almanac)" label="Máj"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1727" end="1732" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1734" end="1740" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1750" end="1757" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1759" end="1766" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1771" end="1776" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q753219" start="2011" end="2019" title="New Town, Prague" label="New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="2122" end="2137" title="Bedřich Smetana" label="Bedřich Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q258960" start="2216" end="2231" title="Karolina Světlá" label="Karolína Světlá"/>
<link wikidata="Q157970" start="2345" end="2359" title="Božena Němcová" label="Božena Němcová"/>
<link wikidata="Q352914" start="2364" end="2383" title="Karel Jaromír Erben" label="Karel Jaromír Erben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854586" start="3403" end="3425" title="Czech National Revival" label="Czech National Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587922" start="3439" end="3456" title="Czech nationalism" label="Czech nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q594896" start="3618" end="3633" title="Vítězslav Hálek" label="Vítězslav Hálek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006306" start="4018" end="4031" title="Národní listy" label="Národní listy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="4120" end="4137" title="intestinal cancer" label="intestinal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q118967" start="4157" end="4174" title="Vyšehrad Cemetery" label="Vyšehrad Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4304" end="4319" title="Hřbitovní kvítí" label="Hřbitovní kvítí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661" start="4450" end="4455" title="Verse (poetry)" label="Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="4631" end="4638" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4713" end="4724" title="Knihy veršů" label="Knihy veršů"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="4865" end="4871" title="Nation" label="Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="5020" end="5026" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5067" end="5089" title="Kniha veršů výpravných" label="Kniha veršů výpravných"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5123" end="5156" title="Kniha veršů lyrických a smíšených" label="Kniha veršů lyrických a smíšených"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5197" end="5235" title="Kniha veršů časových a příležitostných" label="Kniha veršů časových a příležitostných"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5283" end="5297" title="Písně kosmické" label="Písně kosmické"/>
<link wikidata="Q775842" start="5525" end="5531" title="desire" label="desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428981" start="5654" end="5661" title="Májovci" label="Májovci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5670" end="5686" title="Balady a romance" label="Balady a romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="5893" end="5898" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6026" end="6047" title="Romance štědrovečerní" label="Romance štědrovečerní"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6071" end="6090" title="Romance o Karlu IV." label="Romance o Karlu IV."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6122" end="6134" title="Balada česká" label="Balada česká"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6155" end="6185" title="Balada o duši K.H.Borovského" label="Balada o duši K. H. Borovského"/>
<link wikidata="Q452084" start="6213" end="6227" title="Karel Havlíček Borovský" label="K. H. Borovský"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6238" end="6251" title="Prosté motivy" label="Prosté motivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="6440" end="6446" title="Spring (season)" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="6456" end="6462" title="summer" label="summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="6475" end="6481" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="6493" end="6499" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6542" end="6555" title="Zpěvy páteční" label="Zpěvy páteční"/>
<link wikidata="Q461104" start="6680" end="6698" title="Jaroslav Vrchlický" label="Jaroslav Vrchlický"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="6892" end="6901" title="Hussites" label="Hussitism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6926" end="6940" title="V zemi kalichu" label="V zemi kalichu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6972" end="6985" title="Anděl strážný" label="Anděl strážný"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7006" end="7025" title="Ecce homo and Láska" label="Ecce homo and Láska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7857" end="7868" title="Měla Gusto!" label="Měla Gusto!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7873" end="7886" title="Za půl hodiny" label="Za půl hodiny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8012" end="8022" title="Různí lidé" label="Různí lidé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="8161" end="8169" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8186" end="8201" title="Pražské obrázky" label="Pražské obrázky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235920" start="8282" end="8302" title="Povídky malostranské" label="Povídky malostránské"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="8638" end="8649" title="Bourgeoisie" label="Bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q237235" start="8991" end="9003" title="Ellis Peters" label="Ellis Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="9012" end="9017" title="Prague" label="Praha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9065" end="9079" title="Ženich z hladu" label="Ženich z hladu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9115" end="9128" title="Prodaná láska" label="Prodaná láska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9156" end="9175" title="Merenda nestřídmých" label="Merenda nestřídmých"/>
<link wikidata="Q466048" start="9189" end="9208" title="Francesca da Rimini" label="Francesca di Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9222" end="9243" title="Žena miluje srdnatost" label="Žena miluje srdnatost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9257" end="9269" title="Já to nejsem" label="Já to nejsem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9320" end="9339" title="Žerty hravé a dravé" label="Žerty hravé a dravé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9385" end="9407" title="Studie krátké a kratší" label="Studie krátké a kratší"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9451" end="9462" title="Menší cesty" label="Menší cesty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9494" end="9509" title="Obrazy z ciziny" label="Obrazy z ciziny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9568" end="9583" title="Obrazy z ciziny" label="Obrazy z ciziny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9622" end="9637" title="Rodinná kronika" label="Rodinná kronika"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="9792" end="9797" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="9868" end="9880" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q505530" start="9910" end="9927" title="Andrew J. Feustel" label="Andrew J. Feustel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217546" start="10002" end="10009" title="STS-125" label="STS-125"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018601" start="10012" end="10037" title="Jan Neruda Grammar School" label="Jan Neruda Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883702" start="10057" end="10085" title="Statue of Jan Neruda, Prague" label="Statue of Jan Neruda, Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607073" start="10087" end="10098" title="1875 Neruda" label="1875 Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27122" start="10153" end="10167" title="Luboš Kohoutek" label="Luboš Kohoutek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996741" start="10196" end="10202" title="Neruda (crater)" label="Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q567059" start="10288" end="10315" title="Johann Baptist Georg Neruda" label="Johann Baptist Georg Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10361" end="10371" title=":cs:Jan Neruda" label="Jan Neruda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297901" wikidata="Q6608729" url="?curid=297901" title="List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party">
<text>This is a list of political campaigns of the [[Chinese Communist Party]] (CCP) since the founding of the party in 1921, in the aftermath of World War I.

==See also==
* History of China
* History of the Republic of China
* History of the Chinese Communist Party
* History of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Timeline of Chinese history

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6608729" start="10" end="72" title="List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party" label="list of political campaigns of the [[Chinese Communist Party]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608729" start="74" end="77" title="List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="127" end="151" title="aftermath of World War I" label="aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="169" end="185" title="History of China" label="History of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151968" start="188" end="220" title="History of the Republic of China" label="History of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510674" start="223" end="261" title="History of the Chinese Communist Party" label="History of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q862552" start="264" end="310" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521584" start="313" end="340" title="Timeline of Chinese history" label="Timeline of Chinese history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297904" wikidata="Q4111496" url="?curid=297904" title="Windsor Ruins">
<text>Windsor Ruins are in Claiborne County, Mississippi, United States, about southwest of Port Gibson near Alcorn State University. The ruins consist of 23 standing Corinthian columns of the largest antebellum Greek Revival mansion ever built in the state. The mansion stood from 1861 to 1890, when it was destroyed by fire. The site with the columns was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1971 and was designated a Mississippi Landmark in 1985.

==History==

===Background===
Windsor mansion was located on a plantation that covered . The mansion was constructed by enslaved African Americans between 1859 and 1861 for Smith Coffee Daniell II. He was born in Mississippi and had acquired great wealth by age 30 as a cotton planter. In 1849, Smith Daniell married his cousin Catherine Freeland (1830–1903). The couple had six children, with three surviving to adulthood.

===Construction===
Windsor mansion was built facing the Mississippi River, which formed the major transportation route. It was located about east of the river. The architect David Shroder supervised a crew of skilled artisans—carpenters, plasterers, masons, and painters—from Mississippi, northeastern states, and Europe to do finishing work on the mansion.

The footprint for Windsor mansion was set by 29 columns which supported a projected roof line that protected wide verandas on the second and third floors. The 29 columns were constructed of bricks that were covered with stucco. Each column was more than in diameter at the base and stood tall. The columns were constructed atop tall, paneled brick plinths that were almost square. Bricks were made in an onsite kiln. The fluted columns were crowned with ornate, iron Corinthian capitals. The columns were joined at the height of the third floor by ornamental iron balustrades.

Column capitals, balustrades, and four cast iron stairways were manufactured in St. Louis and shipped down the Mississippi River to the Port of Bruinsburg, about west of Windsor mansion.

===Description===
Windsor mansion was constructed as a three-story block, consisting of a ground floor basement, with living quarters on the second and third floors. The main block was on each side. A three-story ell projected from the east side of the main block. The ell measured by . Archeological examination suggests that outer walls were constructed of wood covered in stucco. When completed, the mansion contained three hallways and 23 to 25 rooms, each with its own fireplace. A featured innovation for that time period was the inclusion of two interior bathrooms supplied with rainwater from a tank in the attic.
In 1861, cost of construction was about US$175,000 (equal to $ today).

The ground floor basement contained a school room, doctor&#x27;s office, dairy, commissary, and storage rooms. The second floor had a hallway flanked by the master bedroom, a bathroom, two parlors, a study and a library. In the ell off the second floor was the dining room. Connected to the dining room by a dumbwaiter was the kitchen, located on the ground floor. The third floor contained an additional bath and eight more bedrooms. Eight chimneys extended from the slate-covered roof, and a domed cupola with glass walls was constructed above the attic, over the main block of the mansion.

On April 12, 1861, Smith Daniell died at age 34, just weeks after construction of the mansion was completed.

===Civil War era===
Once the American Civil War began in 1861, Confederate forces used the Windsor mansion cupola as an observation platform and signal station. In the spring of 1863, as part of his Vicksburg campaign, Union General Ulysses S. Grant and 17,000 Union troops landed at the port of Bruinsburg and took control of Windsor mansion. Following the Battle of Port Gibson, the mansion was used by Union troops as a hospital and as an observation station. The Daniell family was allowed to live on the third floor of the mansion during the Union occupation.
Windsor mansion survived the war and continued to be used by the Daniell family as a home and for social gatherings in the area. During Reconstruction, the family derived income by leasing part of their vast land holdings.

For more than 100 years, the outward appearance of Windsor mansion was a matter of conjecture. But in the early 1990s, an 1863 sketch of Windsor mansion was discovered in the papers of a former Union officer, Henry Otis Dwight, of the 20th Ohio Infantry. Historians believe that Henry Dwight made the sketch while his unit was encamped on the grounds of the mansion.

===Fire===
On February 17, 1890, a fire started on the third floor when a guest dropped ashes from a cigarette or cigar into construction debris left by carpenters who were making repairs. Windsor mansion was destroyed leaving only the columns, balustrades, cast iron stairways, and pieces of bone china.

==Historic site==
When Catherine Daniell died in 1903, her daughter, Priscilla Daniell, inherited the mansion property. Priscilla married Joseph Magruder, and the mansion site remained in the Magruder family until 1974, when they donated , containing the mansion ruins, to the state of Mississippi. The historic site contains 23 standing columns and 5 partial columns; it is administered by the Mississippi Department of Archives and History.

Through the years, three of the cast iron stairways, that survived the 1890 fire, disappeared from the site. The fourth stairway was moved to Alcorn State University and serves as the entrance to Oakland Memorial Chapel.

North of Windsor Ruins is a cemetery where members of the Daniell and Freeland families have been buried since the early 19th century. The earliest grave is that of Frisby Freeland (1747 – 1819), an American Revolutionary War soldier.

==In popular culture==
Windsor&#x27;s ruins have been shown in two motion pictures—&quot;Raintree County&quot; (1957) and &quot;Ghosts of Mississippi&quot; (1996).

== See also ==
* The Forks of Cypress

==References==
== External links ==

* Video of the Windsor Ruins from 2016</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4111496" start="0" end="13" title="Windsor Ruins" label="Windsor Ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q492488" start="21" end="50" title="Claiborne County, Mississippi" label="Claiborne County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005276" start="86" end="97" title="Port Gibson, Mississippi" label="Port Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805243" start="103" end="126" title="Alcorn State University" label="Alcorn State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="161" end="179" title="Corinthian columns" label="Corinthian columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q571648" start="195" end="205" title="Antebellum architecture" label="antebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="206" end="219" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="364" end="400" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="430" end="450" title="Mississippi Landmark#Claiborne" label="Mississippi Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="524" end="534" title="Plantations in the American South" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="581" end="607" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="731" end="745" title="Planter (American South)" label="cotton planter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="942" end="959" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="1175" end="1194" title="Northeastern United States" label="northeastern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q693922" start="1359" end="1366" title="veranda" label="veranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="1465" end="1471" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014132" start="1593" end="1599" title="plinth" label="plinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="1656" end="1660" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1712" end="1731" title="Capital (architecture)#Classical capitals" label="Corinthian capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q658386" start="1809" end="1819" title="balustrade" label="balustrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1903" end="1912" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15693968" start="1967" end="1977" title="Bruinsburg, Mississippi" label="Bruinsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364449" start="2224" end="2227" title="Ell (architecture)" label="ell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313763" start="3013" end="3023" title="dumbwaiter" label="dumbwaiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="3173" end="3178" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11346334" start="3205" end="3211" title="cupola" label="cupola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3438" end="3456" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="3472" end="3483" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q862443" start="3608" end="3626" title="Vicksburg campaign" label="Vicksburg campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="3642" end="3658" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="3670" end="3675" title="Union Army" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865994" start="3767" end="3788" title="Battle of Port Gibson" label="Battle of Port Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="4110" end="4124" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726555" start="4407" end="4424" title="Henry Otis Dwight" label="Henry Otis Dwight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630794" start="4433" end="4451" title="20th Ohio Infantry" label="20th Ohio Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q619865" start="4859" end="4869" title="bone china" label="bone china"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879127" start="5267" end="5313" title="Mississippi Department of Archives and History" label="Mississippi Department of Archives and History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805243" start="5458" end="5481" title="Alcorn State University" label="Alcorn State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074026" start="5512" end="5535" title="Oakland Memorial Chapel" label="Oakland Memorial Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5737" end="5763" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q582281" start="5863" end="5878" title="Raintree County (film)" label="Raintree County"/>
<link wikidata="Q997206" start="5902" end="5923" title="Ghosts of Mississippi" label="Ghosts of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469836" start="5956" end="5976" title="The Forks of Cypress" label="The Forks of Cypress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297905" wikidata="Q28753048" url="?curid=297905" title="Goncharov">
<text>Goncharov () is a Russian surname, an equivalent of the English &quot;Potter&quot; (derived from the Russian word &quot;gonchar&quot; which means potter), shared by the following people:

*Alexander Goncharov, mathematician
**Goncharov conjecture
*Aleksandr Goncharov (1959–1990), Soviet Russian hockey player
*George Goncharov, dance instructor of Margot Fonteyn
*Ivan Goncharov (1812-1891), Russian author
*Natalya Goncharova (disambiguation), several people
*Nikolay Goncharov (born 1984), Russian politician
*Pyotr Grigorievich Goncharov (1888-1970), Russian composer
*Ruslan Goncharov (b. 1973), Ukrainian figure skater
*Valeri Goncharov (b. 1977), Ukrainian gymnast
*Vasily Goncharov (1861-1915), Russian film director and screenwriter

==See also==
*Goncharova, a crater on Venus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28753048" start="0" end="9" title="Goncharov" label="Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="18" end="25" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="26" end="33" title="surname" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106585" start="70" end="76" title="Potter (name)" label="Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642205" start="189" end="208" title="Alexander Goncharov" label="Alexander Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581412" start="226" end="246" title="Goncharov conjecture" label="Goncharov conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715144" start="248" end="267" title="Aleksandr Goncharov" label="Aleksandr Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="311" end="327" title="George Goncharov" label="George Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q231776" start="349" end="363" title="Margot Fonteyn" label="Margot Fonteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189665" start="365" end="379" title="Ivan Goncharov" label="Ivan Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q413132" start="409" end="444" title="Natalya Goncharova (disambiguation)" label="Natalya Goncharova (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108686559" start="462" end="479" title="Nikolay Goncharov" label="Nikolay Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q518074" start="513" end="541" title="Pyotr Grigorievich Goncharov" label="Pyotr Grigorievich Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q709507" start="573" end="589" title="Ruslan Goncharov" label="Ruslan Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q887252" start="626" end="642" title="Valeri Goncharov" label="Valeri Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372663" start="673" end="689" title="Vasily Goncharov" label="Vasily Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q665010" start="771" end="786" title="List of craters on Venus" label="crater on Venus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297912" wikidata="Q949707" url="?curid=297912" title="Lancelot (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Lancelot]] was a knight of the mythical Round Table.

Lancelot or Launcelot may also refer to:

==People==
=== Given name ===
* Lancelot Andrewes (1555–1626), English bishop and scholar
* Lancelot Addison (1632–1703), English clergyman and writer
* Lancelot Addison (Archdeacon of Dorset)
* Lancelot Baugh Allen (1774–1845), British educator
* Lancelot Barrington-Ward (1884–1953), British surgeon and rugby union player
* Lancelot Blackburne (1658–1743), Archbishop of York and alleged pirate
* Lancelot Blondeel (1498–1561), Flemish painter
* Lancelot Stephen Bosanquet (1903–1984), British mathematician
* Lancelot van Brederode (died 1573), Dutch military leader
* Lancelot Charles Lee Brenton (1807–1862), English Bible translator
* Lancelot &quot;Capability&quot; Brown (1716–1783), English landscape architect
* Lancelot Browne (–1605), English physician
* Lancelot Bulkeley (1568?–1650), Welsh archbishop
* Lancelot de Carle (1508–1568), French scholar, poet and diplomat
* Lancelot Carnegie (1861–1933), British politician and diplomat
* Lancelot Clark (1936–2018), English shoemaker
* Lancelot Curran (1899–1984), Northern Ireland High Court judge and parliamentarian
* Lancelot Cutforth (1899–1980), British Army officer
* Lancelot de Mole (1880–1950), Australian engineer and inventor
* Lancelot Dent (died 1853), British opium dealer in China
* Lancelot Dowbiggin (1685–1759), English architect
* Lancelot Driffield (1880–1917), English cricketer
* Lancelot Elphinstone (1879–1965), Attorney General of Ceylon
* Lancelot Errington (1657–1745), English Jacobite mariner
* Lancelot Fish (1861–1924), Archdeacon of Bath
* Lancelot Gittens (born 1974), Guyanese athlete
* Launcelot Goody (1908–1992), Australian Roman Catholic bishop
* Lancelot Graham (1880–1958), British Indian civil servant
* Lancelot Grove (1905–1943), British cricketer and army officer
* Lancelot Hansen (1885–1928), Australian rugby league footballer
* Lancelot Hare (1851–1922), British civil servant, Lieutenant-governor of Bengal
* Lancelot Gerald Hasluck (1861–1937), English surveyor and philanthropist
* Lancelot Hemus (1881–1923), New Zealand cricketer
* Launcelot Henderson (born 1951), British Lord Justice of Appeal
* Lancelot Hickes (1884–1965), British Army officer
* Lancelot Hogben (1895–1975), British zoologist and statistician
* Lancelot Holland (1887–1941), British admiral who fought and died in the Battle of the Denmark Strait
* Lancelot Holland (British Army officer) (1781–1859), British Army officer and diarist
* Lancelot Oduwa Imasuen (born 1971), Nigerian filmmaker
* Lancelot Joynson-Hicks, 3rd Viscount Brentford (1902–1983), British politician
* Launcelot Kiggell (born 1954), British Army officer
* Lancelot Lake (1609–1680), English lawyer, landowner and politician
* Lancelot Layne (died 1990), Trinidadian musician
* Lancelot Lowther, 6th Earl of Lonsdale (1867–1953), English peer
* Lancelot Oliphant (1881–1965), British diplomat
* Launcelot Percival (1869–1941), Anglican priest and sportsman
* Lancelot Perowne (1902–1982), British Army officer
* Lancelot Phelps (1784–1866), American politician
* Lancelot Phelps (priest) (1853–1936), British clergyman and educator
* Lancelot Ribeiro (1933–2010), British Indian artist
* Lancelot Richardson (1895–1917), Australian flying ace
* Lancelot Richdale (1900–1983), New Zealand teacher and ornithologist
* Lancelot Ridley (died 1576), English theologian
* Lancelot Robinson (1905–1935), English cricketer
* Lancelot Rolleston (1785–1862), British politician
* Lancelot Royle (1898–1978), British sprinter and businessman
* Lancelot de Saint-Maard (died 1278), marshal of France
* Lancelot Salkeld (1475–1560), English clergyman
* Lancelot Sanderson (1863–1944), British politician and judge
* Lancelot Shadwell (1779–1850), English barrister and politician
* Lancelot Cayley Shadwell (1882–1963), English writer, lyricist, and ceramicist
* Lancelot II Schetz (died 1664), 2nd Count of Grobbendonk, Netherlandish nobleman and military commander
* Lancelot Slee (–1878), English farmer and smuggler
* Lancelot Slocock (1886–1916), English rugby union player
* Lancelot Smith (–1956), Australian rugby union player
* Lancelot Speed (1860–1931), British illustrator
* Lancelot Spicer (1893–1979), British politician
* Lancelot Spurr (1897–1965), Australian politician
* Lancelot Stirling (1849–1932), Australian politician and grazier
* Lancelot Threlkeld (1788–1859), English missionary in Australia
* Lancelot II of Ursel (1499–1573), mayor of Antwerp
* Lancelot Volders (1636–1723), Flemish painter
* Launcelot Ward (1875–1929), British Army officer
* Lancelot Ware (1915–2000), English barrister and biochemist
* Lancelot Law Whyte (1896–1972) was a Scottish philosopher, scientist and financier

=== Surname ===
* André Lancelot (born 1900), French rower
* Claude Lancelot, (–1695), French monk and grammarian
* Jacques Lancelot (1920–2009), French clarinetist
* James Lancelot (born 1952), English organist and choir conductor
* Livia Lancelot (born 1988), French motocross racer

=== Fictional characters ===
* Lancelot Gobbo, a character in &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;
* Launcelot Langstaff, the pseudonymous author of the satirical periodical &quot;Salmagundi&quot;
*Lancelot Lakeknight, a character in the &quot;Battle Arena Toshinden&quot; fighting game series
* Lancelot Richmond, a character in &quot;Nexo Knights&quot;
* Lancelot, a hero in &quot;Mobile Legends: Bang Bang&quot; and its spin-off &quot;Mobile Legends: Adventure&quot;
* Lancelot, a codename for several &quot;Kingsman&quot;&#x27;s agents including James Spencer and his successor Roxanne &quot;Roxy&quot; Morton

== Arts ==
* Lancelot-Grail, a volume of medieval French works that are a major source of Arthurian legend
* &quot;Lancelot, the Knight of the Cart&quot;, a 12th-century poem by Chretien de Troyes
* &quot;Lancelot&quot; (novel), a 1978 novel by Walker Percy
* &quot;Lancelot du Lac&quot; (film), a 1974 film directed by Robert Bresson
* &quot;Lancelot&quot; (&quot;Merlin&quot;), an episode of the 2008 BBC TV series
* &quot;Lancelot&quot; (video game), a 1988 text adventure game
* &quot;Lanzelot&quot;, 1969 opera by Paul Dessau

==Places==
* Lancelot, South Australia, a ghost town
* Lancelot Inlet, an arm of Malaspina Inlet in the Desolation Sound area of the Coast of British Columbia, Canada

== Other uses ==
* Lancelet, a group of primitive chordates
* Launcelot (horse), a racehorse
* 2041 Lancelot, an asteroid
* Brasserie Lancelot, French brewery
* Lancelot Press, Canadian publishing company

==See also==
*Sir Lancelot (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q949707" start="0" end="12" title="Lancelot (disambiguation)" label="[[Lancelot]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q949707" start="56" end="64" title="Lancelot (disambiguation)" label="Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q949707" start="68" end="77" title="Lancelot (disambiguation)" label="Launcelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801816" start="130" end="147" title="Lancelot Andrewes" label="Lancelot Andrewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483601" start="190" end="206" title="Lancelot Addison" label="Lancelot Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483602" start="251" end="290" title="Lancelot Addison (Archdeacon of Dorset)" label="Lancelot Addison (Archdeacon of Dorset)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152306" start="293" end="313" title="Lancelot Baugh Allen" label="Lancelot Baugh Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18819555" start="346" end="370" title="Lancelot Barrington-Ward" label="Lancelot Barrington-Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032012" start="425" end="444" title="Lancelot Blackburne" label="Lancelot Blackburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125116" start="498" end="515" title="Lancelot Blondeel" label="Lancelot Blondeel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483647" start="547" end="573" title="Lancelot Stephen Bosanquet" label="Lancelot Stephen Bosanquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230432" start="611" end="633" title="Lancelot van Brederode" label="Lancelot van Brederode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483608" start="671" end="699" title="Lancelot Charles Lee Brenton" label="Lancelot Charles Lee Brenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q454635" start="740" end="777" title="Lancelot &amp;quot;Capability&amp;quot; Brown" label="Lancelot &amp;quot;Capability&amp;quot; Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483605" start="821" end="836" title="Lancelot Browne" label="Lancelot Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483606" start="866" end="883" title="Lancelot Bulkeley" label="Lancelot Bulkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216958" start="917" end="934" title="Lancelot de Carle" label="Lancelot de Carle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483607" start="984" end="1001" title="Lancelot Carnegie" label="Lancelot Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48967542" start="1049" end="1063" title="Lancelot Clark" label="Lancelot Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483609" start="1097" end="1112" title="Lancelot Curran" label="Lancelot Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q51461147" start="1182" end="1199" title="Lancelot Cutforth" label="Lancelot Cutforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483660" start="1236" end="1252" title="Lancelot de Mole" label="Lancelot de Mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483611" start="1301" end="1314" title="Lancelot Dent" label="Lancelot Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483612" start="1360" end="1378" title="Lancelot Dowbiggin" label="Lancelot Dowbiggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999813" start="1412" end="1430" title="Lancelot Driffield" label="Lancelot Driffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16466749" start="1464" end="1484" title="Lancelot Elphinstone" label="Lancelot Elphinstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483615" start="1527" end="1545" title="Lancelot Errington" label="Lancelot Errington"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838647" start="1586" end="1599" title="Lancelot Fish" label="Lancelot Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34070024" start="1634" end="1650" title="Lancelot Gittens" label="Lancelot Gittens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483617" start="1683" end="1698" title="Launcelot Goody" label="Launcelot Goody"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441911" start="1747" end="1762" title="Lancelot Graham" label="Lancelot Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q61954744" start="1807" end="1821" title="Lancelot Grove" label="Lancelot Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q61723030" start="1872" end="1887" title="Lancelot Hansen" label="Lancelot Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40353626" start="1938" end="1951" title="Lancelot Hare" label="Lancelot Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q26270060" start="2020" end="2043" title="Lancelot Gerald Hasluck" label="Lancelot Gerald Hasluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q24579321" start="2095" end="2109" title="Lancelot Hemus" label="Lancelot Hemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206393" start="2147" end="2166" title="Launcelot Henderson" label="Launcelot Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794592" start="2213" end="2228" title="Lancelot Hickes" label="Lancelot Hickes"/>
<link wikidata="Q562117" start="2265" end="2280" title="Lancelot Hogben" label="Lancelot Hogben"/>
<link wikidata="Q917014" start="2331" end="2347" title="Lancelot Holland" label="Lancelot Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969819" start="2435" end="2474" title="Lancelot Holland (British Army officer)" label="Lancelot Holland (British Army officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992080" start="2523" end="2545" title="Lancelot Oduwa Imasuen" label="Lancelot Oduwa Imasuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483622" start="2580" end="2626" title="Lancelot Joynson-Hicks, 3rd Viscount Brentford" label="Lancelot Joynson-Hicks, 3rd Viscount Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807644" start="2661" end="2678" title="Launcelot Kiggell" label="Launcelot Kiggell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483623" start="2715" end="2728" title="Lancelot Lake" label="Lancelot Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483624" start="2785" end="2799" title="Lancelot Layne" label="Lancelot Layne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483626" start="2836" end="2874" title="Lancelot Lowther, 6th Earl of Lonsdale" label="Lancelot Lowther, 6th Earl of Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483629" start="2903" end="2920" title="Lancelot Oliphant" label="Lancelot Oliphant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498325" start="2953" end="2971" title="Launcelot Percival" label="Launcelot Percival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483632" start="3017" end="3033" title="Lancelot Perowne" label="Lancelot Perowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801814" start="3070" end="3085" title="Lancelot Phelps" label="Lancelot Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528414" start="3121" end="3145" title="Lancelot Phelps (priest)" label="Lancelot Phelps (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21452843" start="3192" end="3208" title="Lancelot Ribeiro" label="Lancelot Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483634" start="3246" end="3265" title="Lancelot Richardson" label="Lancelot Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483614" start="3303" end="3320" title="Lancelot Richdale" label="Lancelot Richdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483635" start="3374" end="3389" title="Lancelot Ridley" label="Lancelot Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483636" start="3424" end="3441" title="Lancelot Robinson" label="Lancelot Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483637" start="3475" end="3493" title="Lancelot Rolleston" label="Lancelot Rolleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q970185" start="3528" end="3542" title="Lancelot Royle" label="Lancelot Royle"/>
<link wikidata="Q466312" start="3591" end="3614" title="Lancelot de Saint-Maard" label="Lancelot de Saint-Maard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483639" start="3648" end="3664" title="Lancelot Salkeld" label="Lancelot Salkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483640" start="3698" end="3716" title="Lancelot Sanderson" label="Lancelot Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483641" start="3761" end="3778" title="Lancelot Shadwell" label="Lancelot Shadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078489" start="3827" end="3851" title="Lancelot Cayley Shadwell" label="Lancelot Cayley Shadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16853686" start="3908" end="3926" title="Lancelot II Schetz" label="Lancelot II Schetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487639" start="4014" end="4027" title="Lancelot Slee" label="Lancelot Slee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483642" start="4067" end="4083" title="Lancelot Slocock" label="Lancelot Slocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483643" start="4126" end="4140" title="Lancelot Smith" label="Lancelot Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483645" start="4182" end="4196" title="Lancelot Speed" label="Lancelot Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15971332" start="4232" end="4247" title="Lancelot Spicer" label="Lancelot Spicer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483646" start="4282" end="4296" title="Lancelot Spurr" label="Lancelot Spurr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243923" start="4334" end="4351" title="Lancelot Stirling" label="Lancelot Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483613" start="4401" end="4419" title="Lancelot Threlkeld" label="Lancelot Threlkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441026" start="4467" end="4487" title="Lancelot II of Ursel" label="Lancelot II of Ursel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195865" start="4520" end="4536" title="Lancelot Volders" label="Lancelot Volders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483653" start="4568" end="4582" title="Launcelot Ward" label="Launcelot Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q383271" start="4619" end="4632" title="Lancelot Ware" label="Lancelot Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q620676" start="4681" end="4699" title="Lancelot Law Whyte" label="Lancelot Law Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248642" start="4783" end="4797" title="André Lancelot" label="André Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096867" start="4826" end="4841" title="Claude Lancelot" label="Claude Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402583" start="4881" end="4897" title="Jacques Lancelot" label="Jacques Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137746" start="4932" end="4946" title="James Lancelot" label="James Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q654685" start="4999" end="5013" title="Livia Lancelot" label="Livia Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="5082" end="5096" title="Lancelot Gobbo" label="Lancelot Gobbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q847347" start="5150" end="5169" title="Launcelot Langstaff" label="Launcelot Langstaff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5270" end="5342" title="List of Battle Arena Toshinden characters#Lancelot Lakeknight" label="character in the &amp;quot;Battle Arena Toshinden&amp;quot; fighting game series"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617309" start="5345" end="5362" title="Lancelot Richmond" label="Lancelot Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5432" end="5457" title="Mobile Legends: Bang Bang" label="Mobile Legends: Bang Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018738" start="5560" end="5568" title="Kingsman (franchise)" label="Kingsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467333" start="5677" end="5691" title="Lancelot-Grail" label="Lancelot-Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q520372" start="5779" end="5811" title="Lancelot, the Knight of the Cart" label="Lancelot, the Knight of the Cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010344" start="5863" end="5891" title="Lancelot (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Lancelot&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723413" start="5924" end="5958" title="Lancelot du Lac (film)" label="&amp;quot;Lancelot du Lac&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643421" start="6001" end="6042" title="Lancelot (Merlin)" label="&amp;quot;Lancelot&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Merlin&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483600" start="6083" end="6116" title="Lancelot (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Lancelot&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49139244" start="6153" end="6161" title="Lanzelot" label="Lanzelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185514" start="6209" end="6234" title="Lancelot, South Australia" label="Lancelot, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075329" start="6251" end="6265" title="Lancelot Inlet" label="Lancelot Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156226" start="6383" end="6391" title="Lancelet" label="Lancelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995961" start="6426" end="6443" title="Launcelot (horse)" label="Launcelot (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110360" start="6459" end="6472" title="2041 Lancelot" label="2041 Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924020" start="6488" end="6506" title="Brasserie Lancelot" label="Brasserie Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483633" start="6525" end="6539" title="Lancelot Press" label="Lancelot Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528236" start="6584" end="6613" title="Sir Lancelot (disambiguation)" label="Sir Lancelot (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297913" wikidata="Q3796115" url="?curid=297913" title="Hamilcar">
<text>Hamilcar (, , or , , &quot;Melqart is Gracious&quot;; , &quot;Hamílkas&quot;;) was a common Carthaginian masculine given name. The name was particularly common among the ruling families of ancient Carthage.

People named Hamilcar include:

* Hamilcar the Magonid, &quot;King&quot; of Carthage, led the Carthaginian forces at the Battle of Himera in 480BC during the First Sicilian War
* Hamilcar, a general against Timoleon of Syracuse
* Hamilcar, a brother of Gisco, possibly brother of Hanno II, with whom he was executed in the middle of the 3rd centuryBC
* Hamilcar the Rhodian, possibly a Carthaginian spy in the entourage of Alexander the Great, executed when returning to Carthage.
* Hamilcar, son of Gisco and grandson of Hanno the Great, led a campaign against Agathocles of Syracuse during the Third Sicilian War. He defeated Agathocles in the Battle of the Himera River in 311 BC. He was captured during the Siege of Syracuse and then killed in 309 BC.
* Hamilcar, a general in Sicily and Africa from 261 to 255 BC during the First Punic War, distinct from the Hamilcar mentioned by Diodorus
* Hamilcar was a Carthaginian commander whose greatest achievement was winning the Battle of Drepanum in 249BC during the First Punic War.
* Hamilcar Barca (–228BC) served as a Carthaginian general during and after the First Punic War. His son was Hannibal, famous for his exploits during the Second Punic War.
* Hamilcar Rashed Jr. (born 1998), American football player

In various forms, the name sometimes appears in other cultures. The Italian name Amilcare was one of the given names of the dictator Benito Mussolini and the composer Amilcare Ponchielli. The Portuguese name Amílcar was one of the given names of the prominent African revolutionary Amílcar Cabral.

==See also==
*General Aircraft Hamilcar — the World War II glider
*Amilcar — French-made automobile from the 1920s and 1930s
*Amílcar Cabral — African nationalist
*Amilcare Cipriani — Italian anarchist
*Amilcare Ponchielli — Italian composer
*Amilcar Hasenfratz — a pseudonym of Frédéric Bartholdi

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* . 
* .

==External links==
*Livius.org: Hamilcar, son of Hanno</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3796115" start="0" end="8" title="Hamilcar" label="Hamilcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q843408" start="27" end="34" title="Melqart" label="Melqart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="92" end="104" title="Carthaginian Empire" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="105" end="114" title="masculine name" label="masculine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="115" end="125" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="189" end="205" title="ancient Carthage" label="ancient Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q599845" start="242" end="262" title="Hamilcar I of Carthage" label="Hamilcar the Magonid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138660" start="329" end="345" title="Battle of Himera (480 BC)" label="Battle of Himera"/>
<link wikidata="Q451587" start="415" end="423" title="Timoleon" label="Timoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q763375" start="427" end="435" title="Kingdom of Syracuse" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6439549" start="461" end="466" title="Gisco (died 239 BC)" label="Gisco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="488" end="496" title="Hanno the Great#Hanno II the Great" label="Hanno II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="631" end="650" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769070" start="708" end="713" title="Gisco" label="Gisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q106281234" start="730" end="745" title="Hanno the Great" label="Hanno the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q391435" start="770" end="780" title="Agathocles" label="Agathocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q763375" start="784" end="792" title="Kingdom of Syracuse" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="804" end="822" title="Greek-Punic Wars#The Third Sicilian War (315–307 BC)" label="Third Sicilian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754459" start="854" end="880" title="Battle of the Himera River (311 BC)" label="Battle of the Himera River"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358464" start="919" end="936" title="Siege of Syracuse (311–309 BC)" label="Siege of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="1037" end="1052" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="1094" end="1102" title="Diodorus of Sicily" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621130" start="1105" end="1113" title="Hamilcar (Drepanum)" label="Hamilcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q590014" start="1186" end="1204" title="Battle of Drepanum" label="Battle of Drepanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185101" start="1244" end="1258" title="Hamilcar Barca" label="Hamilcar Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="1351" end="1359" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="1396" end="1412" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q89433149" start="1416" end="1435" title="Hamilcar Rashed Jr." label="Hamilcar Rashed Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q56446973" start="1543" end="1555" title="Italian name" label="Italian name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796115" start="1556" end="1564" title="Hamilcar" label="Amilcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="1608" end="1624" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q207390" start="1642" end="1661" title="Amilcare Ponchielli" label="Amilcare Ponchielli"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502033" start="1667" end="1682" title="Portuguese name" label="Portuguese name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796115" start="1683" end="1690" title="Hamilcar" label="Amílcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213416" start="1757" end="1771" title="Amílcar Cabral" label="Amílcar Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501545" start="1788" end="1813" title="General Aircraft Hamilcar" label="General Aircraft Hamilcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q471294" start="1841" end="1848" title="Amilcar" label="Amilcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213416" start="1900" end="1914" title="Amílcar Cabral" label="Amílcar Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754922" start="1938" end="1955" title="Amilcare Cipriani" label="Amilcare Cipriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q207390" start="1977" end="1996" title="Amilcare Ponchielli" label="Amilcare Ponchielli"/>
<link wikidata="Q223274" start="2017" end="2035" title="Amilcar Hasenfratz" label="Amilcar Hasenfratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="2040" end="2049" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q223274" start="2053" end="2071" title="Frédéric Bartholdi" label="Frédéric Bartholdi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297914" wikidata="Q4120586" url="?curid=297914" title="Communications management">
<text>Communications management is the systematic planning, implementing, monitoring, and revision of all the channels of communication within an organization and between organizations. It also includes the organization and dissemination of new communication directives connected with an organization, network, or communications technology. Aspects of communications management include developing corporate communication strategies, designing internal and external communications directives, and managing the flow of information, including online communication. It is a process that helps an organization to be systematic as one within the bounds of communication.

Communication and management are closely linked together. Since communication is the process of information exchange of two or people and management includes managers that gives out information to their people. Moreover, communication and management go hand in hand. It is the way to extend control; the fundamental component of project management. Without the advantage of a good communications management system, the cycles associated with the development of a task from start to finish can be genuinely compelled. It also gives the fundamental project integrity needed to give an information help among all individuals from the team. This information must stream descending, upward, and horizontally inside the association. Moreover, it is both master and servant of project control. It is the action component, the integrator of the process toward assembling the project. As project management is both a craftsmanship and a science, the project manager leads the multidiscipline of the plan and construct team.

== The role of communication in management ==
The management&#x27;s part is to achieve the objectives of the organization itself. To be able to do this, managers should make an action plan that simply defines what, when, and how it would be done &amp; finished. In order to execute the plan, managers must pass on the information to everybody in the organization. Good communication advises as well as assists with making a culture that causes individuals to feel like they have a place with and need to help the organization.

Organizations are totally reliant on communication, which is defined as the exchange of ideas, messages, or information by speech, signals, or writing. Without communication, organizations would not function. If communication is diminished or hampered, the entire organization suffers. When communication is thorough, accurate, and timely, the organization tends to be vibrant and effective.

Communication is central to the entire management process for four primary reasons:
# Communication is a linking process of management. 
# Communication is the primary means by which people obtain and exchange information. 
# The most time‐consuming activity a manager engages in is communication. 
# Information and communication represent power in organizations.

The ability to communicate well, both orally and in writing, is a critical managerial skill and a foundation of effective leadership. Through communication, people exchange and share information with one another and influence one another&#x27;s attitudes, behaviors, and understandings.

== Importance of communications management ==
It is basically everything and not a simple plan that everyone will follow. When you make a plan and get everybody ready, it is possible that you or a point person should be the one dealing with the arrangement all through the aggregate of the task.

To ensure solid communication management throughout a project, a communication management plan should be created. The benefits of a communication management plan are five-fold:

* A written framework that both client/stakeholders/team members can reference. This can help in case there is any need for mediation—you have a written paper trail you can refer back to. It can also be beneficial for accounts payable to reference in case there are gaps in time tracked for the project.
* The plan itself will manage expectations from stakeholders to not anticipate a finished project before the deliverables have been tested for quality assurance.
* The points at which communication is shared allow both stakeholders to provide valuable feedback to the project process as well as the final product, and give team members a chance to brainstorm ideas together, bridging the divide between the two groups.
* It allows all involved to better discover risks and issues early on.
* It helps to eliminate the need to hold unnecessary meetings on the books, saving both time and money.
*Communication helps manage organizational conflict. Putnam (2013)
Definition of Organizational Conflict – Putnam &amp; Poole (1987) defines conflict as “the interaction of interdependent people who perceive opposition of goals, aims, values, and who see the other party as potentially interfering with the realization of these goals” (p. 552). Communication eases the process of conflict resolution, and helps maintain the balanced relationships, and sets parameters on interactions between affected individuals and groups in the organization.

Putnam (2013) explains that “a few scholars would deny that communication is an essential feature of conflict.” She cited Thomas and Pondy (1977) noted this in their extensive review of conflict in organizations, and that “It is communication with which we are most concerned in understanding conflict management.&quot;  Communication helps form issues, frame perceptions, translate feelings into conflict, and enact the conflict itself (Putnam &amp; Poole, 1987). Putnam (2013) further stressed that “communication is the means by which conflict gets socially defined” (Simons, 1974b. p. 3)

Source:

Putnam, L. (2013). Definitions and approaches to conflict and communication. In J. G. Oetzel &amp; S. Ting -Toomey The SAGE handbook of conflict communication (pp. 1–40). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Inc. doi: 104135/9781452281988.n1

== Communication management and project management ==
In project management, communication management must address the following questions:
* What information needs to flow in and out of the project?
* Who needs what information?
* When is the information needed?
* What is the format of the information?
* Who will be responsible for transmitting and providing the information?

Moreover, this only serves as guidelines and must take into account other factors like cost and access to information.

As defined by the Project Management Institute (1996), project communications management includes processes required to ensure timely and appropriate generation, collection, dissemination, storage, and ultimate disposition of project information. The following communication processes are involved in Project Communications Management, to wit:

* Communication planning – In this phase, the problems, needs and future plans are being identified to ensure attainment of goals and objectives.
* Information distribution – This involves dissemination of information needed by the stakeholders and other members of the organization.
* Performance reporting – This includes status reporting, progress measurement, and forecasting for the future of the organization.
* Administrative closure – This involves generating, gathering, and disseminating information to formalize phase or project completion.

== Management and communication in organizations ==
Management and communication are closely tied together. As defined, communication is the process by which information is shared between two or more people (which includes machines, e.g. computers). Management literature (Lumenways.com) discusses that each management roles – planning, organizing, leading, and controlling – depends on effective communication. Hence, managers must be able to obtain and share accurate and relevant information to be acted upon. When accurate information is sent, received, and shared, employees can be informed, making them more empowered to perform well. However, when information is mangled and misinterpreted, probably, mistaken information will be spread that will cause communication error. Significant problem in the organization would likely occur.

Hence, it is imperative for a manager to effectively understand and apply the basics of the communication process in his/her management and leadership. Further, Lunenburg (2010) recognizes ‘noise’ that distorts a message. He states, ‘different perceptions of the message, language barriers, interruptions, emotions, and attitude are examples of noise’ that hinders one to obtain a clear message to and from the members of the organization. Stereotypes, prejudice (personal bias), feelings (emotions), and language also can serve as ‘noise’ in the communication process. It is also essential that managers must recognize common impediments to effective communication in their respective organizations. In a world filled with multicultural individuals, members of an organization may have different and unfamiliar norms and mores. Managers therefore should be mindful not to discriminate his/her employees based on what is commonly practiced, acknowledge other&#x27;s feelings (empathy), and communicate simply so everyone gets the message clearly. Effective managers must be adept with the practice of effective communication skills and ICT along with his/her management and leadership practice despite radical changes in the environment. This would lead to a more productive performance of the organization. With these, a manager would eventually stand out in the global world.

== The communication process ==
Some would say that the communication process may seem simple where an individual sends a message and someone would receive it. The communication process describes how a message is delivered and received. When looking at communication as a process, then, one must also look into its elements. Berlo&#x27;s model of communication (1961) is one good example to discuss the process since the model elucidates the commonly used elements such as the source, receiver, message, channel, and feedback. As Ongkiko &amp; Flor (2006) pointed out, a basic understanding of the communication process is important to achieve the highest social good in its application.

According to Berlo (1961) (cited in Ongkiko &amp; Flor, 20016), source refers to a person or a group of persons “with a purpose, a reason for engaging in communication”. Here, the source serves as the initiator in the communication process. On the other hand, the receiver is the person or group of persons at the other end of the communication process.

The receiver according to Berlo (1961) is the target of communication, where he/she listens when the source communicates (verbally or nonverbally). The message is the transmitted idea, purpose, or intention that has been translated into a code or a systematic set of symbols from the source. Berlo (1961) identified three factors of a message which include: message code (e.g. language), message content (e.g. information presented, conclusions, etc.), and message treatment (e.g. angle of the story, news framing, etc.).

The channel is the medium through which the message is transmitted. These could be in the form of sound waves (message-vehicles), a manager&#x27;s speaking mechanism that serves as a mode of encoding and decoding messages, or even the air that serves as vehicle-carrier (Berlo, 1961).
The feedback occurs when a receiver decoded the transmitted messaged (converts the message), then encoded a message and sends it back to the source. This also shows an interactive communication process (lumenlearning.com) where the receiver can send feedback to the sender to indicate that the message has been delivered and how it has been interpreted. Interactive communication means that there is a back-and-forth exchange of message and that can assure the source that the message has been received and interpreted correctly.

In project management, managers should always consider and understand that in a communication process, there are always elements that are continually changing, dynamic, and interacting (Ongkiko and Flor, 2006). Further, the events and relationships among the elements are seen as being: on-going, cyclic, ever-changing, no beginning and no end, interdependent, and interrelated.

In an organization, an effective manager should communicate well and competently with his or her subordinates. It is essential for managers and leaders to ably express their opinions and issue instructions clearly with their members to understand what exactly is expected from them (Lumenlearning.com). Effective communication in an organization can be a basis for sound decision-making and planning, facilitates smooth and efficient work and coordination in the organization, increases managerial capacity, can be a useful tool for public relations (image building), increases productivity, and others.


It may seem simple, but the communication process is more than just a process wherein a person sends a message and others receive it. In the communication process, the message must be sent and received correctly and accurately. From the sender who encodes the message, he/she will send the message through a channel. The Receiver now decodes the message and after which, he/she will give a feedback back to the sender of the message. The feedback indicates how the message has been interpreted by the receiver. It may or it may not be the same with how the sender encodes the message.

=== Four-step process for effective communication ===
The project manager and the project team work together to identify who needs what information. In other words, project management needs to know what the requirements of successful communications are in order to plan on how to achieve those requirements.

;Identify communication requirements: &quot;A project of this size, with this vast amount of stakeholders, requires this much communication,&quot; said project sponsor Kisper, as she stretched her arms wider and wider apart. &quot;Communication is, without a doubt, a project manager&#x27;s most important job.&quot;

; Identify the 5Ws (Why, What, When, Where, Who) and 1H (How)

* Who needs to be communicated to. This is based on the communication formula and needs to be determined.
* What needs to be communicated. All information related to the project need not be communicated to everyone in the team.
* When it should be communicated. The timeline of communication should be monitored.
* Where should it be communicated. If the team involves many people, then individual level and team level communications needs to be resolved.
* Why communication of information is essential and to what level is important. Why is it not encouraged as it is blame rather than change.
* How the communication needs to be done. Is it conducted via e-mail, phone, or a presentation done to the team members?

;Identify and accommodate the enterprise environmental factors: Much of the communications management processes are linked to the enterprise environmental factors.

;Identify organizational process assets: The organizational process assets affect how the project manager, project team, and the stakeholders will communicate within a project.

== The role of communication in management ==
Communication and management come hand in hand. Communication as defined by Merriam Webster Dictionary, is a process by which information is exchanged between individuals through a common system of symbols, signs of behavior. On the other hand, management is the act of getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives using available resources efficiently and effectively by means of its four functions: planning, organizing, directing, and controlling. These four functions depend on effective communication.

Communication is considered to be the means through which members of organization relate with one another by interchanging ideals, facts and feeling, through the use of words, letters, memoranda, symbols and bulletins (Nnamseh, 2009). And one way for the organization to attain certain organizational objectives, is through efficient transmission of information, ideals, attitudes, and feelings within its members, through the process of communication (Etuk, 1991).

Management aims to accomplish the goals and objectives of an organization. They must plan for the future of their organization and these plans must be communicated well to the members of the organization in order for these to succeed. Without proper communication, the plans of the management would be hard to achieve. An effective communication can help in the following areas of management, including:

* Provides clarity – Without effective communication, information would not be disseminated properly. It gives clear instructions and information to everyone to avoid confusion, conflicts and misunderstanding.
* Builds relationship – If the management can communicate well with their people, it can result to a reduced-tension between them. Good communication can help builds relationship and gain trust.
* Creates commitment – Communication is a two-way process, we send and we receive message. If there is an effective communication strategy, the management can also listen well to their people, thus encouraging people&#x27;s opinion and points of view. People who feel belong and engaged are most likely to give a good feedback which is very essential in communication.
* Defines expectations – When there are standards that are set, people will be aware of what they need to do to get a positive feedback and the benefits that come with it.

The management can reach their goals and objectives through the help of an effective communication.

The role of communication is not only crucial between management and employees within the organization but also in the interaction and relationship between the management and the organization&#x27;s external stakeholders. External stakeholders are those who do not directly work with a company but are affected somehow by the actions and outcomes of the business. Suppliers, creditors, and public groups are all considered external stakeholders. It is through communication in the form of meetings, newsletter, summary report and conference calls with external stakeholders that specialists acting in behalf of management, are able to procure resources, support and feedback on organizational products and services which are important to measure overall organization performance. The role of communication with external stakeholders is also important in management strategic planning.  In the early stages of strategic planning process, external stakeholder opinions and insights are especially valuable as they add to understanding the operating environment, as well as to the vision of the organization&#x27;s future. It is through using all communication means available such as newsletters, electronic messaging, emails, meeting, posters, etc. that management is able to let external stakeholders engage and understand the organization&#x27;s core purpose, why the organization exists and what value it provides for its customers, vendors, and the market.

== Method of communication ==
Communication process alone would not be the only basis for communications management&#x27;s success. Managers should take note about the methods of Communication. The standard method that is usually used is oral and written ones. Aside from this, there is also the non – verbal communication.

Management uses various effective methods of communication with internal and external audiences.  The most common traditional methods and styles are oral, written, face-to-face, nonverbal, physical nonverbal, paralanguage and visual. A better understanding of these methods and styles will help management in knowing as well as dealing with staff in a better way, clear any misconceptions or misunderstandings that may exist and thus contribute to the organization&#x27;s success.

Oral communication includes the spoken word which are done formally over the phone, face to-face, lectures, video conferencing, voice chat, meetings and conferences, and informally over grapevine and rumor mill. It also includes the speed, volume, pitch, voice modulation, clarity of speech and also the non-verbal communications like visual cues and body language. Written communication on the other hand refers to the writing and typing paper and pen documents and letters, text chats, emails, typed electronic documents, reports, SMS and anything else that might be conveyed by the use of written symbols in any documents that are part of the day-to-day business life. Such method of communication is indispensable for any formal business communication and for the issue of legal instructions.

Face-to-face style of communication is the preferred method of communication especially in meetings and participation in discussion. While the nonverbal communication or the sending and receiving of wordless messages convey authentic feelings and thoughts, it is not effective in a workplace communication without the supplement of verbal or written communication. The body language style or physical nonverbal communication consists of body posture, facial expressions, eye contact, gestures like a pointed finger, wave and the like touch tone of voice, overall movements of the body and others.  From body language such as facial expressions and facial muscles, silent messages and authentic human emotions can be sent and conveyed without uttering a word. Thus, a change in the emotional state becomes visible when there is a change in facial expression.

The paralanguage style of communication refers to the way something is said, instead of what is actually said.  This is manifested in the style of speaking, tone, emotion, stress, pitch, intonation and voice quality.  The visual communication type takes place through the help of visual aids, color, illustration, graphic design, drawing, typography, signs charts, graphs and other electronic resources.

Technology, worldwide lockdowns and the social distancing protocol caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have caused new and popular methods such as video conferencing and social media chat meetings to emerge popular.  They brought the Zoom Video Communications platform, as people replaced in-person work and social events with videoconferencing, widely utilized.

== Oral communication ==
A huge extent of oral communication is straightforwardly associated with Communications Management. For instance, if a manager doesn&#x27;t speak or make it clear to a sales group, this may prompt contrasts in objectives and accomplishments.

There are two parts of oral communication:
* Active listening - It is where the person, who receives the message pays attention to the information, interprets and remembers.
* Constructive feedback - It is where managers fail most of the time. Feedback needs to be constructive and then it will help the employees to shape up their performance instead of mere criticism.

A major skill which should be developed to master oral communication is active listening. It constitutes a complex parameter of communication rather than a natural effortless hearing process. Effective listening encompasses both the literal and the critical understanding of information and ideas, which are conveyed through oral communication. Through listening, people are exposed to a broad spectrum of experiences, which help them develop their linguistic potential. Active listening skills promote information collection, evaluation of situations, empathy, acceptance of persons and ideas (Mousena and Sidiropoulou, 2018).

== Weekly reporting method ==
One simple and popular communications method is called the weekly reporting method: every employee composes an e-mail report, once a week, including information on their activities in the preceding week, their plans for the following week, and any other information deemed relevant to the larger group, bearing in mind length considerations. Reports are sent to managers, who summarize and report to their own managers, eventually leading to an overall summary led by the CEO, which is then sent to the board of directors. The CEO then sends the board&#x27;s summary back down the ladder, where each manager can append an additional summary or note before referring it to their employees.

Eventually, each employee will receive a long e-mail, containing many or all of the above-mentioned summaries, from every level of management; reading the full result is rarely a requirement. Curious or ambitious employees are considered more likely to read the result; task-centered employees, however, are not.

== Management in communication media system ==
Social media system is considered as the fast-moving platform adjacent to the immense development of digital media as the modern-day tool in communicating knowledge and information. The merging of one&#x27;s capacity to create a message and the digital means to translate it has an enormous influence in considering social media as a prevailing and an easily reached facility. The dominant function of social media to code or translate a content into comprehensible expression with the support of technical medium has yielded a unique facet in the contemporary mode of communication. However, this cutting-edge approach of conveying contents can be more credible if efficient type of communication management in social media system is employed as construct to essentially add force to the essence of news and information distribution. Now, a point at issue that may possibly raise here, what type or style of management will suit the structure and context of the present-day interaction and exchange of ideas in social media system?

The ‘organizational dynamics’ of management is considerably relevant to this present-day communication system that has been occupied by digital sophistications and uncertainties due to the ever-growing properties and features of social media. Organizational dynamics refers to the course of action in developing the resources continuously, and in augmenting the maximum capacity of the individuals within the system through organizational learning, exercises and decisive leadership (“What is Organizational Dynamics?,” n.d.). This communication management regulates the initial worth in realizing the communication goals that may lead to the potential results that would produce a lasting impact change within the organization or institution. Social media system has its luminous quality, with no exact structure and trend. As time changes, social media communication will still be around for expansion, but its management will be regarded as a functional reinforcing structure for its goal, task, and purpose.

Most significantly, this type of management necessitates high degree or quantity of creativity as the primary requirement in the production of contents. According to Küng (2007), high volumes of creativity involve countless elevations of deep-rooted motivation which are strongly swayed by five precise attributes of work environment as follows: a) reinforcement in creating innovative ideas; b) self-sufficiency in attaining the targets; c) properties in setting task motivation and mastery; d) challenge in modeling imaginative and inspired thinking skills; and e) team structure with variety of viewpoints and familiarities.

The article of Jo Silvester, Leading in the Digital Era (2019), deliberates and proposes the type of leader or manager a digital society must have, more explicitly with the growth of the internet and social media devices for the efficient distribution of tasks and accountabilities. The article urges contemporary leaders or managers to be both politically aware and digitally/technically skilled. The author deems that there are enormous modifications in the way leaders or managers perform their roles and duties, from the customary way of seeing the working situation, setting up an organizational goal, and executing the program of action, leaders or managers now participate in freely accessible electronic or digital conferences and discourses with investors and turn out to be familiarized with the rapid change of ethical, social, and situational patterns.

Moreover, the article gives emphasis on the practicality of social media as a system in framing the qualities of a leader or a manager in terms of the way he generates impressions from individuals and other major elements of the organizational system. The author recognizes the five most important contexts in shaping the role, extent, and tasks of a leader or a manager, which are all associated with the purpose, relevance, and service of social media in delivering quality leadership. First, the context of a wide-ranging impact in which social media can touch diverse people where the control of a leader or a manager can even move beyond his workers, clients and providers. The second idea is immense clarity or directness that utilizes an established recording of previous plans and actions that can transform leader or manager into more observable or evident one. Third is the notion of a better democratization which is considered function of a greater transparency in which a leader or a manager who obtains more followers on social media can be more influential and powerful. Fourth, high-speed communication process where the utilization of digital method like using hashtags can get hold of more people in real time. Finally, the opportunity of gaining control of media since the merging of one&#x27;s capacity to create a message and the digital means to translate it has an enormous influence in considering social media as a prevailing and an easily reached facility.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4120586" start="0" end="25" title="Communications management" label="Communications management"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="116" end="129" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="140" end="152" title="organization" label="organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="296" end="303" title="Social network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="308" end="333" title="communications technology" label="communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426058" start="391" end="414" title="corporate communication" label="corporate communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="415" end="425" title="strategy" label="strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10283002" start="503" end="522" title="information flow" label="flow of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="534" end="540" title="internet" label="online"/>
<link wikidata="Q368722" start="14231" end="14234" title="Five Ws" label="5Ws"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="23936" end="23942" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="24297" end="24300" title="Chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="24328" end="24346" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297920" wikidata="Q4022919" url="?curid=297920" title="Yossarian">
<text>:&quot;Also covered in this article are the characters Snowden and Yossarian&#x27;s tentmates.&quot;

Capt. John Yossarian is a fictional character, the protagonist of Joseph Heller&#x27;s satirical 1961 novel &quot;Catch-22&quot; and its 1994 sequel &quot;Closing Time&quot;. In &quot;Catch-22&quot;, Yossarian is a 28-year-old captain in the 256th Squadron of the Army Air Forces where he serves as a B-25 bombardier stationed on the small island of Pianosa off the Italian mainland during World War II. Yossarian&#x27;s exploits have previously been thought to be based on the experiences of the author. Heller was also a bombardier in the Army Air Corps, stationed on an island off the coast of Italy during the war. Heller later documented in his autobiography &quot;Now &amp; Then&quot; the elements of Yossarian which came from his experiences (specifically the episodes where Yossarian attends to Snowden during the Avignon mission). Heller noted that he derived the name Yossarian from a wartime friend and fellow bombardier, Francis Yohannan. Yohannan made the military his career, continuing to serve through the Vietnam War, placing him at odds with Yossarian&#x27;s feelings towards the military and as noted in his obituary &quot;(Yohannan) turned aside calls from reporters who asked if he was the real-life Yossarian.&quot; A possible source for Yossarian&#x27;s narrative adventure and efforts to be relieved of his combat duties is Lt. Julius Fish, another bombardier and wartime friend to both Francis Yohannan and Joseph Heller.

== Name ==
Yossarian&#x27;s first name is &quot;John&quot;, but this is not revealed until late in &quot;Catch-22&quot; when Colonel Korn says to him &quot;Call me Blackie, John. We&#x27;re pals now.&quot;
&quot;Catch-22&quot; introduces Yossarian as an American soldier in World War II, who claims to have Assyrian heritage. In &quot;Closing Time&quot;, this is clarified to be a joke and Yossarian is revealed to actually be Armenian.

The exotic name &quot;Yossarian&quot; was chosen by Heller to emphasize his protagonist&#x27;s detachment from mainstream military culture. Yossarian&#x27;s name is described as &quot;an odious, alien, distasteful name, that just did not inspire confidence.&quot; It was &quot;...not at all like such clean, crisp, honest, American names as Cathcart, Peckem and Dreedle.&quot; As to the origins of the name, &quot;Heller admitted in later years that the name &#x27;Yossarian&#x27; was derived from the name of one of his Air Force buddies, Francis Yohannan – an Assyrian – but that the character of Yossarian himself was &#x27;the incarnation of a wish&#x27; (&quot;Now and Then&quot; 175-6). When, in 1974, he was asked how he felt about the war when he was in it, Heller wrote, &quot;Much differently than Yossarian felt and much differently than I felt when I wrote the novel … In truth I enjoyed it and so did just about everyone else I served with, in training and even in combat.&quot;

== Character sketch ==

=== Motivation ===
Throughout the novel, Yossarian&#x27;s main concern is the idea that people are trying to kill him, either directly (by attacking his plane) or indirectly (by forcing him to fly missions) and he goes to great lengths to stay alive.

=== Goals ===
Yossarian&#x27;s motivation is to &quot;live forever or die in the attempt.&quot; To survive the war, Yossarian employs a number of stratagems:
* Postponing dangerous missions by any means possible (e.g. poisoning the squadron and moving the bomb line during the &quot;Great Big Siege of Bologna&quot;).
* Constantly checking into the hospital with contrived liver complaints (&quot;a pain in his liver that fell just short of being jaundice&quot;), including the fictitious &quot;Garnett-Fleischaker syndrome&quot; and by exploiting the fact he always runs a temperature of 101 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius).
* Ordering his pilot to perform harsh evasive action in the face of flak, something he will not trust anyone else to do.
* &quot;Plotting an emergency heading into Switzerland&quot; so he can be interned for the duration of the war &quot;under conditions of utmost ease and luxury.&quot;

Yossarian, unlike many of the other soldiers, tries to escape the realities of war by getting drunk, gorging himself in the mess hall and having sex, although events in the novel make it easy to believe he would do these things anyway.

=== Relationships and conflicts ===
Yossarian is in continual conflict with the military policy &quot;Catch-22,&quot; a circularly-reasoned bureaucratic trap which his superiors use to justify many of their illogical demands.

The bulk of &quot;Catch-22&quot; concerns Yossarian&#x27;s relationships with the other officers in his squadron, such as the neurotic Hungry Joe, the war profiteer Milo, the idealistic Nately and selfish Doc Daneeka. There are many characters Yossarian hates and likes. His best friends are Dunbar, Chaplain Tappman, Nately, Hungry Joe, McWatt and Orr. Yossarian is greatly saddened when Clevinger and Orr disappear, despite frequently arguing with these characters. He hates the majority of his superiors for putting him in harm&#x27;s way, especially the sadistic Joe McCarthy-like careerist Captain Black and the egomaniacal Colonel Cathcart, who continually raises the number of missions required before the aircrews can rotate back home as well as volunteering his aircrews for the most dangerous missions, to make himself look good to his superiors.

Yossarian shows particular grief for the men that die during the novel, particularly Snowden, McWatt, Nately, Dobbs and Hungry Joe or those who disappear: Orr, Clevinger and Dunbar. While the book tells us nothing of Yossarian&#x27;s relationship with Snowden, it is Yossarian&#x27;s doomed attempt to save Snowden and his witnessing the latter&#x27;s gruesome death that forms the emotional centre of the book.

=== Epiphany ===
At the end of the novel, Yossarian accepts a deal with Colonel Cathcart and Colonel Korn rather than face a court-martial for going AWOL in Rome. The deal allows Yossarian to go home but only if he pretends to be &quot;pals&quot; to Colonel Cathcart and Colonel Korn; to &quot;become one of the boys.&quot; Korn explains this means the Army is &quot;going to glorify you and send you home a hero, recalled by the Pentagon for morale and public-relations purposes.&quot; It allows Yossarian to get out of the war, without any more contribution to the low morale which has been spreading through the Group because of him and to make the colonels look good to their superiors. Yossarian finds this deal &quot;odious&quot; as it lets down all the others in the squadron who were relying on his dissent to force their commanders to treat them better and admits he did it &quot;in a moment of weakness.&quot; When he learns the &quot;official report&quot; had twisted the event of Nately&#x27;s whore stabbing him into Yossarian taking a knife wound from a Nazi assassin to protect the colonels, Yossarian resents being manipulated as &quot;part of the deal.&quot;

Yossarian&#x27;s epiphany comes when he hears of Orr’s escape to neutral Sweden, the culmination of Orr&#x27;s many attempts to escape combat duty (constantly crashing his plane, the prostitute hitting him over the head, etc.) which Yossarian had interpreted as incompetence; Orr had offered hints of this intention in exchanges between the two. Yossarian realizes it is possible to defeat (or at least escape) the military and the Catch-22 that supports it. Yossarian justifies his desertion by stating &quot;I’m not running away from my responsibilities. I’m running to them. There’s nothing negative about running away to save my life.&quot;

==In &quot;Catch-22&quot;==

Throughout the book, Yossarian&#x27;s main concern is the idea that people are trying to kill him, either directly (by attacking his plane) or indirectly (by forcing him to fly missions). His suspicion develops into paranoia after his attempts to find answers by using logic and reason are thwarted by a combination of vague bureaucracy, transparent yet contradicting Army regulations and personality conflicts. He is unable to fly the required number of missions to be discharged from duty, because his superiors keep increasing the number of missions. He cannot obtain a Section 8 by pretending to be insane because his superiors see his desire to get out of flying as a sign of perfect sanity (hence Catch-22). Yossarian boycotts flying missions as much as possible, either through feigning illness or inventing an excuse to return to base (like a busted intercom.) The novel begins with Yossarian staying in the hospital due to an invented liver condition. He busies himself by arbitrarily censoring letters and signing them Washington Irving, Irving Washington, or (as gets the Chaplain into trouble with authorities) A. T. Tappman, the Chaplain&#x27;s name (R. O. Shipman in the original version of the book and in British Editions).

Whenever on leave, Yossarian and his friends carouse, drink, and sleep around as much as they can, knowing and fearing they could be killed on the next mission. One of the prostitutes they employ becomes Nately&#x27;s unofficial girlfriend (she is referred to only as &quot;Nately&#x27;s Whore&quot; and &quot;Nately&#x27;s Girl&quot;). Despite Nately&#x27;s repeated advances, she spurns him cruelly until he, instead of sleeping with her, lets her get a good night&#x27;s sleep. By the next morning she has fallen deeply in love with him. When Nately is killed, she blames Yossarian for his death; she manifests a towering rage and tries to kill Yossarian several times during the remainder of the narrative in an impossible manner (constantly tracking Yossarian down, even after he dumped her hundreds of miles behind enemy territory.)

===Yossarian&#x27;s tentmates===
The squadron houses its soldiers in large tents. At the start of the novel Yossarian is assigned to a tent with Orr and a third officer referred to as &quot;The Dead Man in Yossarian&#x27;s Tent&quot;Lt. Muddwho was sent on a mission immediately upon his arrival and died in combat before he ever even got the official chance to check in. His belongings remain on the bed where he threw them; due to the illogical bureaucratic procedures the armed forces are shown to follow, the belongings cannot be officially removed since Mudd had never officially arrived.

Yossarian and Orr get along well and Orr customizes the tent making it much more comfortable. After Orr is declared M.I.A. and presumed dead, four new officers are assigned to the tent but Yossarian cannot tolerate them. Sergeant Towser offers Yossarian the option of being assigned to the same tent as Nately but he refuses to leave.

The new tentmates call Yossarian &quot;Yo-Yo&quot; and are afraid of him and go out of their way to help him, always offering him the warmest expressions of goodwill and generally behaving with intolerable conviviality. They are rambunctious because of their young age and lack of military experience. They tend to like those whom Yossarian hates and fears and do not mind the increasing number of missions. They do what Yossarian and the Air Force were unable to doget rid of The Dead Man in Yossarian&#x27;s Tentby throwing his belongings into the woods.

=== Snowden ===

Snowden is a member of Yossarian&#x27;s flight during a mission and acts as catalyst for the fundamental change in Yossarian&#x27;s mentality and outlook. After their aircraft is hit by anti-aircraft fire, Snowden is mortally wounded and Yossarian attempts to help by treating a serious leg wound with white bandages and sulfanilamide powder.

Eventually Yossarian notices bleeding from Snowden&#x27;s armpit and realises he has another wound under his flak suit. As Yossarian rips open the flak suit, a fatal wound beneath exposes Snowden&#x27;s internal organs which fall out onto the floor. A huge chunk of flak had ripped straight through his ribs from behind. Yossarian is horrified at the sight. Snowden is about to die but is able to tell Yossarian he is cold. Yossarian covers Snowden in a parachute and comforts him by saying &quot;there, there.&quot;

Snowden&#x27;s death embodies Yossarian&#x27;s desire to evade death; by seeing Snowden&#x27;s entrails spilling over the plane, he feels that &quot;Man was matter, that was Snowden’s secret. Drop him out a window and he’ll fall. Set fire to him and he’ll burn. Bury him and he’ll rot, like other kinds of garbage. That was Snowden’s secret. Ripeness was all.&quot;

The experience on the plane dramatically changes Yossarian&#x27;s attitude towards life. He looks only to protect his life and to an extent the lives of his friends. Yossarian turns against the military and refuses to wear a uniform, his justification being he simply &quot;doesn&#x27;t want to,&quot; perhaps because he was traumatized and depressed by Snowden&#x27;s death. The excuse Captain Korn gives to General Dreedle is that Snowden died in one uniform and his remains had soaked into Yossarian&#x27;s, and all of Yossarian&#x27;s other articles of clothing were in the laundry. General Dreedle says &quot;That sounds like a lot of crap to me.&quot; Yossarian replies, &quot;It is a lot of crap, sir.&quot;

=== Finale ===
By the end of the book, just about every other member of his squadron has been killed, disappeared, gone AWOL, or otherwise removed. When Yossarian learns from Captain Black that Nately&#x27;s Whore&#x27;s kid sister has been evicted by the Military Police, he flies with Hungry Joe to Rome without leave to try to save her. He can&#x27;t find her and ends up walking through the street observing all the horrors that come with war. He gets back to the officers&#x27; apartment, where Aarfy has raped and murdered Michaela. When the MPs finally come, they do not arrest Aarfy and instead arrest Yossarian for going AWOL.

Yossarian is forced by Colonel Cathcart and Colonel Korn into an odious deal whereby if he acts as their &quot;pal&quot; he will be allowed to go home. The deal is designed so the rest of the squadron will not believe Yossarian will be sent home because he has &quot;turned into such a stubborn son of a bitch&quot; and refused to fly but because – being a hero from the Ferrara mission in which he went into the flak zones a second time without support – he is being sent home as a P.R. representative for the Army.

On leaving the colonels, Yossarian is badly injured when Nately&#x27;s whore stabs him and he is rushed to hospital where he recovers and is visited by the Chaplain and Major Danby, who confirms the deal with the colonels is still on but Yossarian wishes not to take it as it lets the rest of the squadron down.

While Yossarian is trying to work out how to escape this Catch-22, the Chaplain runs in to announce the missing Orr is alive and well and has rowed his way to neutral Sweden, escaping the war. This gives a new lease on life to the Chaplain, Major Danby and more so to Yossarian who now sees the genius of Orr&#x27;s plans and makes him determined to escape the war. As Yossarian leaves, Nately&#x27;s whore again tries to kill him but Yossarian jumps out of the way and runs off.

&quot;Closing Time&quot; hints the idealistic escape did not occur, with Yossarian saying that when he went home, he was made a major. While Korn and Cathcart are not mentioned, there are implications that perhaps Yossarian took their deal in the end. This reflects more the character of the older Yossarian, who by his late sixties has become a part of the society he spurned in his youth.

==Film portrayal==
In Mike Nichols&#x27; 1970 film adaptation of the novel Yossarian was played by Alan Arkin, while in the 1973 television series pilot &quot;Catch-22&quot;, based on the novel and the 1970 film, he was played by Richard Dreyfuss. Christopher Abbott plays Yossarian in George Clooney&#x27;s 2019 mini-series for Hulu.

The miniseries portrays Yossarian with his desire to leave the war intact, but stooping to various lows that harm his fellow soldiers as well as some of his superiors. He has no qualms meeting Cathcart&#x27;s demands when offered the chance to permanently leave the war and it is only Scheisskopf&#x27;s intervention that forces him to stay. The ending has him resigning himself to his missions, albeit without clothes.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="55" end="62" title="#Snowden" label="Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67" end="93" title="#Yossarian&amp;#x27;s tentmates" label="Yossarian&amp;#x27;s tentmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022919" start="102" end="122" title="Yossarian" label="Capt. John Yossarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="153" end="164" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q208101" start="168" end="181" title="Joseph Heller" label="Joseph Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q278208" start="216" end="224" title="Catch-22" label="Catch-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135450" start="257" end="269" title="Closing Time (novel)" label="Closing Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="329" end="336" title="Captain (U.S. Air Force)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="366" end="381" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q502117" start="403" end="407" title="B-25 Mitchell" label="B-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305267" start="408" end="418" title="bombardier (air force)" label="bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q208114" start="452" end="459" title="Pianosa" label="Pianosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="468" end="475" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="492" end="504" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305267" start="625" end="635" title="Bombardier (aircrew)" label="bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="699" end="704" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="1857" end="1865" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="1977" end="1985" title="Armenian people" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065909" start="2654" end="2666" title="Now and Then (Joseph Heller book)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="3559" end="3566" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q42289" start="3858" end="3868" title="Fahrenheit" label="Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="3881" end="3888" title="Celsius" label="Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="3959" end="3963" title="flak" label="flak"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4055" end="4066" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="4779" end="4789" title="List of Catch-22 characters" label="Hungry Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q60924" start="4795" end="4808" title="war profiteering" label="war profiteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860336" start="4809" end="4813" title="Milo Minderbinder" label="Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968756" start="4830" end="4836" title="Nately" label="Nately"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287038" start="4849" end="4860" title="Doc Daneeka" label="Doc Daneeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="4936" end="4942" title="Dunbar (Catch-22)" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073199" start="4944" end="4960" title="Chaplain Tappman" label="Chaplain Tappman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="4982" end="4988" title="List of Catch-22 characters" label="McWatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104047" start="4993" end="4996" title="Orr (Catch-22)" label="Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="5033" end="5042" title="List of Catch-22 characters" label="Clevinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="5211" end="5223" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joe McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="5239" end="5252" title="Captain Black (Catch-22)" label="Captain Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148105" start="5273" end="5289" title="Colonel Cathcart" label="Colonel Cathcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="5612" end="5617" title="Dobbs (Catch-22)" label="Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="5754" end="5761" title="List of Catch-22 characters" label="Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148105" start="5987" end="6003" title="Colonel Cathcart" label="Colonel Cathcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="6008" end="6020" title="Colonel Korn" label="Colonel Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="6064" end="6068" title="AWOL" label="AWOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="6072" end="6076" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148105" start="6165" end="6181" title="Colonel Cathcart" label="Colonel Cathcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="6186" end="6198" title="Colonel Korn" label="Colonel Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968756" start="6907" end="6926" title="Nately&amp;#x27;s Whore" label="Nately&amp;#x27;s whore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="6983" end="6987" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104047" start="7141" end="7144" title="Orr (Catch-22)" label="Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q639425" start="7157" end="7171" title="Sweden during World War II" label="neutral Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="7983" end="7991" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="8135" end="8139" title="US Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871419" start="8340" end="8349" title="section 8 (military)" label="Section 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="8370" end="8376" title="insane" label="insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915214" start="8456" end="8462" title="sanity" label="sanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250696" start="8470" end="8478" title="Catch-22 (logic)" label="Catch-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="8491" end="8498" title="boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q488231" start="8552" end="8568" title="Malingering" label="feigning illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="8711" end="8716" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="8796" end="8813" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="9180" end="9190" title="prostitute" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968756" start="9282" end="9301" title="Nately&amp;#x27;s Whore" label="Nately&amp;#x27;s Whore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104047" start="9993" end="9996" title="Orr (Catch-22)" label="Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344557" start="10559" end="10565" title="Missing in action" label="M.I.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="10664" end="10679" title="Sergeant Towser" label="Sergeant Towser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968756" start="10746" end="10752" title="Nately" label="Nately"/>
<link wikidata="Q423423" start="11675" end="11688" title="sulfanilamide" label="sulfanilamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="12152" end="12161" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="12777" end="12785" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434" start="12808" end="12815" title="uniform" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="13474" end="13487" title="Captain Black (Catch-22)" label="Captain Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968756" start="13493" end="13530" title="Nately&amp;#x27;s Whore&amp;#x27;s Kid Sister" label="Nately&amp;#x27;s Whore&amp;#x27;s kid sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="13605" end="13618" title="AWOL" label="without leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036526" start="13799" end="13804" title="Captain Aardvark" label="Aarfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148105" start="13959" end="13975" title="Colonel Cathcart" label="Colonel Cathcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="13980" end="13992" title="Colonel Korn" label="Colonel Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073199" start="14610" end="14618" title="Chaplain Tappman" label="Chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566338" start="14623" end="14634" title="Major Danby" label="Major Danby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104047" start="14879" end="14882" title="Orr (Catch-22)" label="Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135450" start="15254" end="15266" title="Closing Time (novel)" label="Closing Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="15662" end="15674" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050533" start="15686" end="15714" title="Catch-22 (film)" label="film adaptation of the novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q108283" start="15739" end="15749" title="Alan Arkin" label="Alan Arkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181799" start="15870" end="15886" title="Richard Dreyfuss" label="Richard Dreyfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111829" start="15888" end="15906" title="Christopher Abbott" label="Christopher Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="15926" end="15940" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743233" start="15953" end="15964" title="Catch-22 (miniseries)" label="mini-series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297921" wikidata="Q1292602" url="?curid=297921" title="Heathcliff">
<text>Heathcliff may refer to:

* Heathcliff (&quot;Wuthering Heights&quot;), the central character from the novel &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot; by Emily Brontë
** &quot;Heathcliff&quot; (musical), a musical based on the book &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot;
* Heathcliff Slocumb, American baseball player
* Mark Heathcliff, a character from the analog horror web series &quot;The Mandela Catalogue&quot;
* &quot;Heathcliff&quot; (comic strip), a comic strip about a cat of the same name
** &quot;Heathcliff&quot; (1980 TV series), a cartoon based on the above comic strip, produced by Ruby-Spears
** &quot;Heathcliff&quot; (1984 TV series), a cartoon based on the same comic strip, produced by DiC
** &quot;&quot;, a theatrical film composed mainly of several episodes of the 1984 TV series
* Dr. Heathcliff &quot;Cliff&quot; Huxtable, the lead character on &quot;The Cosby Show&quot;, played by Bill Cosby
* Heathcliffe Hope, a character from the TV series &quot;Emmerdale&quot;
* Heathcliff, Fred&#x27;s butler in the 2014 film &quot;Big Hero 6&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2499865" start="28" end="70" title="Heathcliff (Wuthering Heights)" label="Heathcliff (&amp;quot;Wuthering Heights&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290216" start="158" end="190" title="Heathcliff (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Heathcliff&amp;quot; (musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693599" start="252" end="270" title="Heathcliff Slocumb" label="Heathcliff Slocumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q116821267" start="368" end="389" title="The Mandela Catalogue" label="The Mandela Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041547" start="398" end="434" title="Heathcliff (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Heathcliff&amp;quot; (comic strip)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150570" start="482" end="521" title="Heathcliff (1980 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Heathcliff&amp;quot; (1980 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13224629" start="592" end="631" title="Heathcliff (1984 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Heathcliff&amp;quot; (1984 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="785" end="826" title="List of The Cosby Show characters#Heathcliff &amp;quot;Cliff&amp;quot; Huxtable" label="Dr. Heathcliff &amp;quot;Cliff&amp;quot; Huxtable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6357962" start="901" end="917" title="Heathcliffe Hope" label="Heathcliffe Hope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="986" end="990" title="Fredzilla#Disney version" label="Fred"/>
<link wikidata="Q13091172" start="1028" end="1038" title="Big Hero 6 (film)" label="Big Hero 6"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297924" wikidata="Q334855" url="?curid=297924" title="Mantis shrimp">
<text>Mantis shrimps are carnivorous marine crustaceans of the order Stomatopoda (). Stomatopods branched off from other members of the class Malacostraca around 400 million years ago, with more than 520 extant species of mantis shrimp known. All living species are in the suborder Unipeltata, which arose around 250 million years ago. They are among the most important predators in many shallow, tropical and subtropical marine habitats. However, despite being common in their habitats, they are poorly understood, as many species spend most of their lives sheltering in burrows and holes.

Dubbed &quot;sea locusts&quot; by ancient Assyrians, &quot;prawn killers&quot; in Australia, and now sometimes referred to as &quot;thumb splitters&quot; due to their ability to inflict painful wounds if handled incautiously, mantis shrimp possess powerful raptorial appendages that are used to attack and kill prey either by spearing, stunning, or dismembering; the shape of these appendages are often used to classify them into groups: extant mantis shrimp either have appendages which form heavily mineralized &quot;clubs&quot; that can strike with great power, or they have sharp, grasping forelimbs used to swiftly seize prey (similar to those of praying mantis, hence their common name).

== Description ==

Mantis shrimp typically grow to around in length, while a few species such as the zebra mantis shrimp can reach up to . A mantis shrimp&#x27;s carapace covers only the rear part of the head and the first four segments of the thorax. Mantis shrimp widely range in colour, with species mostly being shades of brown to having multiple contrasting, vivid colours.
===Claws===
The mantis shrimp&#x27;s second pair of thoracic appendages is adapted for powerful close-range combat. These claws can accelerate at a rate comparable to that of a .22 caliber bullet when fired, having around 1500 newtons of force with each swing/attack. The appendage differences divide mantis shrimp into two main types: those that hunt by impaling their prey with spear-like structures and those that smash prey with a powerful blow from a heavily mineralised club-like appendage. A considerable amount of damage can be inflicted after impact with these robust, hammer-like claws. This club is further divided into three subregions: the impact region, the periodic region, and the striated region. Mantis shrimp are commonly separated into distinct groups (most are categorized as either spearers or smashers but there are some outliers) as determined by the type of claws they possess:

* Spearers are armed with spiny appendages - the spines having barbed tips - used to stab and snag prey. These raptorial appendages resemble those of praying mantids, hence the common name of these crustaceans. This is the type found in most mantis shrimp.
* Smashers possess a much more developed club and a more rudimentary spear (which is nevertheless quite sharp and still used in fights between their own kind); the club is used to bludgeon and smash their meals apart. The inner aspect of the terminal portion of the appendage can also possess a sharp edge, used to cut prey while the mantis shrimp swims. This is found in the families Gonodactylidae, Odontodactylidae, Protosquillidae, and Takuidae.
* Spike Smashers (hammers or primitive smashers): An unspecialized form, found only in the basal family Hemisquillidae. The last segment lacks spines except at the tip, so it is not as effective at spearing but can also be used for smashing.
* Hatchet: An unusual, highly derived appendage that only a few species have. This body plan is largely unresearched.
Both types strike by rapidly unfolding and swinging their raptorial claws at the prey, and can inflict serious damage on victims significantly greater in size than themselves. In smashers, these two weapons are employed with blinding quickness, with an acceleration of 10,400 &quot;g&quot; (102,000 m/s2 or 335,000 ft/s2) and speeds of from a standing start. Because they strike so rapidly, they generate vapor-filled bubbles in the water between the appendage and the striking surface—known as cavitation bubbles. The collapse of these cavitation bubbles produces measurable forces on their prey in addition to the instantaneous forces of 1,500 newtons that are caused by the impact of the appendage against the striking surface, which means that the prey is hit twice by a single strike; first by the claw and then by the collapsing cavitation bubbles that immediately follow. Even if the initial strike misses the prey, the resulting shock wave can be enough to stun or kill.

Smashers use this ability to attack crabs, snails, rock oysters, and other molluscs, their blunt clubs enabling them to crack the shells of their prey into pieces. Spearers, however, prefer the meat of softer animals, such as fish and cephalopods, which their barbed claws can more easily slice and snag.

The appendages are being studied as a microscale analogue for new macroscale material structures.

===Eyes===

The eyes of the mantis shrimp are mounted on mobile stalks and can move independently of each other. The extreme mobility allows them to be rotated in all three dimensions, yet the position of their eyes has shown to have no effect on the perception of their surroundings. They are thought to have the most complex eyes in the animal kingdom and have the most complex front-end for any visual system ever discovered. 

Each compound eye is made up of tens of thousands of ommatidia, clusters of photoreceptor cells. Each eye consists of two flattened hemispheres separated by parallel rows of specialised ommatidia, collectively called the midband. The number of omatidial rows in the midband ranges from two to six. This divides the eye into three regions. This configuration enables mantis shrimp to see objects that are near the mid-plane of an eye with three parts of the same eye (as can be seen in some photos showing three pseudopupils in one eye). In other words, each eye possesses &quot;trinocular vision&quot;, and therefore depth perception, for objects near its mid-plane. The upper and lower hemispheres are used primarily for recognition of form and motion, like the eyes of many other crustaceans.

Compared with the three types of photoreceptor cell that humans possess in their eyes, the eyes of a mantis shrimp have between 12 and 16 types of photoreceptor cells. Furthermore, some of these stomatopods can tune the sensitivity of their long wavelength colour vision to adapt to their environment. This phenomenon, called &quot;spectral tuning&quot;, is species-specific. Cheroske et al. did not observe spectral tuning in &quot;Neogonodactylus oerstedii&quot;, the species with the most monotonous natural photic environment. In &quot;N. bredini&quot;, a species with a variety of habitats ranging from a depth of 5 to 10 m (although it can be found down to 20 m below the surface), spectral tuning was observed, but the ability to alter wavelengths of maximum absorbance was not as pronounced as in &quot;N. wennerae&quot;, a species with much higher ecological/photic habitat diversity. The diversity of spectral tuning in Stomatopoda is also hypothesised to be directly linked to mutations in the retinal binding pocket of the opsin.

The huge diversity seen in mantis shrimp photoreceptors likely comes from ancient gene duplication events. One consequence of this duplication is the lack of correlation between opsin transcript number and physiologically expressed photoreceptors. One species may have six different opsin genes, but only express one spectrally distinct photoreceptor. Over the years, some mantis shrimp species have lost the ancestral phenotype, although some still maintain 16 distinct photoreceptors and four light filters. Species that live in a variety of photic environments have high selective pressure for photoreceptor diversity, and maintain ancestral phenotypes better than species that live in murky waters or are primarily nocturnal.

Mantis shrimp can perceive wavelengths of light ranging from deep ultraviolet (300 nm) to far-red (720 nm) and polarised light. In mantis shrimp in the superfamilies Gonodactyloidea, Lysiosquilloidea, and Hemisquilloidea, the midband is made up of six ommatidial rows. Rows 1 to 4 process colours, while rows 5 and 6 detect circularly or linearly polarised light. Twelve types of photoreceptor cells are in rows 1 to 4, four of which detect ultraviolet light. Despite the impressive range of wavelengths that mantis shrimp have the ability to see, they do not have the ability to discriminate wavelengths less than 25 nm apart. It is suggested that not discriminating between closely positioned wavelengths allows these organisms to make determinations of its surroundings with little processing delay. Having little delay in evaluating surroundings is important for mantis shrimp, since they are territorial and frequently in combat. However, some mantis shrimp have been found capable of distinguishing between high-saturation and low-saturation colors.
Rows 1 to 4 of the midband are specialised for colour vision, from deep ultraviolet to far red. Their UV vision can detect five different frequency bands in the deep ultraviolet. To do this, they use two photoreceptors in combination with four different colour filters. They are currently believed insensitive to infrared light. The optical elements in these rows have eight different classes of visual pigments and the rhabdom (area of eye that absorbs light from a single direction) is divided into three different pigmented layers (tiers), each for different wavelengths. The three tiers in rows 2 and 3 are separated by colour filters (intrarhabdomal filters) that can be divided into four distinct classes, two classes in each row. Each consists of a tier, a colour filter of one class, a tier again, a colour filter of another class, and then a last tier. These colour filters allow the mantis shrimp to see with diverse colour vision. Without the filters, the pigments themselves range only a small segment of the visual spectrum, about 490 to 550 nm. Rows 5 and 6 are also segregated into different tiers, but have only one class of visual pigment, the ninth class, and are specialised for polarisation vision. Depending upon the species, they can detect circularly polarised light, linearly polarised light, or both. A tenth class of visual pigment is found in the upper and lower hemispheres of the eye.

Some species have at least 16 photoreceptor types, which are divided into four classes (their spectral sensitivity is further tuned by colour filters in the retinas), 12 for colour analysis in the different wavelengths (including six which are sensitive to ultraviolet light) and four for analysing polarised light. By comparison, most humans have only four visual pigments, of which three are dedicated to see colour, and human lenses block ultraviolet light. The visual information leaving the retina seems to be processed into numerous parallel data streams leading into the brain, greatly reducing the analytical requirements at higher levels.

The midband covers only about 5 to 10° of the visual field at any given instant, but like most crustaceans, mantis shrimps&#x27; eyes are mounted on stalks. In mantis shrimps, the movement of the stalked eye is unusually free, and can be driven up to 70° in all possible axes of movement by eight eyecup muscles divided into six functional groups. By using these muscles to scan the surroundings with the midband, they can add information about forms, shapes, and landscape, which cannot be detected by the upper and lower hemispheres of the eyes. They can also track moving objects using large, rapid eye movements where the two eyes move independently. By combining different techniques, including movements in the same direction, the midband can cover a very wide range of the visual field.

==== Polarized light ====
Six species of mantis shrimp have been reported to be able to detect circularly polarised light, which has not been documented in any other animal, and whether it is present across all species is unknown. They perform this feat by converting circularly polarized light into linearly polarized light via quarter-waveplates formed from stacks of microvilli. Some of their biological quarter-waveplates perform more uniformly over the visual spectrum than any current man-made polarising optics, and this could inspire new types of optical media that would outperform early 21st century Blu-ray Disc technology.

The species &quot;Gonodactylus smithii&quot; is the only organism known to simultaneously detect the four linear and two circular polarisation components required to measure all four Stokes parameters, which yield a full description of polarisation. It is thus believed to have optimal polarisation vision. It is the only animal known to have dynamic polarisation vision. This is achieved by rotational eye movements to maximise the polarisation contrast between the object in focus and its background. Since each eye moves independently from the other, it creates two separate streams of visual information.

====Suggested advantages of visual system====

What advantage sensitivity to polarisation confers is unclear; however, polarisation vision is used by other animals for sexual signaling and secret communication that avoids the attention of predators. This mechanism could provide an evolutionary advantage; it only requires small changes to the cell in the eye and could easily lead to natural selection.

The eyes of mantis shrimps may enable them to recognise different types of coral, prey species (which are often transparent or semitransparent), or predators, such as barracuda, which have shimmering scales. Alternatively, the manner in which they hunt (very rapid movements of the claws) may require very accurate ranging information, which would require accurate depth perception. The capacity to see UV light may enable observation of otherwise hard-to-detect prey on coral reefs.

During mating rituals, mantis shrimps actively fluoresce, and the wavelength of this fluorescence matches the wavelengths detected by their eye pigments. Females are only fertile during certain phases of the tidal cycle; the ability to perceive the phase of the moon may, therefore, help prevent wasted mating efforts. It may also give these shrimps information about the size of the tide, which is important to species living in shallow water near the shore.

Researchers suspect that the broader variety of photoreceptors in the eyes of mantis shrimps allows visual information to be preprocessed by the eyes instead of the brain, which would otherwise have to be larger to deal with the complex task of opponent process colour perception used by other species, thus requiring more time and energy. While the eyes themselves are complex and not yet fully understood, the principle of the system appears to be simple. It has a similar set of sensitivities to the human visual system, but works in the opposite manner. In the human brain, the inferior temporal cortex has a huge number of colour-specific neurons, which process visual impulses from the eyes to extract colour information. The mantis shrimp instead uses the different types of photoreceptors in its eyes to perform the same function as the human brain neurons, resulting in a hardwired and more efficient system for an animal that requires rapid colour identification. Humans have fewer types of photoreceptors, but more colour-tuned neurons, while mantis shrimp appear to have fewer colour neurons and more classes of photoreceptors.

However, a study from 2022 failed to find unequivocal evidence for a solely &quot;barcode&quot;-like visual system as described above. Stomatopods of the species &quot;Haptosquilla trispinosa&quot; were able to distinguish high and low-saturation colors from grey, contravening Thoen and colleagues. It may be that some combination of color opponency and photoreceptor activation comparison/barcode analysis is present.

The shrimps use a form of reflector of polarised light not seen in nature or human technology before. It allows the manipulation of light across the structure rather than through its depth, the typical way polarisers work. This allows the structure to be both small and microscopically thin, and still be able to produce big, bright, colourful polarised signals.

==Ecology and life history==

Mantis shrimp are long-lived and exhibit complex behaviour, such as ritualised fighting, or by the use of fluorescent patterns on their bodies for signalling with their own and perhaps even other species. Many have developed complex social behaviours to defend their space from rivals; mantis shrimp are typically solitary sea creatures that may aggressively defend their burrows, either rock formations or self-dug intricate burrows in the seabed. They are rarely seen outside their homes except to feed and relocate. They can learn and remember well, and are able to recognise neighbouring mantis shrimp with which they frequently interact. They can recognise them by visual signs and even by individual smell. 

Mantis shrimp can be diurnal, nocturnal, or crepuscular (active at twilight), depending on the species. Unlike most crustaceans, they sometimes hunt, chase, and kill prey. Although some live in temperate seas, most species live in tropical and subtropical waters in the Indian and Pacific Oceans, encompassing the seas between eastern Africa and Hawaii.

Mantis shrimp live in burrows where they spend the majority of their time. The spearing species build their habitat in soft sediments and the smashing species make burrows in hard substrata, such as cavities in coral. These two habitats are crucial for their ecology since they use burrows as sites for retreat and as locations for consuming their prey. Burrows and coral cavities are also used as sites for mating and for keeping their eggs safe. Stomatopod body size undergoes periodic growth which necessitates finding a new cavity or burrow that will fit the animal&#x27;s new diameter. Some spearing species can modify their pre-established habitat if the burrow is made of silt or mud, which can be expanded.

Stomatopods can have as many as 20 or 30 breeding episodes over their lifespan. Depending on the species, the eggs are either laid and kept in a burrow, or are carried around under the female&#x27;s tail until they hatch, as in a number of other crustaceans. Also depending on the species, males and females may come together only to mate, or they may bond in monogamous, long-term relationships.

In the monogamous species, the mantis shrimps remain with the same partner up to 20 years. They share the same burrow and may be able to coordinate their activities. Both sexes often take care of the eggs (bi-parental care). In &quot;Pullosquilla&quot; and some species in &quot;Nannosquilla&quot;, the female lays two clutches of eggs – one that the male tends and one that the female tends. In other species, the female looks after the eggs while the male hunts for both of them. After the eggs hatch, the offspring may spend up to three months as plankton.

Although stomatopods typically display the standard types of movement seen in true shrimp and lobsters, one species, &quot;Nannosquilla decemspinosa&quot;, has been observed rolling itself into a crude wheel (somewhat resembling volvation). The species lives in shallow, sandy areas. At low tides, &quot;N. decemspinosa&quot; is often stranded by its short rear legs, which are sufficient for movement when the body is supported by water, but not on dry land. The mantis shrimp thus performs a forward flip in an attempt to roll towards the nearest tide pool. &quot;N. &quot; has been observed to roll repeatedly for , but specimens typically travel less than .

==Systematics==
=== Evolutionary history ===

Although the Devonian Eopteridae have been suggested to be early stomatopods, their fragmentary known remains make the referral uncertain. The oldest unambiguous stem-group mantis shrimp date to the Carboniferous (359–300 million years ago). Stem-group mantis shrimp are assigned to two major groups the Palaeostomatopodea and the Archaeostomatopodea, the latter of which are more closely related to modern mantis shrimp, which are assigned to the clade Unipeltata. The oldest members of Unipeltata date to the Triassic.

===Selected extant species===
* Family Gonodactylidae
** &quot;Gonodactylus smithii&quot;
* Family Hemisquillidae
** &quot;Hemisquilla ensigera&quot;
** &quot;Hemisquilla australiensis&quot;
** &quot;Hemisquilla braziliensis&quot;
** &quot;Hemisquilla californiensis&quot;
* Family Lysiosquillidae
** &quot;Lysiosquillina maculata&quot;, zebra mantis shrimp or striped mantis shrimp
* Family Nannosquillidae
** &quot;Nannosquilla decemspinosa&quot;
** &quot;Platysquilla eusebia&quot;
* Family Odontodactylidae
** &quot;Odontodactylus scyllarus&quot;, peacock mantis shrimp
** &quot;Odontodactylus latirostris&quot;, pink-eared mantis shrimp
* Family Pseudosquillidae
** &quot;Pseudosquilla ciliata&quot;, common mantis shrimp
* Family Squillidae
** &quot;Rissoides desmaresti&quot;
** &quot;Squilla empusa&quot;
** &quot;Squilla mantis&quot;
* Family Tetrasquillidae
** &quot;Heterosquilla tricarinata&quot;, New Zealand

A large number of mantis shrimp species were first scientifically described by one carcinologist, Raymond B. Manning; the collection of stomatopods he amassed is the largest in the world, covering 90% of the known species whilst 10% are still unknown.

==Culinary uses==
The mantis shrimp is eaten by a variety of cultures. In Japanese cuisine, the mantis shrimp species &quot;Oratosquilla oratoria&quot;, called , is eaten boiled as a sushi topping, and occasionally raw as sashimi.

Mantis shrimps are also abundant along Vietnam&#x27;s coast, known in Vietnamese as &quot;bề bề&quot;, &quot;tôm tích&quot; or &quot;tôm tít&quot;. In regions such as Nha Trang, they are called &quot;bàn chải&quot;, named for its resemblance to a scrub brush. The shrimp can be steamed, boiled, grilled, or dried, used with pepper, salt and lime, fish sauce and tamarind, or fennel.

In Cantonese cuisine, the mantis shrimp is known as &quot;urinating shrimp&quot; () because of their tendency to shoot a jet of water when picked up. After cooking, their flesh is closer to that of lobsters than that of shrimp, and like lobsters, their shells are quite hard and require some pressure to crack. One common preparation is first deep-frying, then stir-frying with garlic and chili peppers. They may also be boiled or steamed.

In the Mediterranean countries, the mantis shrimp &quot;Squilla mantis&quot; is a common seafood, especially on the Adriatic coasts (&quot;canocchia&quot;) and the Gulf of Cádiz (&quot;galera&quot;).

In the Philippines, the mantis shrimp is known as &quot;tatampal, hipong-dapa,&quot; &quot;pitik-pitik&quot;, or &quot;alupihang-dagat&quot;, and is cooked and eaten like any other shrimp.

In Kiribati, mantis shrimp called &quot;te waro&quot; in Gilbertese are abundant and are eaten boiled.
In Hawaii, some mantis shrimp have grown unusually large in the contaminated water of the Grand Ala Wai Canal in Waikiki. The dangers normally associated with consuming seafood caught in contaminated waters are present in these mantis shrimp.

==Aquaria==

Some saltwater aquarists keep stomatopods in captivity. The peacock mantis is especially colourful and desired in the trade.

While some aquarists value mantis shrimps, others consider them harmful pests, because they are voracious predators, eating other desirable inhabitants of the tank. Additionally, some rock-burrowing species can do more damage to live rock than the fishkeeper would prefer.

The live rock with mantis shrimp burrows is considered useful by some in the marine aquarium trade and is often collected. A piece of live rock not uncommonly conveys a live mantis shrimp into an aquarium. Once inside the tank, it may feed on fish and other inhabitants, and is notoriously difficult to catch when established in a well-stocked tank. While there are accounts of this shrimp breaking glass tanks, they are rare and are usually the result of the shrimp being kept in too small a tank. While stomatopods do not eat coral, smashers can damage it if they try to make a home within it.

==See also==

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Hoplocarida: Stomatopoda fact sheet—Guide to the marine zooplankton of south eastern Australia
* The Lurker&#x27;s Guide to Stomatopods—mantis shrimp
* Mantis shrimp—colourful and aggressive
* Research on Stomatopods at the University of Maryland 
* Caldwell Lab at the University of California, Berkeley
* Patek Lab at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst
* 
* Dana Point Fish Company—Top and Bottom Views of Mantis Shrimp
* TED talk
* Deep Look (PBS)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334855" start="0" end="14" title="Mantis shrimp" label="Mantis shrimps"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="19" end="30" title="carnivorous" label="carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="31" end="37" title="marine animal" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="38" end="48" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="57" end="62" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q334855" start="63" end="74" title="Mantis shrimp" label="Stomatopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="91" end="99" title="phylogenetic tree" label="branched"/>
<link wikidata="Q182978" start="136" end="148" title="Malacostraca" label="Malacostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="198" end="204" title="Neontology" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="267" end="275" title="suborder" label="suborder"/>
<link wikidata="Q334855" start="276" end="286" title="Mantis shrimp" label="Unipeltata"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="364" end="372" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487284" start="382" end="389" title="Shallow water marine environment" label="shallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="391" end="399" title="Tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="404" end="415" title="Subtropics" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="423" end="430" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="620" end="627" title="Assyria" label="ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="628" end="637" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="668" end="677" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294379" start="843" end="852" title="raptorial" label="raptorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q661297" start="935" end="944" title="dismember" label="dismember"/>
<link wikidata="Q610457" start="1087" end="1098" title="Biomineralization" label="mineralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="1105" end="1109" title="Club (weapon)" label="club"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="1238" end="1252" title="praying mantis" label="praying mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="1266" end="1277" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q666115" start="1443" end="1451" title="carapace" label="carapace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9645" start="1525" end="1531" title="thorax" label="thorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027895" start="1837" end="1848" title=".22 caliber" label=".22 caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="2714" end="2729" title="Mantis" label="praying mantids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294379" start="3689" end="3698" title="raptorial" label="raptorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="3907" end="3920" title="g-force" label="&amp;quot;g&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q201666" start="4126" end="4136" title="cavitation" label="cavitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="4277" end="4284" title="Newton (unit)" label="newtons"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="4568" end="4578" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="4647" end="4651" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="4654" end="4659" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460859" start="4662" end="4673" title="rock oyster" label="rock oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="4686" end="4694" title="Mollusca" label="molluscs"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="4837" end="4841" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="4846" end="4856" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4441421" start="5080" end="5086" title="Eyestalk" label="stalks"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="5452" end="5464" title="compound eye" label="compound eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501262" start="5500" end="5509" title="ommatidium" label="ommatidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255464" start="5958" end="5970" title="Pseudopupil" label="pseudopupils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749840" start="6064" end="6080" title="depth perception" label="depth perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="6276" end="6294" title="photoreceptor cell" label="photoreceptor cell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6676" end="6701" title="Neogonodactylus oerstedii" label="Neogonodactylus oerstedii"/>
<link wikidata="Q422001" start="7248" end="7255" title="retinal" label="retinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24785022" start="7278" end="7283" title="opsin" label="opsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q746284" start="7368" end="7384" title="gene duplication" label="gene duplication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8078" end="8094" title="Ultraviolet#Subtypes" label="deep ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434480" start="8107" end="8114" title="far-red" label="far-red"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="8128" end="8143" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarised light"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121676" start="8341" end="8351" title="Circular polarization" label="circularly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553479" start="8355" end="8379" title="Linear polarization" label="linearly polarised light"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="8635" end="8637" title="nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q27673" start="9035" end="9045" title="color saturation" label="saturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501262" start="9493" end="9500" title="rhabdom" label="rhabdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346242" start="9590" end="9605" title="pigmented layer" label="pigmented layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="10984" end="10990" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172540" start="11036" end="11047" title="data stream" label="data stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="11066" end="11071" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192014" start="12269" end="12278" title="waveplate" label="waveplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q939486" start="12302" end="12312" title="Microvillus" label="microvilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="12542" end="12549" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992074" start="12586" end="12606" title="Gonodactylus smithii" label="Gonodactylus smithii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192058" start="12751" end="12768" title="Stokes parameters" label="Stokes parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="13563" end="13580" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q193921" start="13750" end="13759" title="barracuda" label="barracuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="14115" end="14124" title="fluoresce" label="fluoresce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="14276" end="14287" title="Tide" label="tidal cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="14317" end="14334" title="lunar phase" label="phase of the moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q303997" start="14774" end="14790" title="opponent process" label="opponent process"/>
<link wikidata="Q303997" start="16005" end="16020" title="color opponency" label="color opponency"/>
<link wikidata="Q395324" start="16553" end="16572" title="Agonistic behaviour" label="ritualised fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="16591" end="16602" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="16892" end="16900" title="Fossorial" label="self-dug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410542" start="16911" end="16917" title="burrow" label="burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q182238" start="16926" end="16932" title="Benthos" label="seabed"/>
<link wikidata="Q499210" start="17013" end="17036" title="Animal cognition" label="learn and remember well"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="17221" end="17228" title="Diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="17230" end="17239" title="Nocturnality" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="17244" end="17255" title="Crepuscular animal" label="crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="17470" end="17476" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="17481" end="17494" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="17527" end="17541" title="eastern Africa" label="eastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="17546" end="17552" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="17679" end="17687" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914623" start="18312" end="18328" title="Seasonal breeder" label="breeding episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="18631" end="18641" title="Monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217379" start="18875" end="18891" title="bi-parental care" label="bi-parental care"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18903" end="18915" title="Pullosquilla" label="Pullosquilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18948" end="18960" title="Nannosquilla" label="Nannosquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="19219" end="19227" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="19308" end="19319" title="shrimp" label="true shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="19324" end="19331" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13874472" start="19353" end="19378" title="Nannosquilla decemspinosa" label="Nannosquilla decemspinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384631" start="19459" end="19468" title="volvation" label="volvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521187" start="19779" end="19788" title="tide pool" label="tide pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="19952" end="19960" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19961" end="19971" title="Eopteridae" label="Eopteridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="20101" end="20111" title="stem-group" label="stem-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="20138" end="20151" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20243" end="20261" title="Palaeostomatopodea" label="Palaeostomatopodea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20270" end="20289" title="Archaeostomatopodea" label="Archaeostomatopodea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="20450" end="20458" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866110" start="20500" end="20514" title="Gonodactylidae" label="Gonodactylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992074" start="20524" end="20544" title="Gonodactylus smithii" label="Gonodactylus smithii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4511248" start="20560" end="20574" title="Hemisquillidae" label="Hemisquillidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14027106" start="20584" end="20604" title="Hemisquilla ensigera" label="Hemisquilla ensigera"/>
<link wikidata="Q13225984" start="20620" end="20645" title="Hemisquilla australiensis" label="Hemisquilla australiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13225985" start="20661" end="20685" title="Hemisquilla braziliensis" label="Hemisquilla braziliensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507401" start="20701" end="20727" title="Hemisquilla californiensis" label="Hemisquilla californiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858213" start="20743" end="20758" title="Lysiosquillidae" label="Lysiosquillidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855731" start="20768" end="20791" title="Lysiosquillina maculata" label="Lysiosquillina maculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855072" start="20853" end="20868" title="Nannosquillidae" label="Nannosquillidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13874472" start="20878" end="20903" title="Nannosquilla decemspinosa" label="Nannosquilla decemspinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854286" start="20919" end="20939" title="Platysquilla eusebia" label="Platysquilla eusebia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855697" start="20955" end="20971" title="Odontodactylidae" label="Odontodactylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43735" start="20981" end="21005" title="Odontodactylus scyllarus" label="Odontodactylus scyllarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14649034" start="21044" end="21070" title="Odontodactylus latirostris" label="Odontodactylus latirostris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4510671" start="21112" end="21128" title="Pseudosquillidae" label="Pseudosquillidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656056" start="21138" end="21159" title="Pseudosquilla ciliata" label="Pseudosquilla ciliata"/>
<link wikidata="Q665408" start="21197" end="21207" title="Squillidae" label="Squillidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855871" start="21217" end="21237" title="Rissoides desmaresti" label="Rissoides desmaresti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967464" start="21253" end="21267" title="Squilla empusa" label="Squilla empusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315250" start="21283" end="21297" title="Squilla mantis" label="Squilla mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858278" start="21313" end="21328" title="Tetrasquillidae" label="Tetrasquillidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747770" start="21338" end="21363" title="Heterosquilla tricarinata" label="Heterosquilla tricarinata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243374" start="21467" end="21480" title="List of carcinologists" label="carcinologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420704" start="21482" end="21500" title="Raymond B. Manning" label="Raymond B. Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="21711" end="21727" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051753" start="21761" end="21782" title="Oratosquilla oratoria" label="Oratosquilla oratoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="21820" end="21825" title="sushi" label="sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q190715" start="21859" end="21866" title="sashimi" label="sashimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="22193" end="22199" title="black pepper" label="pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="22210" end="22214" title="lime (fruit)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q545985" start="22216" end="22226" title="fish sauce" label="fish sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q80235" start="22231" end="22239" title="tamarind" label="tamarind"/>
<link wikidata="Q43511" start="22244" end="22250" title="fennel" label="fennel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="22256" end="22273" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="22451" end="22458" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="22473" end="22479" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="22701" end="22714" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315250" start="22750" end="22764" title="Squilla mantis" label="Squilla mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="22810" end="22818" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22833" end="22842" title="canocchia" label="canocchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117157" start="22858" end="22871" title="Gulf of Cádiz" label="Gulf of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="22902" end="22913" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="23088" end="23096" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="23142" end="23152" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="23191" end="23197" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700726" start="23284" end="23297" title="Ala Wai Canal" label="Ala Wai Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q254861" start="23301" end="23308" title="Waikiki" label="Waikiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q43735" start="23505" end="23519" title="Odontodactylus scyllarus" label="peacock mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q686478" start="23800" end="23809" title="live rock" label="live rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916943" start="23922" end="23937" title="marine aquarium" label="marine aquarium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297927" wikidata="Q453552" url="?curid=297927" title="James Craig">
<text>James or Jim Craig may refer to:
==Entertainment==
* James Humbert Craig (1877–1944), Irish painter
* James Craig (actor) (1912–1985), American actor
* James Craig (&quot;General Hospital&quot;), fictional character on television, a.k.a. Jerry Jacks
* Jim Craig (&quot;One Life to Live&quot;), on television
* Jim Craig (&quot;The Man from Snowy River&quot;), fictional character in film

==Politics==
===U.K.===
*James Henry Craig (1748–1812), British military officer and Canadian governor
*James Craig (MP for Carrickfergus) (1759–1833), British politician
*James Craig (MP for Newcastle) (1834–1902), British politician
*James Craig (physician) (1861–1933), Irish professor of medicine and independent politician
*James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon (1871–1940), first Prime Minister of Northern Ireland
*James Craig, 2nd Viscount Craigavon (1906–1974), British politician, son of prime minister
*James Craig (diplomat) (1924–2017), British ambassador, lecturer, writer
*James Craig (County Antrim, 20th century) (1931–1974), Northern Ireland politician

===Elsewhere===
*James Craig (Missouri soldier) (1818–1888), American politician and soldier
*James Craig (Canadian politician) (1823–1874), farmer and politician in Ontario
*James J. Craig (1853–1929), educator and politician in Ontario
*James Craig (Australian politician) (1911–1989), Australian politician

==Sports==
*James B. Craig (1893–1990), American football player and coach
*Jim Craig (rugby league) (1895–1959), Australian rugby league footballer and coach
*Jim Craig (Australian footballer) (1900–1978), Australian rules footballer
*Jim Craig (Scottish footballer) (born 1943), fullback
*Jim Craig (ice hockey) (born 1957), American hockey player 
*James Craig (rugby union, born 1977), Scottish rugby player, son of footballer Jim Craig
*James Craig (rugby union, born 1988), English rugby union player

==Other==
* James Craig (architect) (1739–1795), Scottish architect
* James Craig (loyalist) (1941–1988), Ulster loyalist paramilitary
* James Craig (police chief) (born 1956), 2022 Republican candidate for governor of Michigan
* James Craig (VC) (1824–1861), British soldier
* James Ireland Craig (1868–1952), Scottish mathematician and meteorologist
* &quot;James Craig&quot; (barque), three-mast sailing ship
* , American destroyer escort launched in 1943, named for U.S. Navy officer James Edwin Craig
* Sir James Henry Craig (ship)
* James Thomson Gibson-Craig (1799–1886), Scottish book collector
* Sir James Gibson-Craig (1765–1850), 1st Baronet Gibson-Craig
* Sir James Henry Gibson-Craig (1841–1908), 3rd Baronet Gibson-Craig
* James Craig, an accessory to murder involving followers of Charles Manson
* James Craig, pen name of Roy J. Snell

==See also==
* Craig (surname)
*Craig James (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q453552" start="0" end="5" title="James Craig" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q453552" start="9" end="18" title="James Craig" label="Jim Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136391" start="53" end="72" title="James Humbert Craig" label="James Humbert Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680220" start="102" end="121" title="James Craig (actor)" label="James Craig (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183805" start="152" end="194" title="James Craig (General Hospital)" label="James Craig (&amp;quot;General Hospital&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451207" start="252" end="292" title="Jim Craig (One Life to Live)" label="Jim Craig (&amp;quot;One Life to Live&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259533" start="310" end="358" title="Jim Craig (The Man from Snowy River)" label="Jim Craig (&amp;quot;The Man from Snowy River&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372092" start="414" end="431" title="James Henry Craig" label="James Henry Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131864" start="493" end="527" title="James Craig (MP for Carrickfergus)" label="James Craig (MP for Carrickfergus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131870" start="561" end="591" title="James Craig (MP for Newcastle)" label="James Craig (MP for Newcastle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131872" start="625" end="648" title="James Craig (physician)" label="James Craig (physician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q336809" start="718" end="753" title="James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon" label="James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131862" start="809" end="844" title="James Craig, 2nd Viscount Craigavon" label="James Craig, 2nd Viscount Craigavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428851" start="901" end="923" title="James Craig (diplomat)" label="James Craig (diplomat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131866" start="975" end="1016" title="James Craig (County Antrim, 20th century)" label="James Craig (County Antrim, 20th century)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680217" start="1076" end="1106" title="James Craig (Missouri soldier)" label="James Craig (Missouri soldier)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131868" start="1153" end="1186" title="James Craig (Canadian politician)" label="James Craig (Canadian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23584357" start="1234" end="1248" title="James J. Craig" label="James J. Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q27915126" start="1298" end="1333" title="James Craig (Australian politician)" label="James Craig (Australian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129078" start="1382" end="1396" title="James B. Craig" label="James B. Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194399" start="1446" end="1470" title="Jim Craig (rugby league)" label="Jim Craig (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194397" start="1530" end="1563" title="Jim Craig (Australian footballer)" label="Jim Craig (Australian footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q719897" start="1606" end="1637" title="Jim Craig (Scottish footballer)" label="Jim Craig (Scottish footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q478435" start="1661" end="1683" title="Jim Craig (ice hockey)" label="Jim Craig (ice hockey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131874" start="1722" end="1758" title="James Craig (rugby union, born 1977)" label="James Craig (rugby union, born 1977)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204921" start="1812" end="1848" title="James Craig (rugby union, born 1988)" label="James Craig (rugby union, born 1988)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386955" start="1890" end="1913" title="James Craig (architect)" label="James Craig (architect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012059" start="1948" end="1970" title="James Craig (loyalist)" label="James Craig (loyalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033911" start="2015" end="2041" title="James Craig (police chief)" label="James Craig (police chief)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066065" start="2108" end="2124" title="James Craig (VC)" label="James Craig (VC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664322" start="2156" end="2175" title="James Ireland Craig" label="James Ireland Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q948738" start="2232" end="2264" title="James Craig (barque)" label="&amp;quot;James Craig&amp;quot; (barque)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120433" start="2386" end="2414" title="Sir James Henry Craig (ship)" label="Sir James Henry Craig (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546413" start="2417" end="2443" title="James Thomson Gibson-Craig" label="James Thomson Gibson-Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559273" start="2523" end="2543" title="Gibson-Craig-Carmichael baronets" label="Baronet Gibson-Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559273" start="2592" end="2612" title="Gibson-Craig-Carmichael baronets" label="Baronet Gibson-Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q485508" start="2674" end="2688" title="Charles Manson" label="Charles Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q51788794" start="2716" end="2728" title="Roy J. Snell" label="Roy J. Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278582" start="2745" end="2760" title="Craig (surname)" label="Craig (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181089" start="2762" end="2790" title="Craig James (disambiguation)" label="Craig James (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297933" wikidata="Q4797007" url="?curid=297933" title="Art Paul Schlosser">
<text>Arthur Paul Schlosser (born January 4, 1960) is an American artist, cartoonist, comedian, journalist, musician, poet, singer, and songwriter based in Madison, Wisconsin. He plays humorous novelty, gospel, and political songs and draws cartoons currently for the &quot;Madison Street Pulse&quot; newspaper, where he also submits poems and interviews people. Schlosser also paints and has participated in various art projects.

Schlosser was named Arthur after his father and grandfather but his grandfather might have originally been named Otto but because of his German accent when he said his name they thought he said Arthur.

== Childhood ==
Schlosser was born in Chicago and grew up listening to novelty musicians like Allen Sherman and Tiny Tim, as well as funny songs by The Beatles and The Monkees. When he was 11, he, his mother, and his sisters moved to Madison, Wisconsin, after his parents got a divorce. As a child in Madison, his mother continued to play weird and funny songs for him, sometimes playing strange sound effects on one recorded player to go with the songs. As a teenager, Schlosser joined a work experience play group that encouraged him to be creative. In this group, there were a couple of fans of The Beatles, one of whom encouraged Schlosser to write lyrics. It was from that time on that Schlosser started to write. He would listen to the Dr Demento radio show as well as other strange records that he discovered at the local library, and then try to write some lyrics he was inspired to write after listening to the songs. Also as a child he was encouraged to draw cartoons by his sister Mary.

== State Street ==
Upon discovering that it is legal to busk on State Street, Schlosser tried it out on a warm day late in February 1986 and received a couple of dollars for his effort. Since then Schlosser has been a street musician and busker as well as an outsider artist on State Street in Madison, Wisconsin.

He usually performs his original songs or parodies on an acoustic guitar and kazoo. He also sometimes plays electronic keyboard or ukulele.

He is best known for his comedy music, especially &quot;Have A Peanut Butter Sandwich&quot;, which made the Funny Five of the Dr Demento radio show four times in 2001, and &quot;Vote for Me/It&#x27;s a Joke&quot; which was on the Funny Five of the Dr Demento radio in 2003. While he sings mostly humorous songs, Schlosser has also written on the topics of politics and religion.

In 2007, Schlosser received a Madison Area Music Award (MAMA) for best compilation for his CD &quot;Art Paul Schlosser {The Tribute}&quot;. In 2009, he won two more Madison Area Music Awards for Unique Song (&quot;Have A Peanut Butter Sandwich,&quot; the remix version, which was remixed by Animalien) and for Unique Album (&quot;Leftovers&quot;).

== Appearances ==
His music has been played on oddball radio programs, including Greasy Kid Stuff, The Mad Music Hour, Dave&#x27;s Gone By and the Dr. Demento Show, and he has appeared on his own public-access television show as well as WGN-TV news.

* On April 1, 1994, Schlosser perform with Horace Pinker and Jawbreaker (band) at the Beloit Sports Arena 
* On July 30, 2009, Stephen Colbert mentioned Schlosser on the &quot;Colbert Report&quot;, in order to emphasize that any artist can get their songs on iTunes, no matter what the quality of their work may be.
* On June 27, 2010, Schlosser appeared on the internet radio show &quot;The Bastard Den&quot; on Infernal Rock Radio at www.infernalrockradio.com. Schlosser performed a few of his original songs and gave a 15-minute interview.
* On June 29, 2010, Schlosser appeared on &quot;America&#x27;s Got Talent&quot; appearing under the name Buddy Holly Cheesehead, singing &quot;Eating Cheese.&quot; He was X off the show by the three judges.
* On July 30, 2016, Schlosser appeared on &quot;Bordello of Horror&quot; being interviewed and playing 3-6 Headed.
*On October 23, 2019, &quot;The Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon&quot; played Schlosser&#x27;s song &quot;Have a Peanut Butter Sandwich&quot; as part of the reoccurring bit of songs to &quot;Do Not Play&quot;.

==Discography==

*&quot;My Cat Was Taking A Bath &amp; Dead Skunk Perfume plus 23 other songs&quot; (1992)
*&quot;All the songs from Happy Birthday &amp; Smile Be Happy&quot; (1993)
*&quot;I Want To Be Madonna ? &amp; Greene plus 41 other songs and jokes&quot; (1994)
*&quot;I&#x27;m A Prince by the Artist Still Known as Art Paul Schlosser&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Be My Valentine&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Reinventing Myself&quot; (2000)
*&quot;They Won&#x27;t Play This on the Country Western Radio&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Smile You&#x27;re on Kandid Kamera&quot; (2002)
*&quot;The Best of Art Paul Schlosser&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Art Paul Schlosser Live at the Hog&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Vote for Me/It&#x27;s a Joke&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Art Paul Schlosser &amp; Friends Live at Club De Wash plus the 3 songs at Bob&#x27;s Apartment Experiment&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Do You Want To Walk on Water&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Words of Cheese &amp; Other Parrot Tree&quot; (2003)
*&quot;The ABCs of Art Paul Schlosser&#x27;s World&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Art Paul Schlosser {The Tribute!} by various artist&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Warning: Listening To This CD could be dangerous to your health&quot; (2007)
*&quot;It Takes A Whole World&quot; by Art Paul Schlosser &amp; Jim Anderson (2007)
*&quot;Untitled I &amp; II&quot; (2007)
*&quot;The Best of Art Paul Schlosser {The Sequel}&quot; (2007)
*&quot;Scum Always Rises at the Top&quot; (2007)
*&quot;Songs I forgot that the Elephant Remembered&quot; (2007)
*&quot;Art Paul Schlosser &amp; Robin Good Our Tribute To Shari Elf&quot;
*&quot;Art Paul Schlosser living in a Materialistic World&quot;
*&quot;Songs I Recorded On The Telephone&quot; (2008)
*&quot;February Album Writing Month&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Art Paul Schlosser {The Remix Project}&quot; by Various Artists (2008)
*&quot;Leftovers&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Art Paul Schlosser Live at MarsCon 2007 &amp; 2008&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Let&#x27;s Be Friends&quot; (2009)
*&quot;U&#x27;re The Best&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Monster&quot; (2010)
*&quot;If I Was Governor?&quot; (2011)
*&quot;Live on the Snake&quot; (2011)
*&quot;Show Me You&#x27;re Crazy Legs&quot; Art Paul Schlosser with David Labedz(2012)
*&quot;The Treasure&quot; (2013)
*&quot;Live 2: On The Snake&quot; (WSUM) (2013)
*&quot;Something Old, Something New, Something Borrowed &amp; Something Blue Live on WORT 89.9 fm&quot; (2013)
*&quot;I Bet U&#x27;ve Got a Smile&quot; (2013)
*&quot;I Want 2 C Your Smile&quot; (2014)
*&quot;Songs I Recorded At the Library&quot; (2015)
*&quot;New Experiments in Music&quot; (2016)
*&quot;Our Song May Not Be Your Thing&quot; with Chris Kammer as The Schlosser-Kammer Project (2016)
*&quot;Songs I Recorded at the Library&quot; (2016)
*&quot;We Duet Right by Art Paul Schlosser &amp; Friends&quot;(2017)
*&quot;Eye Want 2 Bee Viral&quot; (2018) *&quot;Cartoons by Schlosser &amp; Polar Lay (2019)&quot; 
*&quot; Art Paul Live Doing His Best (2020)&quot; 
*&quot;For Piano Lovers (2020)&quot;
*&quot;Santa Claus Ran Out Of Coal So He Gave You This CD (Some of Art Paul&#x27;s Best terrible Xmas Songs) (2020)&quot;
*&quot;I Wrote The Lyrics (2021)&quot;
*&quot;The ArtcaPaula Project by Various Artist (2021)&quot;
*&quot;67 songs in less than 67 Minutes (2021)&quot;
*&quot;Have a Better Day (2022)&quot;
*&quot;The X Y Zs of Art Paul Schlosser (2023)&quot;

==References==

Sources

*Art Paul Schlosser – Inside Outsider
==External links==
*Schlosser&#x27;s videos
*Schlosser&#x27;s artist page at the Mad Music Archive
*Schlosser&#x27;s art and music videos at Facebook
*Artwork photos at Instagram
*Shockwave Radio Theater review of Schlosser&#x27;s live performance at Marscon 2007</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4797007" start="0" end="21" title="Art Paul Schlosser" label="Arthur Paul Schlosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="68" end="78" title="cartoonist" label="cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="150" end="157" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="159" end="168" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="667" end="674" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151663" start="700" end="707" title="novelty song" label="novelty"/>
<link wikidata="Q708963" start="723" end="736" title="Allen Sherman" label="Allen Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q979347" start="741" end="749" title="Tiny Tim (musician)" label="Tiny Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="777" end="788" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="793" end="804" title="The Monkees" label="The Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="863" end="881" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1227" end="1238" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q731668" start="1371" end="1381" title="Dr Demento" label="Dr Demento"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="1684" end="1688" title="busking" label="busk"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="1846" end="1861" title="street musician" label="street musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="1866" end="1872" title="busking" label="busker"/>
<link wikidata="Q594150" start="1887" end="1902" title="outsider artist" label="outsider artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714609" start="1906" end="1918" title="State Street (Madison)" label="State Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="1922" end="1929" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="1985" end="1993" title="parody" label="parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563510" start="2000" end="2015" title="Steel-string guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q483994" start="2020" end="2025" title="kazoo" label="kazoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343007" start="2051" end="2070" title="electronic keyboard" label="electronic keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="2074" end="2081" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q731668" start="2210" end="2220" title="Dr Demento" label="Dr Demento"/>
<link wikidata="Q731668" start="2332" end="2342" title="Dr Demento" label="Dr Demento"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="2494" end="2518" title="Madison Area Music Award" label="Madison Area Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q731668" start="2960" end="2971" title="Dr. Demento" label="Dr. Demento"/>
<link wikidata="Q119400" start="3009" end="3038" title="Public-access television" label="public-access television show"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="3050" end="3056" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q38926" start="3057" end="3061" title="news" label="news"/>
<link wikidata="Q624538" start="3125" end="3142" title="Jawbreaker (band)" label="Jawbreaker (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="3191" end="3206" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130799" start="3240" end="3254" title="Colbert Report" label="Colbert Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q467561" start="3655" end="3680" title="America&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="America&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="3979" end="3991" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297935" wikidata="Q7193243" url="?curid=297935" title="Pig racing">
<text>Pig racing is a sport in which juvenile pigs race around in a small, enclosed area of either dirt, fake grass, gravel track or steel-framed enclosures. This racing is usually purely for entertainment or charity, and betting is rarely part of it, as the races are family-friendly events.

== Equipment ==
The pigs are equipped with vests to differentiate each pig from another. To distinguish the pigs racing, the vests are either colour-coded or have numbers on them. Puppet jockeys are sometimes attached to the vests for entertainment purposes.

The course includes a variety of obstacles which the pigs have to race through, such as tunnels, tyre ramps, hay bales and a series of locked gates. The course distance can vary in length depending on the type of race. The race can be a normal race on the track or a race with obstacles. Most races at the end of the finishing line have a prize waiting for the winning pig, usually food.

== Countries ==

=== Australia ===
Pig racing is practised in Australia. The MTV Promotions Pig Racing hosts pig racing events which cover all Major Royal Shows and have been running since 1993. The pigs are trained through a 4-week course to prepare them mentally and physically for the race. The pigs run a track in a space and there are two races within the 15-minute show production. The pigs get ready at the starting gates while their coloured vests are fitted on them and they wait for the whistle to be blown before they start to race.

Noah&#x27;s Farm Thoroughbred Pig Racing hosts pig races for entertainment purposes and fundraisers for organisations. The pigs are raised in free-range conditions and begin training for races when they are approximately 5 to 6 weeks of age. For the race, five pigs are pitted against each other wearing coloured jackets. The track dimensions are , and 15 to 20 small square bales of hay are used as obstacles. The race begins with a bugle call as the pigs begin to position themselves in their starting box and wait for the commencement of the race. The crowd counts down from five and then the starting gate opens once the count is finished. On the course, the pigs face tyres, gates and a maze of hay bales. The pigs start to race when they are around 4 weeks old an after being weaned, they continue racing until they are around 12 to 15 weeks old. For each race, a &quot;Race Steward&quot; is picked from the crowd to oversee the pig race. Children are allowed to name each pig, and the best name wins a prize.

The 2003 Easter Show in Melbourne held a pig racing event in Olympic Boulevard. The race featured nine pigs racing around a track.

===Ireland===

The festival in Portlaoise is known for pig-racing, and it was tried in Durrow for their St. Patrick&#x27;s day parade in 2009.

===United Kingdom===

Pig racing is practised in the United Kingdom. The South of England Rare Breeds Centre holds regular pig races in the summer. Natasha Raskin has also commented that Hall Park in Oswestry is also famous for pig racing. Piglet racing has become popular at the Royal Norfolk Show, which has a course of about with three jumps with various breeds participating.

A proposal by the Winchester Cheese and Chilli Festival in August 2018 to stage a steeplechase for six rare-breed pigs over hurdles was abandoned after a campaign group, &quot;Pigs Don&#x27;t Race&quot;, got 46,873 signatures in an online campaign. The charity Animal Aid was quoted as noting &quot;to run in front of potentially loud crowds in scorching heat...caused these sensitive animals undue stress, in addition to the distress and heat produced through transportation&quot;. The organisers said they withdrew the event due to continued hot temperatures and after consultations with relevant parties.

Joseph&#x27;s Amazing Racing Pigs has five different breeds of pigs for racing: Tamworths, Gloucester Old Spots, Saddlebacks, Berkshires, and Oxford Sandy and Blacks. The track dimensions are of roped off grass area for the track and a display area for the pigs to interact with the audience. The pigs are encouraged to race down the track by the handlers, who shake a bucket of food for the pigs. The pigs are weaned for approximately 10 to 12 weeks and are raised naturally and are not given growth hormones or antibiotics. Once the pigs become too big to race, they are returned to where they came from and new sets of pigs replace them.

Pennywell Farm in South Devon, England holds pig races every day. They use specially-bred pigs called miniature pigs, which they started breeding in 1992. The average pig weighs at birth.

===United States===

Pig racing is most popular in the Southern United States. The city of Charlotte, North Carolina will occasionally host pig races before other sporting events. The annual Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo bills itself as the largest in the world, and the second-largest fair or festival of any kind in North America. Besides the pro rodeo events and livestock exhibitions, pig racing is featured. The minor league baseball team the St. Paul Saints hosts pig races at their stadium during select home games.

The newest pig-racing show traveling the United States is called Hot Dog Pig Races, which includes pig racing and dachshunds. You can find them at fairs and festivals such as Meadowlands State Fair, New Jersey; Ocean County Fair, New Jersey; Dundalk Heritage Festival, Maryland; and the Pig Gig Bay City, Michigan. All-Alaskan Racing Pigs, Sue Wee Pigs and Ugly Pig Racing are other shows traveling the United States. The Bear Creek Saloon and Steakhouse in Bear Creek, Montana, has hosted pig races during the summer season since 1992.

The All-Alaskan Racing Pig hosts pig racing events in the northwest United States with pigs racing on a dash course and hurdle course. During every show, two teams of four pigs race on flat tracks and high hurdles. At the end of each show, there is a championship round. The race is mainly for entertainment purposes, as it is only for &#x27;pure fun&#x27;. They use Gloucestershire Old Spots to race and begin training when they are about 10 weeks old. They travel with 10 pigs, eight for daily races and two spares. The pigs race four times a day.

Bob Hale Racing Stables holds pig races at the Michigan State Fair in which 19 pigs race in seven free daily shows. The pigs race around a oval track with bars as obstacles to jump over. The pigs are trained and take four 8-hour days to complete a lap. The pigs run from the starting line to the paddock, where there is food. Once they finish eating the food, the pigs are put back on the starting line and the food on the paddock is replenished. They run to get the food again. The pigs are checked by vets if any of them catch a disease after a carnival or event.

Vogel&#x27;s Pig Racing hosts pig racing events at many state fairs. The pigs are three months old and race around a series of red pens set up like a circular racetrack. The pigs can be trained to run in three days. The pigs are split into three divisions: men&#x27;s, women&#x27;s and Nascar at the South Dakota State Fair in Huron. Three pigs compete in each division, weighing around each. At the end of the finish line, there would be an Oreo waiting for the pig who crosses the finish line first.

Leader Area Pig Races hosts county fairs, special events, and benefits from Memorial Day to Labor Day. They use five pigs at a time to race on a circular track. The pigs are named after a person in the crowd, and the prizes won by the winning pig are awarded to both the pig and the person from the crowd. Originally it was supposed to be a gambling/betting race, but the state of Minnesota wouldn&#x27;t allow gambling on pigs, so it became a family-friendly event. It takes two weeks to train the pigs for racing. The first week of training is teaching the pigs to run around the track by bribing them with doughnuts at the finish line. The second week is devoted to getting the pigs used to large crowds.

The Swifty Swine Productions showcases pig racing events at the Franklin County Show located in Greenfield, Ohio. The pig race is held at the &#x27;Pork Chop International Speedway&#x27; track course featuring two races, one with baby pigs and the other with full-grown pigs. Both piglets and full-grown pigs are given names spun off of celebrities&#x27; names, such as Brad Pig, Kevin Bacon, Justin Beiboar and Elvis Pigsley. Once the gate opens, the pigs race around a track, competing for an Oreo cookie on a silver plate at the end of the finish line. The races are held on Saturdays and Sundays. After each race, the pigs return to their trailer to take a nap and wait for the next race. However, if they do not return to the trailer, they stay behind to take photos with the public. The races are sponsored by the Greenfield Farmers Cooperative Exchange.

The PigTuckey Derby is a pig race held in Denver Down Farm every fall. 

The Bengston&#x27;s Pumpkin Farm and Fall Fast often holds pig races. The pigs wear a colored, numbered bib when racing around the track.

==International==
Pig racing also occurs in the Pig Olympics. 12 pigs participate in the race from seven countries with each pig wearing a numbered bib. Betting occurs in the Pig Olympics. After the pigs participate in the Pig Olympics, &#x27;they go on to produce a new generation of sport pigs&#x27;.

== Controversy ==
There are some controversies with pig racing, as some see it as a cruel sport. Some people protest to have pig racing events cancelled. One animal rights activist started an online petition to stop the pig racing event in the Arklow Seabreeze Festival held in Wicklow, Ireland, from happening, which was signed by over 2,400 people. The pigs race in an hour-long event, running the course five times for a total distance of around . The festival committee was quoted as saying &quot;the welfare of the pigs is of utmost concern and important to us...a pig handler is also present to ensure no harm or cruelty is inflicted on any of his pigs&quot;. The race still went ahead as the festival committee defended the event by saying that many other Irish festivals hold pig races.

Another case was seen at the Paddington Tavern in Brisbane, Australia, where animal rights activists protested and called to have the pig racing event cancelled. However, the event had the support of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA).

The Comet Pub in Santry&#x27;s hosts pig races at the Comet 4th of July Festival in Dublin, Ireland. The pig race is the main event of the festival, and all money raised is donated to two charities. In 2018, the pig racing event gained the public&#x27;s awareness, which resulted in protests to cancel the event. This was due to health concerns about the heat on the day of the race, which was . For the event, the pub was supported by the Gardai, the Dublin City Council, and the Dublin Fire Brigade. A vet from the Department of Agriculture agreed to supervise the race to ensure that the pigs were okay. Six pigs wore puppet jockeys on their backs and raced down a ramp and up to the pub while jumping over hurdles. Protesters said it was cruel for the pigs to be put on a noisy track with the sun on their skin. In response, the pub noted that &quot;It&#x27;s done in fun, it&#x27;s not done in a dangerous way&quot;.

== References ==
==External links==
* &quot;Pig Racing: A Question of Ethics (1991)&quot; - documentary/mockumentary on the morality of the sport

* Video of Alaskan Racing Pigs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7193243" start="0" end="10" title="Pig racing" label="Pig racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="40" end="43" title="domestic pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653520" start="2560" end="2577" title="Olympic Boulevard (Melbourne)" label="Olympic Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q822871" start="2662" end="2672" title="Portlaoise" label="Portlaoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267497" start="2718" end="2724" title="Durrow, County Laois" label="Durrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033673" start="2848" end="2883" title="South of England Rare Breeds Centre" label="South of England Rare Breeds Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24567350" start="2923" end="2937" title="Natasha Raskin" label="Natasha Raskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009221" start="2975" end="2983" title="Oswestry" label="Oswestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374595" start="3055" end="3073" title="Royal Norfolk Show" label="Royal Norfolk Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="3174" end="3184" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667258" start="3417" end="3427" title="Animal Aid" label="Animal Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113876" start="3845" end="3854" title="Tamworth pig" label="Tamworths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572116" start="3856" end="3876" title="Gloucester Old Spots" label="Gloucester Old Spots"/>
<link wikidata="Q820953" start="3891" end="3901" title="Berkshire pig" label="Berkshires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115446" start="3907" end="3930" title="Oxford Sandy and Black" label="Oxford Sandy and Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="4259" end="4274" title="Growth hormone" label="growth hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="4278" end="4289" title="Antibiotic" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164504" start="4407" end="4421" title="Pennywell Farm" label="Pennywell Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101807" start="4425" end="4436" title="South Devon" label="South Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="4651" end="4673" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="4687" end="4712" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787044" start="4787" end="4819" title="Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo" label="Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="4917" end="4930" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591267" start="5047" end="5062" title="St. Paul Saints" label="St. Paul Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q29099" start="5237" end="5247" title="Dachshund" label="dachshunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803386" start="5298" end="5320" title="Meadowlands State Fair" label="Meadowlands State Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876411" start="5545" end="5577" title="Bear Creek Saloon and Steakhouse" label="Bear Creek Saloon and Steakhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q957442" start="5581" end="5600" title="Bear Creek, Montana" label="Bear Creek, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951898" start="6259" end="6278" title="Michigan State Fair" label="Michigan State Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333621" start="6835" end="6846" title="state fairs" label="state fairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q138585" start="7221" end="7225" title="Oreo" label="Oreo"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="7358" end="7370" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="7374" end="7383" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q113237" start="8055" end="8070" title="Franklin County, Ohio" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544743" start="8087" end="8097" title="Greenfield, Ohio" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="8099" end="8103" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q673662" start="9613" end="9619" title="Arklow" label="Arklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q652101" start="9647" end="9654" title="Wicklow" label="Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="10215" end="10223" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q629420" start="10242" end="10265" title="animal rights activists" label="animal rights activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q584819" start="10369" end="10423" title="Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="10494" end="10505" title="4th of July" label="4th of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="10518" end="10524" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="10874" end="10880" title="Gardai" label="Gardai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810766" start="10886" end="10905" title="Dublin City Council" label="Dublin City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310892" start="10915" end="10934" title="Dublin Fire Brigade" label="Dublin Fire Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044707" start="10951" end="10976" title="Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine" label="Department of Agriculture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297937" wikidata="Q2167179" url="?curid=297937" title="American Splendor">
<text>American Splendor is a series of autobiographical comic books written by Harvey Pekar and drawn by a variety of artists. The first issue was published in 1976 and the last one in September 2008, with publication occurring at irregular intervals. Publishers were, at various times, Harvey Pekar himself, Dark Horse Comics, and DC Comics.

The comics have been adapted into a film of the same name and a number of theatrical productions.

== Origins ==
Despite comic books in the United States being traditionally the province of fantasy-adventure and other genre stories, Pekar felt that the medium could be put to wider use:

Pekar&#x27;s philosophy of the potential of comics is also expressed in his often repeated statement that &quot;comics are words and pictures. You can do anything with words and pictures&quot;. In an interview with &quot;Walrus Comix&quot;, Pekar described how the idea of producing his own comic book developed. In 1972 when Crumb was visiting him in Cleveland, Pekar showed him his story ideas. Not only did Crumb agree to draw some of them but also offered to show them to other artists to draw. By 1975, Pekar decided to produce and publish his own comic book.

Recurring character Toby Radloff first appeared in &quot;American Splendor&quot; #9 (1984), as did Joyce Brabner. Pekar and Brabner&#x27;s adopted daughter, Danielle, was first introduced in &quot;American Splendor: Bedtime Stories&quot; (1999).

== Themes ==
The stories in &quot;American Splendor&quot; concern the everyday life of Pekar in Cleveland, Ohio, told in a brutally frank style akin to the writing of Henry Miller. Pekar&#x27;s stories eschew traditional narrative structure, focusing on small moments and observations. As Robert Pulcini, co-writer and co-director of the &quot;American Splendor&quot; film, said: &quot;The whole point of the &quot;American Splendor&quot; comics is that life doesn&#x27;t really organize itself well&quot;.

Situations covered include Pekar&#x27;s job as a file clerk at a Veteran&#x27;s Affairs hospital and his relations with colleagues and patients there. There are also stories about Pekar and his relations with friends and family, including his second wife, Lark (issues #5, #7), his third wife, Joyce Brabner (issue #9 onward), and their adopted daughter, Danielle. Other stories concern everyday situations such as Pekar&#x27;s troubles with his car, money, his health, and his concerns and anxieties in general. Several issues (#14, #13, #18) give accounts of Pekar&#x27;s becoming a recurring guest on the NBC television show &quot;Late Night with David Letterman&quot;, including a 1987 interview segment in which Pekar criticized Letterman for ducking criticism of General Electric, the parent company of NBC. &quot;American Splendor&quot; sometimes departs from Pekar&#x27;s own life, with stories about jazz musicians (#23), the artists for his comics (#25), and a three-issue miniseries &quot;American Splendor: Unsung Hero&quot; (#29–31), which chronicles the Vietnam experience of Pekar&#x27;s African-American co-worker Robert McNeill.

== Artists ==
Pekar was not an artist himself, incapable of &quot;drawing a straight line&quot;, according to a line in the film version of his story, so he recruited his friend, underground comics artist Robert Crumb, to help launch &quot;American Splendor&quot;. As Crumb described it:
As &quot;The Complete Crumb Comics&quot; co-editor Robert Fiore wrote about the Pekar/Crumb collaborations:
As things evolved, however, Crumb explained:
In addition to Crumb, Pekar&#x27;s most well-known and longest-running collaborators included Gary Dumm, Greg Budgett, Spain Rodriguez, Joe Zabel, Gerry Shamray, Frank Stack, Mark Zingarelli, and Joe Sacco. Other notable &quot;American Splendor&quot; illustrators include Alison Bechdel, Joyce Brabner, Brian Bram, Chester Brown, Alan Moore, David Collier, Drew Friedman, Michael T. Gilbert, Dean Haspiel, Paul Mavrides, Val Mayerik, Josh Neufeld, Ed Piskor, James Sherman, Don Simpson and Jim Woodring. The later Vertigo Comics-published issues employed a new crop of artists, including Ty Templeton, Richard Corben, Hunt Emerson, Eddie Campbell, Gilbert Hernandez, Ho Che Anderson, Hilary Barta, Bob Fingerman, Rick Geary, David Lapham, John Lucas, Leonardo Manco, José Marzan Jr., Warren Pleece, Chris Samnee and Chris Weston.

== Publication history ==
Pekar produced seventeen issues of &quot;American Splendor&quot; from 1976 to 1993 — usually each May — which, except for the last few issues, he also self-published and self-distributed. By keeping back issues in print and available (contrary to the industry practice of the time), Pekar continued to receive income on previously completed work, although at the time some of them were published, according to his &quot;Comics Journal&quot; interview (1985), he was losing thousands of dollars per year on the books. Starting in 1994, additional &quot;American Splendor&quot; were published by Dark Horse Comics, although these issues are not numbered. They include the two-issue &quot;American Splendor: Windfall&quot; and several themed issues such as &quot;American Splendor: Transatlantic Comics&quot; and &quot;American Splendor: On the Job&quot;. In September 2006, a four-issue &quot;American Splendor&quot; mini-series was published by the DC Comics imprint Vertigo. A second four-issue miniseries was published by DC in 2008.

== Collected editions ==
Many stories from &quot;American Splendor&quot; have been collected into trade paperbacks from various publishers, their material not (for the most part) overlapping:
* &quot;American Splendor: The Life and Times of Harvey Pekar&quot; (Doubleday, 1986) 
* &quot;More American Splendor&quot; (Doubleday, 1987) 
* &quot;The New American Splendor Anthology&quot; (Four Walls Eight Windows, 1991) 
* &quot;American Splendor Presents: Bob &amp; Harv&#x27;s Comics&quot;, with R. Crumb (Four Walls Eight Windows, 1996) 
* &quot;American Splendor: Unsung Hero&quot;, with David Collier (Dark Horse, 2003) 
* &quot;Best of American Splendor&quot; (Ballantine Books, 2005) 
* &quot;American Splendor: Another Day&quot; (DC/Vertigo, 2007) 
* &quot;American Splendor: Another Dollar&quot; (DC/Vertigo, 2009)

==Graphic novels and other collections==
Pekar wrote two larger works that carry the &quot;American Splendor&quot; label: &quot;Our Movie Year&quot; (Ballantine Books, 2004) and &quot;Ego &amp; Hubris: The Michael Malice Story&quot; (Ballantine, 2006). &quot;Our Movie Year&quot; is a collection of comics written about or at the time of the &quot;American Splendor&quot; film; it includes an original piece illustrated by Ed Piskor, as well as material originally published in a variety of sources, including &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;, &quot;Cleveland Scene&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;Time Out New York&quot;, &quot;LA Weekly&quot;, &quot;Empire&quot; magazine, &quot;Gambit Weekly&quot;, the Music Maker Relief Foundation, the &quot;American Splendor&quot; film soundtrack CD, and the &quot;Sundance Film Festival Daily Insider&quot;. &quot;Ego &amp; Hubris&quot; is a biography of the early life of the author Michael Malice.

Pekar also wrote two graphic novels which are not officially labeled &quot;American Splendor&quot; but which should arguably be considered part of it: &quot;Our Cancer Year&quot; (Four Walls Eight Windows, 1994), co-written with Pekar&#x27;s wife Joyce Brabner and illustrated by Frank Stack, covering the year when Pekar was diagnosed with cancer; and &quot;The Quitter&quot; (DC/Vertigo, 2005), illustrated by Dean Haspiel, which deals with Pekar&#x27;s youth.
* 
* 

== Adaptations ==
===Theatrical productions===
Theatrical productions based on &quot;American Splendor&quot; have been mounted over the years:
* September–October 1985 – Adapted and directed by Conrad Bishop, with Herb O&#x27;Dell as Harvey. Produced by The Independent Eye in Lancaster, Pennsylvania
* November 1987 – Adapted by Lloyd Rose and directed by James C. Nicola, with Richard Bauer as Harvey, Isiah Whitlock Jr. as Mr. Boats, and Brigid Cleary and Anderson Matthews in supporting roles. Produced by Arena Stage in the Old Vat Room in Washington, DC
* September 1990 – September 1991 – Adapted and directed by Vince Waldron, with Dan Castellaneta as Harvey, Andy Wilson as Mr. Boats, and Richard Kuhlman, Steve Sheridan, Monica Horan, David O&#x27;Shea, and Siobhan Fallon Hogan in supporting roles. Produced at the Theatre/Theater in Hollywood, California (and represented in fictionalized form in the &quot;American Splendor&quot; movie, with Donal Logue as Harvey and Molly Shannon as Joyce)
* 2024 - 2025 – Composed by Scott Fields &quot;Pekar&quot; is a musical suite of stories from American Splendor comic books. Development of the suite was started with Joyce Brabner in 2021. The 95-minute-long suite includes eight stories, with instrumental interludes. The instrumentation is female voice, accordion, marimba, guitar, and tuba. The premier is set for November 14, 2024 in Cologne, Germany with performances in nine other German cities in 2025. Pages from the corresponding comics are projected as supertitles.

===Film===

In 2003 a film adaptation featuring Paul Giamatti playing Pekar (as well as appearances by Pekar himself) and Hope Davis as his wife was released to critical acclaim and first honors at the Sundance Film Festival, in addition to the Writers Guild of America Award for best adapted screenplay. The film was written and directed by documentarians Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini, and was filmed entirely on location in Cleveland and Lakewood in Ohio. At the 2003 Cannes Film Festival, the film received the FIPRESCI critics award. It was also nominated for Best Adapted Screenplay at the 2003 Academy Awards.

== Further reading ==

== References ==
== Sources ==
* (Harvey Pekar)
* (Dark Horse Comics)

== External links ==
* Harvey Pekar&#x27;s Artists at Josh Neufeld&#x27;s website
* Radio interviews with Pekar, NPR.org
* An article about issue #7
* &quot;American Splendor&quot; at Toonopedia. Archived from the original on April 4, 2012.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181275" start="33" end="49" title="autobiographical comics" label="autobiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="50" end="60" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q440073" start="73" end="85" title="Harvey Pekar" label="Harvey Pekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="303" end="320" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="326" end="335" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q466961" start="379" end="395" title="American Splendor (film)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="412" end="434" title="#Theatrical productions" label="theatrical productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811869" start="1212" end="1224" title="Toby Radloff" label="Toby Radloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297405" start="1291" end="1304" title="Joyce Brabner" label="Joyce Brabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="1535" end="1544" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="1546" end="1550" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q187765" start="1606" end="1618" title="Henry Miller" label="Henry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481490" start="1728" end="1742" title="Robert Pulcini" label="Robert Pulcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q466961" start="1783" end="1800" title="American Splendor (film)" label="American Splendor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297405" start="2241" end="2254" title="Joyce Brabner" label="Joyce Brabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="2555" end="2558" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806831" start="2581" end="2612" title="Late Night with David Letterman" label="Late Night with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="2716" end="2732" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q466961" start="3218" end="3243" title="American Splendor (film)" label="film version of his story"/>
<link wikidata="Q435278" start="3299" end="3311" title="Robert Crumb" label="Robert Crumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727128" start="3391" end="3416" title="The Complete Crumb Comics" label="The Complete Crumb Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525001" start="3629" end="3638" title="Gary Dumm" label="Gary Dumm"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793955" start="3640" end="3652" title="Greg Budgett" label="Greg Budgett"/>
<link wikidata="Q621791" start="3654" end="3669" title="Spain Rodriguez" label="Spain Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185675" start="3671" end="3680" title="Joe Zabel" label="Joe Zabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553026" start="3682" end="3695" title="Gerry Shamray" label="Gerry Shamray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367014" start="3697" end="3708" title="Frank Stack" label="Frank Stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q335397" start="3731" end="3740" title="Joe Sacco" label="Joe Sacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q435032" start="3807" end="3821" title="Alison Bechdel" label="Alison Bechdel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297405" start="3823" end="3836" title="Joyce Brabner" label="Joyce Brabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963189" start="3838" end="3848" title="Brian Bram" label="Brian Bram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070694" start="3850" end="3863" title="Chester Brown" label="Chester Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="3865" end="3875" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232478" start="3877" end="3890" title="David Collier (cartoonist)" label="David Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307178" start="3892" end="3905" title="Drew Friedman (cartoonist)" label="Drew Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834754" start="3907" end="3925" title="Michael T. Gilbert" label="Michael T. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246202" start="3927" end="3939" title="Dean Haspiel" label="Dean Haspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152281" start="3941" end="3954" title="Paul Mavrides" label="Paul Mavrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909115" start="3956" end="3967" title="Val Mayerik" label="Val Mayerik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289203" start="3969" end="3981" title="Josh Neufeld" label="Josh Neufeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335285" start="3983" end="3992" title="Ed Piskor" label="Ed Piskor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143102" start="3994" end="4007" title="James Sherman (comics)" label="James Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293532" start="4009" end="4020" title="Don Simpson (cartoonist)" label="Don Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689246" start="4025" end="4037" title="Jim Woodring" label="Jim Woodring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462533" start="4123" end="4135" title="Ty Templeton" label="Ty Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387300" start="4137" end="4151" title="Richard Corben" label="Richard Corben"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364213" start="4153" end="4165" title="Hunt Emerson" label="Hunt Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282723" start="4167" end="4181" title="Eddie Campbell" label="Eddie Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q949202" start="4183" end="4200" title="Gilbert Hernandez" label="Gilbert Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138849" start="4202" end="4217" title="Ho Che Anderson" label="Ho Che Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760889" start="4219" end="4231" title="Hilary Barta" label="Hilary Barta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932421" start="4233" end="4246" title="Bob Fingerman" label="Bob Fingerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331410" start="4248" end="4258" title="Rick Geary" label="Rick Geary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018271" start="4260" end="4272" title="David Lapham" label="David Lapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15504445" start="4274" end="4284" title="John Lucas (comics)" label="John Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526024" start="4286" end="4300" title="Leonardo Manco" label="Leonardo Manco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709431" start="4302" end="4317" title="José Marzan Jr." label="José Marzan Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7970428" start="4319" end="4332" title="Warren Pleece" label="Warren Pleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q16769729" start="4334" end="4346" title="Chris Samnee" label="Chris Samnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108451" start="4351" end="4363" title="Chris Weston" label="Chris Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547397" start="4812" end="4826" title="Comics Journal" label="Comics Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="4986" end="5003" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="5340" end="5349" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q122669" start="5358" end="5365" title="Vertigo (DC Comics)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="5526" end="5542" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475605" start="5814" end="5838" title="Four Walls Eight Windows" label="Four Walls Eight Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475605" start="5934" end="5958" title="Four Walls Eight Windows" label="Four Walls Eight Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881141" start="6401" end="6417" title="Ballantine Books" label="Ballantine Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335285" start="6674" end="6683" title="Ed Piskor" label="Ed Piskor"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="6767" end="6787" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132227" start="6801" end="6816" title="Cleveland Scene" label="Cleveland Scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6830" end="6848" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="6862" end="6879" title="Time Out New York" label="Time Out New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q952554" start="6893" end="6902" title="LA Weekly" label="LA Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="6916" end="6922" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519643" start="6945" end="6958" title="Gambit Weekly" label="Gambit Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685103" start="6970" end="6999" title="Music Maker (label)" label="Music Maker Relief Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="7069" end="7091" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19561346" start="7189" end="7203" title="Michael Malice" label="Michael Malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110580" start="7363" end="7378" title="Our Cancer Year" label="Our Cancer Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475605" start="7386" end="7410" title="Four Walls Eight Windows" label="Four Walls Eight Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297405" start="7453" end="7466" title="Joyce Brabner" label="Joyce Brabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367014" start="7486" end="7497" title="Frank Stack" label="Frank Stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q122669" start="7584" end="7594" title="DC/Vertigo" label="DC/Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246202" start="7618" end="7630" title="Dean Haspiel" label="Dean Haspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741816" start="7930" end="7949" title="The Independent Eye" label="The Independent Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="7953" end="7976" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662716" start="8006" end="8016" title="Lloyd Rose" label="Lloyd Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q70604367" start="8033" end="8048" title="James C. Nicola" label="James C. Nicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q41754589" start="8055" end="8068" title="Richard Bauer" label="Richard Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788912" start="8186" end="8197" title="Arena Stage" label="Arena Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8221" end="8235" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q44442" start="8316" end="8332" title="Dan Castellaneta" label="Dan Castellaneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q299961" start="8407" end="8419" title="Monica Horan" label="Monica Horan"/>
<link wikidata="Q457991" start="8444" end="8464" title="Siobhan Fallon Hogan" label="Siobhan Fallon Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="8521" end="8530" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="8532" end="8542" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q466961" start="8589" end="8624" title="American Splendor (film)" label="&amp;quot;American Splendor&amp;quot; movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q517137" start="8631" end="8642" title="Donal Logue" label="Donal Logue"/>
<link wikidata="Q239145" start="8657" end="8670" title="Molly Shannon" label="Molly Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260860" start="8709" end="8721" title="Scott Fields" label="Scott Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297405" start="8848" end="8861" title="Joyce Brabner" label="Joyce Brabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q466961" start="9230" end="9245" title="American Splendor (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208649" start="9256" end="9269" title="Paul Giamatti" label="Paul Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q236399" start="9330" end="9340" title="Hope Davis" label="Hope Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="9410" end="9432" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415017" start="9453" end="9483" title="Writers Guild of America Award" label="Writers Guild of America Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481490" start="9565" end="9586" title="Shari Springer Berman" label="Shari Springer Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481490" start="9591" end="9605" title="Robert Pulcini" label="Robert Pulcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="9646" end="9655" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q570990" start="9660" end="9668" title="Lakewood, Ohio" label="Lakewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="9672" end="9676" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073282" start="9685" end="9710" title="2003 Cannes Film Festival" label="2003 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q253988" start="9734" end="9742" title="International Federation of Film Critics" label="FIPRESCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="9784" end="9807" title="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="9820" end="9834" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="10044" end="10051" title="National Public Radio" label="NPR.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297939" wikidata="Q707146" url="?curid=297939" title="Gao Lishi">
<text>Gao Lishi () (684 – May 762), born Feng Yuanyi (馮元一), noble title Duke of Qi (齊國公), was a Chinese eunuch and politician of the Tang dynasty and the Wu Zhou dynasty, becoming particularly powerful during Emperor Xuanzong of Tang&#x27;s reign. He is believed to have been in charge of many decisions that were supposed to be the emperor&#x27;s responsibility during Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s later years, and was believed to have been richer than many of the nobility of the era. Despite this, however, he was often viewed as a positive example of eunuch participation in politics for his personal loyalty to Emperor Xuanzong, which withstood despite its putting himself in personal danger later, during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s son Emperor Suzong (when Emperor Xuanzong was &quot;Taishang Huang&quot; (retired emperor)) as it drew jealousy from fellow eunuch Li Fuguo. Further, during the years of his highest power, he was also said to make no improper influences on governance, and therefore drew no anger from the intelligentsia. Late in Emperor Suzong&#x27;s reign, he was exiled upon Li Fuguo&#x27;s urging. After a pardon in 762, he was returning from exile, when he heard of Emperors Xuanzong&#x27;s and Suzong&#x27;s deaths. Mourning Emperor Xuanzong, he grew ill and died.

== Background ==

Gao Lishi was born in 684, when Empress Dowager Wu (later known as Wu Zetian) was successively regent over her sons Emperor Zhongzong (Li Zhe/Li Xian) and Emperor Ruizong (Li Dan). He was from Pan Prefecture (潘州, roughly modern Maoming, Guangdong). His was born Feng Yuanyi (馮元一), and he was reportedly a great-grandson of the early Tang local government official Feng Ang (馮盎). In 698, a local official, Li Qianli (李千里), submitted two young eunuchs to Wu Zetian, who had by that point taken the throne as Empress regnant as tribute; one was Lishi (who had not yet taken the name of Gao at this point), and one was named Jin&#x27;gang (金剛). Wu Zetian favored Lishi for his intelligence and kept him as an attending eunuch. Later, however, Lishi committed a minor fault, and she had him battered and expelled from her presence. An older eunuch, Gao Yanfu (高延福), took Lishi as an adoptive son (and thus had Lishi take his own name of Gao), and as Gao Yanfu had previously served Wu Zetian&#x27;s powerful nephew Wu Sansi the Prince of Liang, he had Gao Lishi serve Wu Sansi. After about a year, Wu Zetian summoned him back to her palace, and he again attended her. He eventually grew to be exceedingly tall. As he was careful, he was put in charge of announcing imperial edicts, and was eventually promoted to be &quot;Gongwei Cheng&quot; (宮闈丞), a highly ranked eunuch.

During the subsequent return to the throne by Emperor Zhongzong, Gao Lishi cultivated a friendship with Emperor Zhongzong&#x27;s nephew Li Longji the Prince of Linzi, the son of Li Dan the Prince of Xiang (Emperor Zhongzong&#x27;s brother and former emperor). In 705, after Emperor Zhongzong&#x27;s sudden death, Li Longji and Emperor Zhongzong&#x27;s sister Princess Taiping overthrew Emperor Zhongzong&#x27;s powerful wife Empress Wei and returned Li Dan to the throne. Li Longji was created crown prince, and he retained Gao on his staff.

== During Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s reign ==
In 712, Emperor Ruizong passed the throne to Li Longji, who took the throne as Emperor Xuanzong. However, Emperor Ruizong retained most of the imperial authority as &quot;Taishang Huang&quot; (retired emperor), and Princess Taiping, through him, continued to exert great influence on governance. As of 713, it was said that five of the seven chancellors at the time -- Dou Huaizhen, Cen Xi, Xiao Zhizhong, Cui Shi, and Lu Xiangxian, and three of the four generals of the Forbidden Troops at the time—Chang Yuankai, Li Ci, and Li Qin—were recommended by her (although Lu was not considered a follower of hers). Also, most of the officials and officers under chancellors and senior generals in the central government depended on her. With Emperor Xuanzong and Princess Taiping locked into a power struggle, Zhang Shuo, from his post at Luoyang, had a messenger present Emperor Xuanzong with his sword—meaning to tell him that it was time to take decisive action. Meanwhile, it was said that Princess Taiping, Dou, Cen, Xiao, and Cui; along with other officials Xue Ji, Li Jin (李晉) the Prince of Xinxing (a grandson of Li Deliang (李德良), a cousin of Tang&#x27;s founder Emperor Gaozu), Li You (李猷), Jia Yingfu (賈膺福), Tang Jun (唐晙); the generals Chang Yuankai (常元楷), Li Ci (李慈), and Li Qin (李欽); and the monk Huifan (惠範), were plotting to overthrow Emperor Xuanzong. It was further said that they discussed, with the lady-in-waiting Yuan to poison the &quot;gastrodia elata&quot; that Emperor Xuanzong routinely took as an aphrodisiac. When this alleged plot was reported to Emperor Xuanzong by Wei Zhigu, Emperor Xuanzong, who had already received advice from Wang Ju (王琚), Zhang Yue, and Cui Riyong to act first, did so. He convened a meeting with his brothers Li Fan (李範) the Prince of Qi, Li Ye (李業) the Prince of Xue, Guo, along with a number of his associates — the general Wang Maozhong (王毛仲), the officials Jiang Jiao (姜皎) and Li Lingwen (李令問), his brother-in-law Wang Shouyi (王守一), Gao Lishi, and the military officer Li Shoude (李守德) — and decided to act first. On July 29, Emperor Xuanzong had Wang Maozhong take 300 soldiers to the imperial guard camp to behead Chang and Li Ci. Then, Jia, Li You, Xiao, and Cen were arrested and executed as well. Dou and Princess Taiping committed suicide. Emperor Ruizong turned over imperial authority to Emperor Xuanzong and thereafter was no longer involved in important decisions. As a result of Gao&#x27;s participation in this action against Princess Taiping and her party, Emperor Xuanzong awarded him by making him a general of the imperial guards, as well as the acting head of the eunuch bureau (內侍省, &quot;Neishi Sheng&quot;). Gao&#x27;s general commission made Gao the first eunuch in Tang history to carry the third rank in Tang&#x27;s nine-rank system, and this was viewed as the start of the rise of eunuchs.

Afterwards Gao became one of Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s closest confidants, and it was often Gao that Emperor Xuanzong sent to communicate his wishes with key officials. For example, later in 713, when the chancellor Yao Chong was initially surprised and dismayed when Emperor Xuanzong refused to discuss the commissions of low-level officials with him, Gao spoke with Emperor Xuanzong and was told that the reason was not that he was displeased with Yao, but rather that these were decisions that Yao himself, as chancellor, had the authority to make. After Gao informed Yao this, Yao&#x27;s apprehensions were dissolved. In 726, when Zhang Shuo was accused of corruption and arrested, it was Gao that Emperor Xuanzong sent to visit Zhang to see how he was doing, and it was at Gao&#x27;s subsequent intercession that Zhang&#x27;s punishment was reduced.

In 730, when Emperor Xuanzong was beginning to be apprehensive about Wang Maozhong&#x27;s power and arrogance, it was Gao who suggested that he act first, and in spring 731, Emperor Xuanzong exiled Wang and his associates, and subsequently forced Wang to commit suicide. Thereafter it was said that Gao was particularly trusted by Emperor Xuanzong, who remarked, &quot;If Gao Lishi is here, I can sleep securely.&quot; Gao therefore rarely returned to his own home, and the petitions submitted to Emperor Xuanzong were first screened by Gao before he would pass them on to Emperor Xuanzong—and Gao ruled on the less important matters himself, causing his power to rise immensely. He spent much effort to support his adoptive parents Gao Yanfu and Gao Yanfu&#x27;s wife. He also had the commander (&quot;jiedushi&quot;) of Lingnan Circuit locate his birth mother Lady Mai and send her to the capital Chang&#x27;an, so that he could support her. When Lady Mai died, the general Cheng Boxian (程伯獻) and the official Feng Shaozheng (馮紹正), who had sworn to be brothers with Gao Lishi, both mourned her deeply. Gao Lishi&#x27;s father-in-law Lü Xuanwu (呂玄晤) was promoted quickly, as were his brothers and sons, and when Gao Lishi&#x27;s wife Lady Lü died, the officials and the ordinary citizens all mourned her, to impress Gao. However, it was said that while Gao was powerful, he was careful and modest, and therefore continuously drew trust from Emperor Xuanzong. Among officials and generals who ingratiated him and had him help their advancements were Yuwen Rong, Li Linfu, Li Shizhi, Gai Jiayun (蓋嘉運), Wei Jian (韋堅), Yang Shenjin (楊慎矜), Wang Hong (王鉷), Yang Guozhong, An Lushan, An Sishun, and Gao Xianzhi. The intelligentsia at the time blamed him for the advancement of some of the more power-hungry officials, but also recognized that whenever officials associated with him were charged with crimes, he would not improperly intercede to save them.

In 737, Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s favorite concubine Consort Wu, trying to have her son Li Mao (李瑁) the Prince of Shou made crown prince, made false accusations against Li Ying the Crown Prince, as well as two other princes, Li Yao (李瑤) the Prince of E and Li Ju (李琚) the Prince of Guang. Li Ying, Li Yao, and Li Ju were deposed and then forced to commit suicide. Consort Wu died later that year, but Li Linfu, who was then chancellor and who was allied with her, continued to lobby on Li Mao&#x27;s behalf. Instead, Emperor Xuanzong was considering an older son, Li Yu the Prince of Zhong, but could not decide quickly, and was depressed over the matter as well as his killing of three of his own sons. He could not sleep well or eat well. Gao asked him the reason, and he responded, &quot;You are my old servant. Can you not tell?&quot; Gao responded, &quot;Is it that the position of young master [(i.e., crown prince)] has not been decided?&quot; He responded, &quot;Yes.&quot; Gao responded, &quot;You do not need to trouble your heart. Just select the oldest one, and no one would dare to dispute it.&quot; Emperor Xuanzong therefore made up his mind, and he selected Li Yu (whose name was later changed to Li Heng) as crown prince.

Meanwhile, it was customary for Tang emperors to rotate their residences between Chang&#x27;an and the eastern capital Luoyang, depending on the amount of harvests for the year, as it was easier to transport food supplies to Luoyang than Chang&#x27;an. However, after Emperor Xuanzong last returned to Chang&#x27;an from Luoyang in 736, he did not visit Luoyang again. Li Linfu knew that he, in his more advanced age (he was 49 as of 736), tired of the rotation, and therefore expended effort to build up food supplies within the Guanzhong region, centered around Chang&#x27;an. By 744, on one occasion, Emperor Xuanzong commented to Gao:

Gao, who did not trust Li Linfu, responded:

Emperor Xuanzong was displeased, and Gao bowed and stated, &quot;I am insane. I did not know what I said, and I should be killed.&quot; Emperor Xuanzong tried to make light of the situation by holding a feast for Gao, but Gao did not dare to discuss governmental matters with Emperor Xuanzong after this point.

In 746, there was an occasion when Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s new favorite concubine, Consort Yang Yuhuan, angered Emperor Xuanzong by being jealous and rude to him, and he had her sent to the mansion of her cousin Yang Xian (楊銛). Later that day, however, his mood was such that he could not eat, and the servants were battered by him for minor offenses. Gao knew that he missed Consort Yang, and Gao requested that the treasures in Consort Yang&#x27;s palace be sent to her. Emperor Xuanzong agreed, and further sent imperial meals to her as well. That night, Gao requested that Emperor Xuanzong welcome Consort Yang back to the palace, a request that Emperor Xuanzong easily agreed to. Thereafter, she was even more favored, and no other imperial consort drew the favor of Emperor Xuanzong.

Meanwhile, it was said that Li Linfu did not have a good relationship with Li Heng the Crown Prince. Gao often protected Li Heng from Li Linfu&#x27;s machinations however, and as such Li Heng&#x27;s position was never actually endangered. As a result, Li Heng referred to Gao as an older brother. The other princes and dukes referred to him as &quot;father,&quot; and Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s sons-in-law referred to him as &quot;master.&quot; By 748, he was given the very high general rank of &quot;Piaoqi Da Jiangjun&quot; (驃騎大將軍) and was also awarded the title of Duke of Bohai.

In 750, there was another occasion at which Consort Yang offended Emperor Xuanzong with her words, and he sent her back to her clan. The official Ji Wen (吉溫) told Emperor Xuanzong that he overreacted, and Emperor Xuanzong regretted his actions. He against sent imperial meals to her, and she wept to the eunuchs delivering the meal, stating:

She cut off some of her hair and had the hair taken back to Emperor Xuanzong. Emperor Xuanzong had Gao escort her back to the palace, and thereafter loved her even more.

In 752, when associates of Wang Hong&#x27;s brother Wang Han (王銲) plotted treason and rose in rebellion inside Chang&#x27;an, the troops commanded by Yang Guozhong (Consort Yang&#x27;s cousin) and Wang Hong were initially unable to crush Wang Han&#x27;s associates, but Gao then arrived with reinforcements and crushed the rebellion decisively. In the aftermaths, when Wang Hong hesitated at asking for punishment for his brother, Yang Guozhong accused Wang Hong of being complicit, and both Wang Hong and Wang Han were executed. Later that year, when Emperor Xuanzong, seeing that Geshu Han, the commander of Longyou Circuit (隴右, headquartered in modern Haidong Prefecture, Qinghai), had poor relations with An Lushan, then the commander of Fanyang Circuit (范陽, headquartered in modern Beijing) and An Sishun (whose uncle was An Lushan&#x27;s stepfather), then the commander of Shuofang Circuit (朔方, headquartered in modern Yinchuan, Ningxia), and wanted to improve relations between these three key border troop commanders, he summoned all three to the capital and had Gao host a feast for the three of them, trying to get them to resolve their unpleasantries. However, instead, at the feast, Geshu and An Lushan got into an argument, which only stopped after Gao gazed at Geshu, stopping him from responding to An Lushan&#x27;s insults.

By 754, Yang Guozhong, who was then chancellor, was beginning to repeatedly accuse An Lushan of plotting rebellion, claiming that if Emperor Xuanzong summoned An to the capital, An would surely not come. Instead, when Emperor Xuanzong summoned An to the capital in early 754, An came. Emperor Xuanzong considered making him chancellor as well—even having the official Zhang Ji (張垍, Zhang Shuo&#x27;s son) draft an edict to that effect—but eventually did not do so. When An was set to return to Fanyang, Emperor Xuanzong had Gao hold a feast for An to send him off. After the feast, Gao observed to Emperor Xuanzong that An was somewhat displeased, perhaps because he had found out that he was originally set to be made chancellor but was not. Emperor Xuanzong, believing Zhang Ji and his brothers Zhang Jun (張均) and Zhang Shu (張埱) to have leaked the news, demoted all of them. Meanwhile, there was a war in the southwest between Tang forces and Nanzhao, which was not going well for Tang, and 200,000 soldiers had died in the conflict. Yang Guozhong, however, was hiding the truth from Emperor Xuanzong and declaring that there had been numerous victories. In response, Emperor Xuanzong told Gao:

Gao responded, however, as he saw trouble brewing:

Emperor Xuanzong began to be concerned, but took no decisive action, instead stating, &quot;Do not speak further. Let me think about these things.&quot;

At the time, Yang Guozhong was also hiding a major flood from Emperor Xuanzong. Once, when Emperor Xuanzong was alone with Gao, he stated, &quot;The rains would not stop. Speak what you will.&quot; Gao responded, &quot;Since Your Imperial Majesty trusted all power to the chancellors, the rewards and punishments are out of hand, and the yin and yang are out of alignment. How would I dare to speak?&quot;

Meanwhile, Yang Guozhong repeatedly tried to provoke An into rebelling, including arresting and executing staff members at An&#x27;s mansion in Chang&#x27;an. In 755, An finally did. In 756, after Geshu was defeated by An&#x27;s forces, after being forced by Yang Guozhong to engage An, Tong Pass, the last major defense against An&#x27;s forces, fell to An. Yang Guozhong suggested fleeing to Chengdu, the capital of Jiannan Circuit, of which Yang Guozhong was commander. On July 14, Emperor Xuanzong, keeping the news secret from the people of Chang&#x27;an, took the imperial guards to escort him, Consort Yang, her family, and his immediate clan members, and exited Chang&#x27;an, heading toward Chengdu. Attending him were Yang Guozhong, his fellow chancellor Wei Jiansu, the official Wei Fangjin (魏方進), the general Chen Xuanli (陳玄禮), and some eunuchs and ladies in waiting close to him, including Gao.

On July 15, Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s train reached Mawei Station (馬嵬驛, in modern Xianyang, Shaanxi). The imperial guards were not fed and were angry at Yang Guozhong. Chen also believed that Yang Guozhong provoked this disaster and planned to carry him—and reported his plans to Li Heng through Li Heng&#x27;s eunuch Li Fuguo, but Li Heng was hesitated and gave no approval. Meanwhile, emissaries of the Tibetan Empire, who had followed Emperor Xuanzong south, were meeting with Yang Guozhong and complaining that they were also not fed. The imperial guard soldiers took this opportunity to proclaim that Yang Guozhong was planning treason along with the Tibetan emissaries, and they killed him, along with his son Yang Xuan (楊暄), the Ladies of Han and Qin, and Wei Fangjin. Wei Jiansu was also nearly killed, but was spared at the last moment with severe injuries. The soldiers then surrounded Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s pavilion, and refused to scatter even after Emperor Xuanzong came out to comfort them and order them to scatter. Chen publicly urged him to put Consort Yang to death—which Emperor Xuanzong initially declined. After Wei Jiansu&#x27;s son Wei E (韋諤) and Gao Lishi spoke further, Emperor Xuanzong finally resolved to do so. He therefore had Gao take Consort Yang to a Buddhist shrine and supervise her forced suicide by strangling. After he showed the body to Chen and the other imperial guard generals, the guard soldiers finally scattered and prepared for further movement. The imperial guards eventually escorted Emperor Xuanzong to Chengdu. Gao continued to attend to him there. For Gao&#x27;s faithfulness, Emperor Xuanzong created him the Duke of Qi.

== During Emperor Suzong&#x27;s reign ==
Li Heng, however, broke away from Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s party and fled to Shuofang instead, and was proclaimed emperor there (as Emperor Suzong) later in 756, a proclamation that Emperor Xuanzong recognized, as he assumed the title of &quot;Taishang Huang&quot; and had only relatively limited authority thereafter.

In 757, after Emperor Suzong recaptured Chang&#x27;an, he welcomed Emperor Xuanzong back to Chang&#x27;an. Gao Lishi accompanied Emperor Xuanzong back to the capital, and was rewarded with the honorific title &quot;Kaifu Yitong Sansi&quot; (開府儀同三司).

After Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s return to Chang&#x27;an, he took residence at Xingqing Palace (興慶宮), which was converted from his residence as an imperial prince. Gao and Chen Xuanli attended to him, as did Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s younger sister Li Chiying (李持盈) the Princess Yuzhen, the lady in waiting Ru Xianyuan (如仙媛), and the eunuchs Wang Cheng&#x27;en (王承恩) and Wei Yue (魏悅). Meanwhile, Li Fuguo had become very powerful, but these attendants of Emperor Xuanzong did not respect him. To retaliate, Li Fuguo began to try to convince Emperor Suzong that Emperor Xuanzong and his attendants were plotting to seize power back. In 760, with Emperor Suzong&#x27;s tacit, although not explicit, approval, on one occasion when Emperor Xuanzong was out riding, Li Fuguo intercepted him and forced him to move back to the main palace. Even on that occasion, however, Gao would not submit to Li Fuguo, and even yelled at Li Fuguo to force him to get off his horse and to escort Emperor Xuanzong on foot, along with Gao. Soon after Emperor Xuanzong was forcibly moved, Li Fuguo forced Chen to retire, Li Chiying to return to her temple (she had become an ordained Taoist nun in 711), and exiled Gao, Wang, Wei, and Ru. In Gao&#x27;s case, he was exiled to Wu Prefecture (巫州, roughly modern Huaihua, Hunan).

== Death ==
In spring 762, Emperor Suzong, then seriously ill, declared a general pardon. Gao Lishi was therefore allowed to return to Chang&#x27;an, and he began to undertake the journey. While he was on the way back to Chang&#x27;an, however, on May 5, Emperor Xuanzong died, followed by Emperor Suzong on May 16. When Gao reached Lang Prefecture (朗州, roughly modern Changde, Hunan), he heard of the two emperors&#x27; deaths, and he, mourning Emperor Xuanzong bitterly, spit up blood and died soon afterwards.

Emperor Suzong&#x27;s son Emperor Daizong, who became emperor after Emperor Suzong&#x27;s death, recognizing Gao&#x27;s faithfulness and prior protection of Emperor Suzong, posthumously restored his titles and further bestowed honors, and buried him near Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s tomb.

==In fiction and popular culture==
* &quot;Portrayed by Liu Kai-chi in &quot;The Legend of Lady Yang&quot;. (2000)
* &quot;Portrayed by Evergreen Mak in TVB&#x27;s Whatever it Takes&quot;. (2001)

==See also==
*Li Bai

== Notes and references ==

* &quot;Old Book of Tang&quot;, vol. 184.
* &quot;New Book of Tang&quot;, vol. 207.
* &quot;Zizhi Tongjian&quot;, vols. 210, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 221, 222.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q707146" start="0" end="9" title="Gao Lishi" label="Gao Lishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q707146" start="35" end="46" title="Gao Lishi" label="Feng Yuanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28654" start="90" end="104" title="Chinese eunuch" label="Chinese eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="127" end="139" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q835435" start="148" end="163" title="Zhou dynasty (690–705)" label="Wu Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9746" start="203" end="227" title="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang" label="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9749" start="741" end="755" title="Emperor Suzong of Tang" label="Emperor Suzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q44731715" start="789" end="803" title="Taishang Huang" label="Taishang Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q605214" start="868" end="876" title="Li Fuguo" label="Li Fuguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="1026" end="1040" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="1342" end="1360" title="Wu Zetian" label="Empress Dowager Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9717" start="1426" end="1443" title="Emperor Zhongzong of Tang" label="Emperor Zhongzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9722" start="1465" end="1480" title="Emperor Ruizong of Tang" label="Emperor Ruizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q38927" start="1538" end="1545" title="Maoming" label="Maoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="1547" end="1556" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q834323" start="2320" end="2328" title="Wu Sansi" label="Wu Sansi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9746" start="2815" end="2824" title="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang" label="Li Longji"/>
<link wikidata="Q706438" start="3038" end="3054" title="Princess Taiping" label="Princess Taiping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063783" start="3104" end="3115" title="Empress Wei (Tang dynasty)" label="Empress Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="3173" end="3185" title="crown prince" label="crown prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q44731715" start="3436" end="3450" title="Taishang Huang" label="Taishang Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299530" start="3634" end="3646" title="Dou Huaizhen" label="Dou Huaizhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058772" start="3648" end="3654" title="Cen Xi" label="Cen Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044244" start="3656" end="3669" title="Xiao Zhizhong" label="Xiao Zhizhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192701" start="3671" end="3678" title="Cui Shi" label="Cui Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694915" start="3684" end="3696" title="Lu Xiangxian" label="Lu Xiangxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124978" start="3736" end="3752" title="Imperial Guards (Tang dynasty)" label="Forbidden Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147970" start="4324" end="4330" title="Xue Ji" label="Xue Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q9700" start="4431" end="4444" title="Emperor Gaozu of Tang" label="Emperor Gaozu"/>
<link wikidata="Q715222" start="4677" end="4692" title="lady-in-waiting" label="lady-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q650760" start="4718" end="4733" title="gastrodia elata" label="gastrodia elata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979789" start="4855" end="4864" title="Wei Zhigu" label="Wei Zhigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q701545" start="4935" end="4944" title="Zhang Yue (Tang dynasty)" label="Zhang Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192695" start="4950" end="4960" title="Cui Riyong" label="Cui Riyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151136" start="6056" end="6072" title="nine-rank system" label="nine-rank system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275350" start="6346" end="6355" title="Yao Chong" label="Yao Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688932" start="7789" end="7797" title="jiedushi" label="jiedushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368026" start="7808" end="7815" title="Lingnan" label="Lingnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="7885" end="7898" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567076" start="8536" end="8546" title="Yuwen Rong" label="Yuwen Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q713000" start="8548" end="8556" title="Li Linfu" label="Li Linfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q703306" start="8558" end="8567" title="Li Shizhi" label="Li Shizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069299" start="8638" end="8651" title="Yang Guozhong" label="Yang Guozhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q360559" start="8653" end="8662" title="An Lushan" label="An Lushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750219" start="8664" end="8673" title="An Sishun" label="An Sishun"/>
<link wikidata="Q708541" start="8679" end="8690" title="Gao Xianzhi" label="Gao Xianzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="8978" end="8987" title="concubine" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178742" start="8988" end="8998" title="Consort Wu (Xuanzong)" label="Consort Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539240" start="9104" end="9111" title="Li Ying (prince)" label="Li Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q9749" start="9499" end="9504" title="Emperor Suzong of Tang" label="Li Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="10294" end="10301" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q189923" start="10705" end="10714" title="Guanzhong" label="Guanzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q298046" start="11255" end="11274" title="Consort Yang Yuhuan" label="Consort Yang Yuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837589" start="13642" end="13651" title="Geshu Han" label="Geshu Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q984788" start="13715" end="13733" title="Haidong Prefecture" label="Haidong Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="13735" end="13742" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="13847" end="13854" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505185" start="13939" end="13947" title="Shuofang" label="Shuofang"/>
<link wikidata="Q211243" start="13985" end="13993" title="Yinchuan" label="Yinchuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57448" start="13995" end="14002" title="Ningxia" label="Ningxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045322" start="15346" end="15353" title="Kingdom of Nanzhao" label="Nanzhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="16143" end="16155" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757995" start="16499" end="16508" title="Tong Pass" label="Tong Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="16606" end="16613" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567072" start="16977" end="16987" title="Wei Jiansu" label="Wei Jiansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q497341" start="17201" end="17209" title="Xianyang" label="Xianyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="17211" end="17218" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q605214" start="17437" end="17445" title="Li Fuguo" label="Li Fuguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431480" start="17524" end="17538" title="Tibetan Empire" label="Tibetan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="20561" end="20567" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="20568" end="20571" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q416922" start="20687" end="20694" title="Huaihua" label="Huaihua"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="20696" end="20701" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q416544" start="21074" end="21081" title="Changde" label="Changde"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="21083" end="21088" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9753" start="21245" end="21260" title="Emperor Daizong of Tang" label="Emperor Daizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q845471" start="21561" end="21572" title="Liu Kai-chi" label="Liu Kai-chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746739" start="21582" end="21605" title="The Legend of Lady Yang" label="The Legend of Lady Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q422950" start="21641" end="21654" title="Evergreen Mak" label="Evergreen Mak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195543" start="21658" end="21661" title="TVB" label="TVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071" start="21716" end="21722" title="Li Bai" label="Li Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146980" start="21760" end="21776" title="Old Book of Tang" label="Old Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q386073" start="21802" end="21818" title="New Book of Tang" label="New Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q207062" start="21844" end="21858" title="Zizhi Tongjian" label="Zizhi Tongjian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21872" end="21875" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷210" label="210"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21877" end="21880" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷212" label="212"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21882" end="21885" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷213" label="213"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21887" end="21890" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷214" label="214"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21892" end="21895" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷215" label="215"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21897" end="21900" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷216" label="216"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21902" end="21905" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷217" label="217"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21907" end="21910" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷218" label="218"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21912" end="21915" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷221" label="221"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21917" end="21920" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷222" label="222"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297943" wikidata="Q124650494" url="?curid=297943" title="Grand empress dowager">
<text>Grand [[empress dowager]] (also grand dowager empress or grand empress mother) ( (太皇太后) was a title given to the grandmother, or a woman from the same generation, of a Chinese, Japanese, Korean, or Vietnamese emperor in the Chinese cultural sphere.

Some grand empresses dowager held regency during the emperor&#x27;s childhood. Some of the most prominent empress dowagers extended their regencies beyond the time when the emperor was old enough to govern alone. This was seen as a source of political turmoil, according to the traditional views of Chinese historians.

== Chinese grand empresses dowager ==

=== Han dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Lü Zhi (188 BC – 180 BC), during the reign of Emperor Qianshao and Emperor Houshao
* Grand Empress Dowager Bo (156 BC – 155 BC), during the reign of Emperor Jing
* Grand Empress Dowager Dou (141 BC – 135 BC), during the reign of Emperor Wu
* Grand Empress Dowager Shangguan (74 BC – 37 BC), during the reign of Emperor Xuan and Emperor Yuan
* Grand Empress Dowager Qiongcheng (33 BC – 16 BC), during the reign of Emperor Cheng
* Grand Empress Dowager Wang Zhengjun (7 BC – 13 AD), during the reign of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping
* Grand Empress Dowager Fu (帝太太后 instead of 太皇太后) (7 BC – 3 BC), during the reign of Emperor Ai

=== Cao Wei ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Bian (226–230), during the reign of Emperor Ming

=== Jin dynasty (266–420) ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Li Lingrong (397–400), during the reign of Emperor An

=== Liu Song dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Xiao Wenshou (422–423), during the reign of Emperor Shao
* Grand Empress Dowager Lu Huinan (464–466), during the reign of Emperor Qianfei

=== Chen dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Zhang Yao&#x27;er (566–568), during the reign of Emperor Fei

=== Northern Wei dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Helian (452–453), during the reign of Emperor Wencheng
* Grand Empress Dowager Feng (471–490), during the reign of Emperor Xiaowen
* Grand Empress Dowager Lou Zhaojun (559–560), during the reign of Emperor Fei

=== Northern Qi dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Hu (577), during the reign of Emperor Youzhu

=== Northern Zhou dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Ashina (579–581), during the reign of Emperor Jing

=== Tang dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Guo (824–848), during the reign of Emperor Jingzong, Emperor Wenzong, Emperor Wuzong and Emperor Xuānzong
* Grand Empress Dowager Zheng (859–865), during the reign of Emperor Yizong

=== Song dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Cao (1067–1085), during the reign of Emperor Shenzong
* Grand Empress Dowager Gao Taotao (1085–1093), during the reign of Emperor Zhezong
* Grand Empress Dowager Wu (1189–1197), during the reign of Emperor Guangzong
* Grand Empress Dowager Xie (1194–1203), during the reign of Emperor Ningzong
* Grand Empress Dowager Xie Daoqing (1274–1276), during the reign of Emperor Gong; the proceeding two emperors were her grandsons but they were fleeing from the Mongols

=== Liao dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Xiao Yanmujin (died 933), during the reign of Emperor Taizong
* Grand Empress Dowager Xiao Noujin (1055–1057), during the reign of Emperor Daozong
* Grand Empress Dowager Xiao Dali (1101–1118), during the reign of Emperor Tianzuo

=== Jin dynasty (1115–1234) ===
* Tangkuo, Grand Empress Dowager of Qingyuan Palace (1135–1136), during the reign of Emperor Xizong
* Heshilie, Grand Empress Dowager of Mingde Palace (1135–1143), during the reign of Emperor Xizong

=== Yuan dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager of Dagi (1321–?), during the reign of Emperor Yingzong
* Grand Empress Dowager Budashiri (1333–1338), during the reign of Emperor Huizong

=== Ming dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Zhang (1435–1442), during the reign of the Zhengtong Emperor
* Grand Empress Dowager Zhou (1487–1504), during the reign of the Hongzhi Emperor
* Grand Empress Dowager Wang (1505–1518), during the reign of both the Hongzhi Emperor and the Zhengde Emperor
* Grand Empress Dowager Zheng (1565–1630) (posthumous title), awarded by the Hongguang Emperor

=== Qing dynasty ===
* Grand Empress Dowager Zhaosheng (1661–1688), during the reign of the Kangxi Emperor
* Grand Empress Dowager Cixi (1908), during the reign of the Xuantong Emperor (Puyi)

== Japanese grand empresses dowager ==
==See also==
* Empress dowager
* Từ Dụ (1810–1902), Vietnamese royal and only ever person to be crowned Great Grand Empress Dowager

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q124650494" start="0" end="25" title="Grand empress dowager" label="Grand [[empress dowager]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q124650494" start="32" end="53" title="Grand empress dowager" label="grand dowager empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q124650494" start="57" end="77" title="Grand empress dowager" label="grand empress mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q167918" start="113" end="124" title="grandmother" label="grandmother"/>
<link wikidata="Q467" start="131" end="136" title="woman" label="woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="168" end="175" title="Chinese emperors" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="177" end="185" title="Japanese emperor" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740625" start="187" end="193" title="Korean emperors" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q130054" start="198" end="208" title="Vietnamese emperors" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="224" end="247" title="East Asian cultural sphere" label="Chinese cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="284" end="291" title="Regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q298039" start="631" end="659" title="Empress Lü Zhi" label="Grand Empress Dowager Lü Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7217" start="699" end="715" title="Liu Gong" label="Emperor Qianshao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7220" start="720" end="735" title="Emperor Houshao of Han" label="Emperor Houshao"/>
<link wikidata="Q997681" start="738" end="762" title="Empress Dowager Bo" label="Grand Empress Dowager Bo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224" start="802" end="814" title="Emperor Jing of Han" label="Emperor Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q837295" start="817" end="842" title="Empress Dou (Wen)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Dou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="882" end="892" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Emperor Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268394" start="895" end="926" title="Grand Empress Dowager Shangguan" label="Grand Empress Dowager Shangguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230" start="964" end="976" title="Emperor Xuan of Han" label="Emperor Xuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232" start="981" end="993" title="Emperor Yuan of Han" label="Emperor Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q712305" start="996" end="1028" title="Empress Wang (Xuan)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Qiongcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234" start="1066" end="1079" title="Emperor Cheng of Han" label="Emperor Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q701379" start="1082" end="1117" title="Empress Wang Zhengjun" label="Grand Empress Dowager Wang Zhengjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237" start="1154" end="1164" title="Emperor Ai of Han" label="Emperor Ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244" start="1169" end="1181" title="Emperor Ping of Han" label="Emperor Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079615" start="1184" end="1208" title="Consort Fu (Yuan)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237" start="1267" end="1277" title="Emperor Ai of Han" label="Emperor Ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q292698" start="1297" end="1323" title="Grand Empress Dowager Bian" label="Grand Empress Dowager Bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q378470" start="1355" end="1367" title="Cao Rui" label="Emperor Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374482" start="1423" end="1434" title="Li Lingrong" label="Li Lingrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403" start="1466" end="1476" title="Emperor An of Jin" label="Emperor An"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079660" start="1527" end="1539" title="Xiao Wenshou" label="Xiao Wenshou"/>
<link wikidata="Q49701" start="1571" end="1583" title="Emperor Shao of Liu Song" label="Emperor Shao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374485" start="1586" end="1617" title="Empress Dowager Lu Huinan" label="Grand Empress Dowager Lu Huinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q718258" start="1649" end="1664" title="Emperor Qianfei of Liu Song" label="Emperor Qianfei"/>
<link wikidata="Q712190" start="1689" end="1728" title="Empress Zhang Yao&amp;#x27;er" label="Grand Empress Dowager Zhang Yao&amp;#x27;er"/>
<link wikidata="Q718222" start="1760" end="1771" title="Emperor Fei of Chen" label="Emperor Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017975" start="1804" end="1832" title="Empress Helian" label="Grand Empress Dowager Helian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074798" start="1864" end="1880" title="Emperor Wencheng of Northern Wei" label="Emperor Wencheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276928" start="1883" end="1909" title="Empress Feng (Wencheng)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Feng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327614" start="1941" end="1956" title="Emperor Xiaowen of Northern Wei" label="Emperor Xiaowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079575" start="1959" end="1992" title="Empress Dowager Lou Zhaojun" label="Grand Empress Dowager Lou Zhaojun"/>
<link wikidata="Q708368" start="2024" end="2035" title="Emperor Fei of Northern Qi" label="Emperor Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049189" start="2067" end="2091" title="Empress Dowager Hu (Northern Qi)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q288135" start="2119" end="2133" title="Gao Heng" label="Emperor Youzhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268509" start="2167" end="2195" title="Empress Ashina" label="Grand Empress Dowager Ashina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149124" start="2227" end="2239" title="Emperor Jing of Northern Zhou" label="Emperor Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374477" start="2264" end="2289" title="Empress Dowager Guo (Tang dynasty)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Guo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9776" start="2321" end="2337" title="Emperor Jingzong of Tang" label="Emperor Jingzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9790" start="2339" end="2354" title="Emperor Wenzong of Tang" label="Emperor Wenzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9801" start="2356" end="2370" title="Emperor Wuzong of Tang" label="Emperor Wuzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9825" start="2375" end="2391" title="Emperor Xuānzong of Tang" label="Emperor Xuānzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374499" start="2394" end="2421" title="Empress Dowager Zheng" label="Grand Empress Dowager Zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q9886" start="2453" end="2467" title="Emperor Yizong of Tang" label="Emperor Yizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q704227" start="2492" end="2517" title="Empress Cao (Song dynasty)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7483" start="2551" end="2567" title="Emperor Shenzong of Song" label="Emperor Shenzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219495" start="2570" end="2602" title="Empress Gao (Song dynasty)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Gao Taotao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7484" start="2636" end="2651" title="Emperor Zhezong of Song" label="Emperor Zhezong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219495" start="2654" end="2678" title="Empress Gao (Song dynasty)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494" start="2712" end="2729" title="Emperor Guangzong of Song" label="Emperor Guangzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374464" start="2732" end="2757" title="Empress Xie (Xiaozong)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Xie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496" start="2791" end="2807" title="Emperor Ningzong of Song" label="Emperor Ningzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357886" start="2810" end="2843" title="Xie Daoqing" label="Grand Empress Dowager Xie Daoqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500" start="2877" end="2889" title="Emperor Gong of Song" label="Emperor Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374497" start="3023" end="3036" title="Xiao Yanmujin" label="Xiao Yanmujin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991" start="3069" end="3084" title="Emperor Taizong of Liao" label="Emperor Taizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8254267" start="3109" end="3120" title="Xiao Noujin" label="Xiao Noujin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007" start="3154" end="3169" title="Emperor Daozong of Liao" label="Emperor Daozong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009" start="3237" end="3252" title="Emperor Tianzuo of Liao" label="Emperor Tianzuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071" start="3371" end="3385" title="Emperor Xizong of Jin" label="Emperor Xizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071" start="3470" end="3484" title="Emperor Xizong of Jin" label="Emperor Xizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8549" start="3569" end="3585" title="Gegeen Khan, Emperor Yingzong of Yuan" label="Emperor Yingzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984083" start="3588" end="3619" title="Budashiri" label="Grand Empress Dowager Budashiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8666" start="3653" end="3668" title="Ukhaantu Khan, Emperor Huizong of Yuan" label="Emperor Huizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q719667" start="3693" end="3720" title="Empress Zhang (Hongxi)" label="Grand Empress Dowager Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9983" start="3758" end="3775" title="Zhengtong Emperor" label="Zhengtong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9994" start="3842" end="3857" title="Hongzhi Emperor" label="Hongzhi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q701379" start="3860" end="3886" title="Grand Empress Dowager Wang" label="Grand Empress Dowager Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9994" start="3929" end="3944" title="Hongzhi Emperor" label="Hongzhi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10007" start="3953" end="3968" title="Zhengde Emperor" label="Zhengde Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250818" start="3971" end="3998" title="Noble Consort Zheng" label="Grand Empress Dowager Zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352743" start="4046" end="4063" title="Zhu Yousong" label="Hongguang Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373915" start="4088" end="4119" title="Empress Xiaozhuangwen" label="Grand Empress Dowager Zhaosheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="4157" end="4171" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="4174" end="4200" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Grand Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185152" start="4251" end="4255" title="Puyi" label="Puyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409248" start="4312" end="4327" title="Empress dowager" label="Empress dowager"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798440" start="4330" end="4335" title="Từ Dụ" label="Từ Dụ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297946" wikidata="Q12772457" url="?curid=297946" title="Neruda (surname)">
<text>Neruda () is a Czech surname. Notable people with this name include:

* Franz Xaver Neruda (; (1843–1915), Czech-Danish cellist, son of Josef Neruda
* Freedom Neruda (born 1956), Ivorian journalist
* Jan Neruda (1834–1891), Czech journalist, writer and poet
* Johann Baptist Georg Neruda (, c. 1707–1780), Czech composer
* Josef Neruda (1807–1875), Czech organist, great-grandson of Johann Baptist Georg Neruda
* Maria Neruda (1838–1911), Czech-Swedish violinist, daughter of Josef Neruda
* Pablo Neruda (1904–1973), pseudonym of Chilean poet, writer and socialist politician, Nobel laureate for Literature
* Wilma Neruda, Lady Hallé (1838–1911), Czech violinist, daughter of Josef Neruda

== See also ==
* Neruda (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12772457" start="0" end="6" title="Neruda (surname)" label="Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381853" start="72" end="90" title="Franz Xaver Neruda" label="Franz Xaver Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500572" start="151" end="165" title="Freedom Neruda" label="Freedom Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q156321" start="200" end="210" title="Jan Neruda" label="Jan Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q567059" start="260" end="287" title="Johann Baptist Georg Neruda" label="Johann Baptist Georg Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072640" start="323" end="335" title="Josef Neruda" label="Josef Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936457" start="413" end="425" title="Maria Neruda" label="Maria Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="491" end="503" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q78938" start="609" end="621" title="Wilma Neruda" label="Wilma Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q233668" start="707" end="730" title="Neruda (disambiguation)" label="Neruda (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297947" wikidata="Q188191" url="?curid=297947" title="Chord (geometry)">
<text>A chord (from the Latin &quot;chorda&quot;, meaning &quot;bowstring&quot;) of a circle is a straight line segment whose endpoints both lie on a circular arc. If a chord were to be extended infinitely on both directions into a line, the object is a &quot;secant line&quot;. The perpendicular line passing through the chord&#x27;s midpoint is called &quot;sagitta&quot; (Latin for &quot;arrow&quot;).

More generally, a chord is a line segment joining two points on any curve, for instance, on an ellipse. A chord that passes through a circle&#x27;s center point is the circle&#x27;s &quot;diameter&quot;.

== In circles ==

Among properties of chords of a circle are the following:
# Chords are equidistant from the center if and only if their lengths are equal.
# Equal chords are subtended by equal angles from the center of the circle.
# A chord that passes through the center of a circle is called a diameter and is the longest chord of that specific circle.
# If the line extensions (secant lines) of chords AB and CD intersect at a point P, then their lengths satisfy AP·PB = CP·PD (power of a point theorem).

==In conics==
The midpoints of a set of parallel chords of a conic are collinear (midpoint theorem for conics).

== In trigonometry ==
Chords were used extensively in the early development of trigonometry. The first known trigonometric table, compiled by Hipparchus in the 2nd century BC, is no longer extant but tabulated the value of the chord function for every degrees. In the 2nd century AD, Ptolemy compiled a more extensive table of chords in his book on astronomy, giving the value of the chord for angles ranging from to 180 degrees by increments of degree. Ptolemy used a circle of diameter 120, and gave chord lengths accurate to two sexagesimal (base sixty) digits after the integer part.

The chord function is defined geometrically as shown in the picture. The chord of an angle is the length of the chord between two points on a unit circle separated by that central angle. The angle &quot;θ&quot; is taken in the positive sense and must lie in the interval (radian measure). The chord function can be related to the modern sine function, by taking one of the points to be (1,0), and the other point to be (), and then using the Pythagorean theorem to calculate the chord length:

: formula_1 

The last step uses the half-angle formula. Much as modern trigonometry is built on the sine function, ancient trigonometry was built on the chord function. Hipparchus is purported to have written a twelve-volume work on chords, all now lost, so presumably, a great deal was known about them. In the table below (where &quot;c&quot; is the chord length, and &quot;D&quot; the diameter of the circle) the chord function can be shown to satisfy many identities analogous to well-known modern ones:

The inverse function exists as well:

:formula_2

==See also==
*Circular segment - the part of the sector that remains after removing the triangle formed by the center of the circle and the two endpoints of the circular arc on the boundary.
*Scale of chords
*Ptolemy&#x27;s table of chords
*Holditch&#x27;s theorem, for a chord rotating in a convex closed curve
*Circle graph
*Exsecant and excosecant
*Versine and haversine - (formula_3)
*Zindler curve (closed and simple curve in which all chords that divide the arc length into halves have the same length)
*Bertrand paradox (probability) average length of chord paradox

==References==
== External links ==

* History of Trigonometry Outline
* Trigonometric functions , focusing on history
*Chord (of a circle) With interactive animation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188191" start="2" end="7" title="Chord (geometry)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q890542" start="58" end="67" title="bowstring" label="bowstring"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="80" end="86" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="92" end="113" title="straight line segment" label="straight line segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335820" start="144" end="156" title="circular arc" label="circular arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="189" end="199" title="Infinity" label="infinitely"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="226" end="230" title="Line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q426301" start="254" end="265" title="secant line" label="secant line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645406" start="329" end="337" title="midpoint" label="midpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951719" start="354" end="361" title="Sagitta (geometry)" label="sagitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="468" end="473" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="495" end="502" title="Ellipse#Chords" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="588" end="596" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="655" end="661" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q898575" start="1088" end="1112" title="power of a point theorem" label="power of a point theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="1177" end="1182" title="conic" label="conic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419761" start="1187" end="1196" title="Collinearity" label="collinear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1198" end="1225" title=" Midpoint theorem (conics)" label="midpoint theorem for conics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="1308" end="1320" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="1371" end="1381" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257100" start="1429" end="1470" title="table of chords" label="tabulated the value of the chord function"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="1481" end="1487" title="Degree (angle)" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="1513" end="1520" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="1566" end="1587" title="Almagest" label="his book on astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q114799" start="1761" end="1772" title="sexagesimal" label="sexagesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="1903" end="1908" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36253" start="1916" end="1922" title="length" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094399" start="1990" end="2003" title="central angle" label="central angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="2155" end="2159" title="sine" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="2260" end="2279" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2349" end="2367" title="List_of_trigonometric_identities#Half-angle_formulae" label="half-angle formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q783081" start="2886" end="2902" title="Circular segment" label="Circular segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099488" start="3064" end="3079" title="Scale of chords" label="Scale of chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257100" start="3081" end="3111" title="Ptolemy&amp;#x27;s table of chords" label="Ptolemy&amp;#x27;s table of chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888583" start="3113" end="3136" title="Holditch&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Holditch&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121450" start="3185" end="3197" title="Circle graph" label="Circle graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282261" start="3199" end="3222" title="Exsecant and excosecant" label="Exsecant and excosecant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364682" start="3224" end="3245" title="Versine and haversine" label="Versine and haversine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204352" start="3261" end="3274" title="Zindler curve" label="Zindler curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q828552" start="3382" end="3412" title="Bertrand paradox (probability)" label="Bertrand paradox (probability)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297951" wikidata="Q963153" url="?curid=297951" title="William Wentworth">
<text>William Charles Wentworth (August 179020 March 1872) was an Australian statesman, pastoralist, explorer, newspaper editor, lawyer, politician and author, who became one of the wealthiest and most powerful figures in colonial New South Wales. He was among the first colonists to articulate a nascent Australian identity.

Wentworth was the leading advocate for the rights of emancipists, trial by jury and representative self-government; he led the drafting of New South Wales&#x27; first self-governing constitution establishing the Parliament of New South Wales. The establishment of Australia&#x27;s first independent newspaper by Wentworth and Robert Wardell led to the introduction of press freedom in Australia. A proponent of secular and universal education, he participated in the creation of the state education system and legislated for the creation of Australia&#x27;s first university, the University of Sydney. His views took a strong conservative turn in the 1840s, with Wentworth ending his previous support for free migration and expressing more restrictive views on voting rights, though he moderated the latter upon becoming President of the Legislative Council in 1861. Throughout his life, he promoted the subjugation of Aboriginal Australians. Wentworth consistently advocated for Australian nationhood both in Australia and Britain, and gained credit from Sir Henry Parkes for his advocacy of self-government; a key figure in Australian and New South Wales history, he is widely commemorated.

Wentworth, Gregory Blaxland and William Lawson led the 1813 expedition across the Blue Mountains, the first successful British traversal of the region.

==Birth==
William Charles Wentworth was born on the vessel HMS &quot;Surprize&quot; off the coast of the penal settlement of Norfolk Island in August 1790 to D&#x27;Arcy Wentworth and Catherine Crowley. Catherine was a convict while his father, D&#x27;Arcy, was a member of the aristocratic Anglo-Irish Wentworth family, who had avoided prosecution for highway robbery by accepting the position of assistant surgeon in the colony of New South Wales.

Due to his mother being a felon and his conception being out of wedlock, confusion has existed around the exact date of William Wentworth&#x27;s birth. His father, however, acknowledged him as a legitimate son and he became a part of colonial society as a Wentworth family member.

==Early life==
As a young boy William Wentworth moved from Norfolk Island to Sydney with his parents and younger brothers in 1796. The family lived at Parramatta, where his father became a prosperous landowner. His mother died in 1800. In 1803, William and his brothers Dorset and Matthew, were sent to England to be educated at an exclusive school run by Alexander Crombie in Greenwich.

Wentworth failed to gain entry into both the East India Company College and the Royal Military Academy and with his career prospects blunted, he returned to Sydney in 1810. He rode his father&#x27;s horse Gig to victory at Hyde Park in the first official horse races on Australian soil.

In 1811, he was appointed acting Provost Marshal by Governor Lachlan Macquarie, and given a grant of of prime land along the Nepean River which Wentworth named Vermont.

==Crossing the Blue Mountains==

In 1813 Wentworth, along with Gregory Blaxland and William Lawson, led the expedition which found a route across the Blue Mountains west of Sydney and opened up the grazing lands of inland New South Wales. Wentworth kept a journal of the exploration which begins by describing the first day of the journey:

On the Eleventh of May our party consisting of Mr. Gregory Blaxland, Lieutenant Lawson and Myself with four servants quitted Mr. Gregory Blaxland&#x27;s farm on the South Creek and on the 29th of the June Month descended from the Mountain into forest land having travelled as nearly as I can compute about 60 Miles.

In the journal, Wentworth describes the landscapes they were exploring:

A country of so singular a description could in my opinion only have been produced by some Mighty convulsion in Nature.In his 1823 epic &quot;Australasia&quot;, Wentworth once again references what he saw on the expedition:
:&quot;Hail mighty ridge! That from thy azure brow&quot;
:&quot;Survey&#x27;st these fertile plains, that stretch below&quot;

The town of Wentworth Falls in the Blue Mountains commemorates his role in the expedition. As a reward he was granted .

In 1814 Wentworth continued his adventurous lifestyle by joining a sandalwood-getting voyage to the South Pacific aboard the &quot;Cumberland&quot; under Captain Philip Goodenough. This vessel reached Rarotonga where conflict with the local people resulted in five of the crew being killed. Wentworth was nearly killed himself but with the aid of a pistol was able to flee to the &quot;Cumberland&quot; which sailed back to Sydney.

==Studying in England==
Wentworth returned to England in 1816 where he studied law at the Magdalene and Peterhouse colleges at Cambridge University. He became a barrister and was admitted to the bar in 1822.

In between studying and writing, Wentworth also travelled to Europe, spending much of his time in Paris. He formulated an idea of establishing himself as a leader of a pastoral aristocracy in New South Wales and attempted to arrange his marriage with Elizabeth Macarthur, the daughter of the highly influential colonist John Macarthur. Wentworth however failed in this attempt after arguing with the Macarthur patriarch over his convict heritage and a loan.

=== Writings ===
Wentworth became involved in literary pursuits, and by 1824 had published a number of notable works. He had created a minor stir in 1816 by anonymously publishing a satirical verse attacking the Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales, George Molle. In 1819 he published a book entitled: &quot;A Statistical, Historical, and Political Description of the Colony of New South Wales and Its Dependent Settlements in Van Diemen&#x27;s Land.&quot; In this book Wentworth advocated for an elected assembly for New South Wales, free press, trial by jury and settlement of Australia by free emigrants rather than convicts. It served as the source material for the first theatrical play set in Van Diemen&#x27;s Land (modern-day Tasmania), the bushranging melodrama &quot;Michael Howe the Terror! of Van Diemen&#x27;s Land&quot;, which premiered in London in 1821.

In 1823 he also published an epic poem &quot;Australasia&quot;, the first book of verse by a native-born Australian poet, which contained the lines:

:&quot;And, O Britannia!... may this—thy last-born infant—then arise,&quot;
:&quot;To glad thy heart, and greet thy parent eyes;&quot;
:&quot;And Australasia float, with flag unfurl&#x27;d,&quot;
:&quot;A new Britannia in another world!&quot;
As well as describing the scenery Wentworth saw in the Blue Mountains, the poem featured a romanticised portrayal of the lifestyle of Aboriginal Australians.

==Influential colonist in New South Wales==

=== Advocate for reform ===
Wentworth returned to Sydney in 1824, accompanied by fellow barrister Robert Wardell. They actively campaigned for the introduction of self-government and trial by jury by establishing &quot;The Australian&quot; (not to be confused with the present-day paper of the same name), the colony&#x27;s first privately owned paper. Governor Sir Thomas Brisbane realised there was little point in continuing to censor &quot;The Sydney Gazette&quot; when &quot;The Australian&quot; was uncensored and so government censorship of newspapers was abandoned in 1824 and the freedom of the press began in Australia. With an editorial leaning toward the rights of ex-convicts (known as emancipists), the paper was in frequent conflict with Governor Ralph Darling, who attempted unsuccessfully to have it banned in 1826. Wentworth also became a director of the Bank of New South Wales in 1825.

Of the liberal-minded &quot;Australian&quot;, one contemporary who commented on flogging and other harsh punishments administered to convicts in New South Wales went on to say:

Wentworth&#x27;s support for the rights of emancipists pitted him against the opposing exclusives. During an October 1825 public meeting to recognise outgoing Governor Brisbane, Wentworth expressed a hope “deprive&quot; the exclusives &quot;of their venom and their fangs” and moved a successful motion requesting Brisbane lobby Westminster for “the immediate establishment” of trial by jury and “Taxation by Representation.” Of his call for an elected legislature, Wentworth noted “there are colonists of … very great influence at home who are inimical to the establishment in New South Wales of the British Constitution.” Wentworth and Wardell opined in &quot;The Australian&quot;:Public meetings open the eyes of the people—shew them their own strength—moral as well as physical and convey to their reasoning faculties truths, to which, but for them, they might remain strangers. Public meetings expose the irresistibility of the people, if they firmly and legally claim their political due.The death of Private Joseph Sudds in November 1826 inflamed Wentworth, prompting him to demand Governor Darling&#x27;s recall. Sudds and Private Patrick Thompson had broken the law in an effort to be discharged. Darling, seeking to make an example of the two, sentenced Thompson and already-ill Sudds to seven years&#x27; hard labour with the unusual additional punishment of being chained from the neck for the entirety of their sentences. Wentworth declared Darling guilty of &quot;murder, or at least a high misdemeanour&quot; for Sudds&#x27; death.

In 1827, Wentworth&#x27;s father died and William inherited much of his highly valuable assets and property, becoming one of the wealthiest men in the colony and growing his land holdings to over 7,000 acres. He purchased land at Vaucluse and built a mansion named Vaucluse House, which he moved into from Petersham. Wentworth also acquired property in Homebush.

On 26 October 1829, Wentworth married Sarah Cox, a convict-descended currency lass who had been represented by him in her successful 1825 breach of promise suit. The proceeding had been the first such case in Australia. William and Sarah had previously named their daughter Thomasine in honour of Sir Thomas Brisbane. A love poem from William to Sarah appeared in &quot;The Australian&quot; three days prior to their marriage.

In 1830, the Imperial Parliament incorporated Wentworth&#x27;s legal argument that convicts could only be removed from assignments if to their benefit. It required the Governor to consult the Executive Council before doing so. This followed protracted conflict between Governor Darling and reformists including Wentworth, involving Darling&#x27;s reassignment of &quot;The Monitor&quot;&#x27;s foreman printer to a road gang.

===Powerful squatter===
Wentworth expanded his property holdings, obtaining large pastoral grazing licenses throughout New South Wales. In 1832 he acquired land at Gammon Plains and in 1836 he bought the Windermere estate expanding his Hunter River holdings. In the 1830s he formed partnerships with Captain Thomas Raine and John Christie in taking up land along the Macquarie River from Narromine to Haddon Rig. In the 1840s with John Charles Lloyd, he acquired further massive landholdings along the Namoi River and at Manilla. In the Murrumbidgee River region, Wentworth employed Augustus Morris to establish huge squatting licenses in his name.

Some of these properties were immense and became famous as highly valuable sheep and cattle stations. These included the 120,000 acre Yanko property, the 200,000 acre Tala station, the Wambianna cattle property and the Galathra and Burburgate holdings. Wentworth was able to obtain most of these vast accumulations of land for only the £10 annual squatting fee, and after stocking them, was able to sell the properties for considerable profit.

In 1839, Wentworth led a consortium of Sydney speculators in an attempt to acquire large amounts of land in New Zealand from the resident Ngāi Tahu people. In exchange for paying chief Tūhawaiki a lump sum of £100 with an annual payment of £50, as well as £20 upfront and £10 annually for the other chiefs, Wentworth laid claim to 8 million hectares which amounted to around a third of the entire New Zealand land mass. This included the third of the South Island purchased by Edward Gibbon Wakefield from Te Rauparaha, an enemy of the chiefs Wentworth dealt with. The deed, 1000 words long, was densely written. Governor George Gipps intervened and prevented the transaction from proceeding, openly accusing Wentworth of an outrageous and immoral fraud against the Māori, whilst Wentworth argued that they had a right to dispose of their land as they saw fit. This heightened the fierce enmity between the squatters and Gipps. After a series of tit-for-tat retaliations, Wentworth swore &quot;eternal vengeance&quot; against Gipps.

===Budding politician===

During the 1830s, Wentworth continued to push his ideals of free emigration, trial by jury, rights for emancipists and elected representation. On 29 May 1835, a meeting chaired by Wentworth discussed Henry Lytton Bulwer&#x27;s proposal for the formation of a colonial committee which would act through a Parliamentary Advocate, for which Bulwer nominated himself, to represent New South Wales. The meeting resolved to raise £2,000 to fund the position by establishing the Australian Patriotic Association. Following a complaint over the £5 fee for directing members, Wentworth reportedly remarked that &quot;Ignorance and poverty went together.&quot; He argued that the stipulation would ensure &quot;men of talent, education and experience and exclude only the ignorant pretender.” Wentworth committed £50 to the organisation.

The association was established by Wentworth and ex-convict William Bland and is believed to be the first political party in Australia. While it began as a broad church, division soon grew over the rights of emancipists, augmented by Wentworth drafting two bills for the association proposing not just representative government but also the repeal of all restrictions on trial by jury.

In 1842, the British government passed the Constitution Act for New South Wales which allowed for elected representatives to outnumber those nominated by the Crown in the Legislative Council of New South Wales. The following year, 24 members were elected by eligible land-holding male citizens of the colony. Although these changes seemed to democratise governance in New South Wales, it in fact markedly increased the influence of the wealthy land-holding squatters due to the prerequisite of owning at least £2,000 worth of land in order to be a candidate. Wentworth was elected to the Council in 1843 for Town of Sydney and soon became the leader of the conservative party, opposed to the liberal-minded members led by Charles Cowper. The political climate in New South Wales had changed and with Wentworth becoming one of the wealthiest and most powerful landholders in the colony, his views became very conservative.

=== Squatter leader ===

Wentworth positioned himself in the legislature as a vocal leader for the wealthy squatters and landowners. He vehemently opposed any reforms that threatened the status of this &quot;squattocracy&quot; class and was one of the chief opponents of Governor Gipps in 1846 who wanted to fund free emigration to the colony through additional tariffs on squatting licences. With Gipps out of the picture, the squatters achieved dominance.

Convict transportation to the colony ended in 1840 and with it the squatters lost a very cheap source of labour to work on their properties. Wentworth no longer approved of free European migration to fill the void as this was more costly. With other members of the &quot;squattocracy&quot; such as James Macarthur, Wentworth advocated for the introduction of indentured Chinese coolie labour and procured them as servants at his Vaucluse mansion and on his grazing properties. Wentworth advanced Chinese coolies six Spanish dollars for their passage, to be paid back over a five year labour contract. He pressed charges against absconders, who were punished with jail terms of hard labour. On one occasion, an interpreter for the Chinese workers verbally abused Wentworth following the sentencing of one of the workers, and was subsequently charged by Wentworth for absconding, and as such was sentenced to two months&#x27; imprisonment with hard labour. During the trial, Wentworth quipped that the prisoners ought to be forced to work on treadmills.

In 1851, he argued for the death penalty, arguing that &quot;hardened felons, convicted of repeated grave offences would be punished best by death&quot; and that such punishment would be &quot;more reformatory in its effects&quot; than any other. He argued that the British Government &quot;had in its system of punishment gone too far, and had gone from the extreme of too great severity to too little.&quot; In light of these sentiments, &quot;The&quot; &quot;Australian&quot;, the progressive paper that Wentworth was no longer associated with, stated in the early 1850s that Wentworth&#x27;s opinions were then worth nothing.

Wentworth continued to advocate for causes related to self-government. During his time leading elected conservatives in the Legislative Council between 1843 and 1854, Wentworth led agitation for the local control of Crown lands and revenue. In 1848, Wentworth proposed the establishment of &quot;a Congress from the various Colonial Legislatures&quot; to legislate on &quot;inter-colonial questions&quot; in response to a suggestion from Earl Grey for a &quot;central authority&quot; for the Australian colonies. This preceded Australian federation in 1901.

Wentworth, who owned property in the Hunter Region, chaired a public meeting establishing the Hunter River Railway Company in April 1853. The company devised the railway line between Newcastle and Maitland, though it ran into financial trouble and was bought by the Government during construction. Wentworth foreshadowed the line&#x27;s extension to Scone up north and Sydney down south; the line ultimately developed into the Main North line connecting Sydney and Queensland.

At the end of his career, Wentworth would change tact on the issue of land administration, agreeing to land reforms opposed by the squatters.

===Aboriginal Australians===

As a young writer in 1819, Wentworth saw Aboriginal Australians as occupying &quot;the lowest place in the gradatory scale of the human species.&quot;Thirty years’ intercourse with Europeans has not effected the slightest change in their habit; and those even, who have the most intermixed with the colonists, have never been prevailed upon to practise any of the arts of civilized life ... Frequent attempts have been made to divert them from their vagrant propensities, and to adopt some of the fixed occupations of social man; but except in one or two instances, these attempts have been utterly unsuccessful.

In 1820, Wentworth noted that the outbreak of smallpox decimating Aboriginal communities around Sydney was retold in traditional songs. He romanticised the lifestyle of Aboriginal Australians in his 1823 epic &quot;Australasia&quot;.

In 1827, Wentworth was the defence counsel for Lieutenant Nathaniel Lowe who was accused and acquitted of shooting dead an Aboriginal prisoner. He argued that Englishmen were justified in punitively killing Aboriginal people as the law had an &quot;inability&quot; to punish them and therefore did not exist to protect them, whom he described as being &quot;one degree just above the beasts of the field — possessing no understanding beyond a confused notion of right and wrong, and that is all.&quot;We could not, according to any principles, have assumed any right of sovereignty over them; they are the free occupants of the demesne or soil; it belongs to them by law of nations, anterior to any laws which follow from human institutions ... there is no right of empire among them, no Chieftain in a condition, from their vagabond state, to make a treaty with the head of any civilized government. If there be no public compact of this sort, there can only exist a tacit compact among individuals, which goes no further than to say, we will be at peace with you if you keep peaceable with us, and that compact would be sufficient to authorize the gentleman at the bar to punish any of these natives who violated this compact, in any way he might think fit.In 1844, there was a push to reform the judicial system to allow evidence to be given by Aboriginals. Wentworth was vociferous in his opposition, claiming that the evidence given by &quot;this savage race&quot; would be comparative to the &quot;chatterings of the ourang-outang,&quot; and would enable them to &quot;wreak their revenge on the unfortunate white man&quot;. When the issue was brought before the Council again in 1849, he referred to the proposal as &quot;most fatal to the natives themselves [and] most cruel to the white inhabitants.&quot; He simultaneously referred to the hangings of the perpetrators of the 1838 Myall Creek massacre as &quot;judicial murder&quot; – it was reported in his obituary that &quot;the Crown was thought by Mr. Wentworth, and by many more, to have strained the law against those who slew the savages,&quot; with their executions &quot;bitterly and even fiercely resented by Wentworth, and ... perhaps, never forgiven or forgotten.&quot; While arguing against the proposal, Wentworth remarked:...remember when the Cowpasture tribe made an inroad upon the settled lands, and on that occasion what was the course adopted by the Government? The military were ordered out by the Government—they opposed these savage marauders, and a slaughter, numerically considered very inconsiderable, ensued. But the force of the bullets and bayonets of the English forces prevailed, and peace and quiet was for ever obtained. It was not the policy of a wise Government to attempt the perpetuation of the aboriginal race of New South Wales by any protective means. They must give way before the arms, aye! even the diseases of civilised nations—they must give way before they attained the power of those nations.In 1849, Wentworth supported the establishment of a Native Police force, believing &quot;it would be the most powerful, perhaps, the only means, of averting those collisions between the blacks and the border settlers which had hitherto unfortunately existed.&quot; The first Commandant of the Native Police for the northern districts, Frederick Walker, was a personal friend of Wentworth&#x27;s who also managed his immense property at Tala on the Murrumbidgee.

Wentworth employed a large number of Aboriginal stockmen.:96 When the Wentworths sailed to Britain in 1862, their Aboriginal servant Bobby travelled with them. Bobby returned after finding the winters too cold, Sarah Wentworth remarking that he was “naturally so clever and sensible that I hope he will be content to go back to Vaucluse.”

=== Education advocate ===

Wentworth was a strong supporter of universal and secular education. He became a shareholder in the newly-opened Sydney College, a secular boys&#x27; school, in 1835.:28 He was involved in the establishment of state primary education, supporting in 1844 the introduction of &quot;Lord Stanley&#x27;s system of national education&quot; used in Ireland, modified so that:...instead of the clergy and pastors of the several denominations being allowed to impart religious instruction in the schools, the children be allowed to be absent from school one day in every week exclusive of Sunday, for the purpose of receiving such instruction elsewhere...Wentworth&#x27;s amendment passed and National Board of Education was established in 1848 following a change of governor; schools were established for both sexes.Wentworth was also key to the establishment of the University of Sydney, one of the first public, non-denominational and secular universities in the British Empire. It came about when Wentworth and Sir Charles Nicholson, a graduate from the University of Edinburgh Medical School, tabled a plan to expand the existing Sydney College – of which Wentworth was on the governing council – into a university. Wentworth argued that a state secular university was imperative for the growth of a society aspiring towards self-government, and that it would provide the opportunity for &quot;the child of every class, to become great and useful in the destinies of his country&quot;.

I see In this measure the path opened to the poor man to the highest position which the country can afford him. So far from being an institution for the rich, I take It to be an institution for the poor. ... I trust that, from the pregnant womb of this institution will arise a long list of illustrious names—of statesmen—of patriots—of philanthropists—of philosophers—of poets and of heroes, who will shed a deathless halo, not only on their country, but upon the University which called them into being.

He promoted access on the basis of merit rather than religious or social status. Speaking in the Legislative Council in September 1849, Wentworth argued for the government&#x27;s responsibility to provide for the people&#x27;s education.No doubt on the subject of education great and deplorable apathy had existed in the colony; but while he wished not to excuse the community from their share of the blame, he must confess that this apathy seemed to him to be more chargeable on the Government than on the public. If it was the duty of the governments of other colonies to provide education for the people, that duty became infinitely more imperious here. If it was the duty of the State to instruct the free and virtuous population of those colonies, how much greater the necessity to enlighten the tainted population of this ... it was the paramount duty of the Government to provide for the instruction of the people, and to reclaim it from the mood taint attaching to it, by elevating and enlightening the minds of its inhabitants.Wentworth was vociferous on the university&#x27;s secular mandate, declaring that clergy &quot;ought to be excluded altogether from ... [its] management ... its gates must be open to all whether they were disciples of Moses, of Jesus, of Brahmin, of Mohammed, of Vishnu or of Buddha.&quot; Though not a follower of organised religion, Wentworth agitated for public funds to be granted for a Jewish minister, and was sympathetic to Catholics in the 1820s when Protestantism was the official religion in New South Wales.

Radical Sydney newspaper &quot;The People&#x27;s Advocate&quot; praised Wentworth for his efforts to establish the university. The paper saw in it a kind of atonement, perceiving &quot;in some of his recent actions evidence of a latent consciousness of not having discharged, his duty to his country, and of a desire to make some expiation for his culpable neglect, not to use a stronger term.&quot;

It took two attempts on Wentworth&#x27;s behalf before the plan was finally adopted, culminating in the passage of the &quot;University of Sydney Act 1850&quot; (NSW) on 24 September 1850. Wentworth was among the first members of the university&#x27;s senate.

Wentworth helped endow the university, and donations from Wentworth funded the establishment of the Wentworth Medal in 1854 and the Wentworth Fellowship in 2020. The 1972-built Wentworth Building is named after him, and a statue of him stands in the Great Hall.

=== Self government ===
Well before Wentworth led the creation of the first self-governing New South Wales constitution, he advocated for representative government in the colony. In his 1819 book, Wentworth wrote:Every community which has not a free government is devoid of that security of person and property which has been found to be the chief stimulus to individual exertion and the only basis on which social edifice can repose in a solid and durable tranquility.In April 1851, Wentworth established a committee to formulate a motion against the perceived inadequacies of the Australian Colonies Government Act. The &quot;Declaration and Remonstrance&quot; declared, among other things, that &quot;the Imperial Parliament has not, nor of right ought to have any power to tax the people of this Colony,&quot; and that &quot;plenary powers of legislation should be conferred upon and exercised by the Colonial Legislature ... [and] no bills should be reserved&quot; for the Imperial Parliament unless they affected the Empire. Sir Henry Parkes later wrote of Wentworth that &quot;His Declaration and Remonstrance is so important as one of the foundation-stones of the fabric of our constitutional liberties.&quot;

In 1853 Wentworth chaired a committee to draft a new constitution for New South Wales, which was to receive full responsible self-government from Britain. His draft provided for a powerful unelected Legislative Council and an elected Legislative Assembly with high property qualifications for voting and membership. He also suggested the establishment of a colonial peerage drawn from the landowning class. He remarked that he &quot;agreed with that ancient and venerable constitution that treated those who had no property as infants, or idiots, unfit to have any voice in the management of the State.&quot; This draft aroused the bitter opposition of the democrats and radicals such as Daniel Deniehy, who ridiculed Wentworth&#x27;s plans for what he called a &quot;bunyip aristocracy&quot;. The draft constitution was substantially changed to make it more democratic, although the Legislative Council remained unelected.

=== Australian confederation ===
Wentworth&#x27;s constitution committee also proposed a General Assembly of the Australian Colonies to legislate on intercolonial matters, including tariffs, railways, lighthouses, penal settlements, gold and the mail. This was the first outline of the future Australian Commonwealth to be presented in an official colonial legislative report. Wentworth had proposed a &quot;Congress&quot; of the colonial legislatures in 1848.

In 1857 while in London, Wentworth produced a draft Bill proposing a confederation of the Australian colonies, with each colony given equal representation in an intercolonial assembly, a proposal subsequently endorsed by his General Association for the Australian Colonies. He further proposed that a &quot;permissive Act&quot; be passed by Parliament allowing the colonies of Australia or any subset of them which was not a penal settlement to federate at will. Wentworth, hoping to garner as broad support as possible, proposed a loose association of the colonies, which was criticised by Robert Lowe. The Secretary of State subsequently opted not to introduce the Bill stating it would probably lead to &quot;dissension and discontent&quot;, distributing it nonetheless to the colonies for their responses. While there was in-principle support for a union of the colonies, the matter was ultimately deferred while NSW Premier Charles Cowper and Henry Parkes preferred to focus on liberalising Wentworth&#x27;s squatter-friendly constitution.

==Return to England==

Wentworth retired from the Legislative Council of New South Wales in 1854 and sailed for England in March of that same year. His speech to the public during his departure ceremony at Circular Quay was met with both cheers and jeers.

Once in England, he founded the &#x27;General Association for the Australian Colonies&#x27;, whose object was to obtain a federal assembly for the whole of Australia. He refused an offer for a baronetcy, and was a member of the Conservative Party and the Conservative Club. He returned to New South Wales for a brief period in 1860-61 to lead the New South Wales Legislative Council, but otherwise remained in England at his Merly House estate. He was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Geographic Society. Despite his ill health, Wentworth continued to attend colonial dinners including for the establishment of what became the Royal Commonwealth Society.:88

== President of the Legislative Council ==
Upon becoming President of the Legislative Council, Wentworth agreed with Premier Charles Cowper that the Council should be elected and that the Robertson Land Acts should pass, despite the opposition of squatters. This opposition had culminated in the resignation of the previous speaker on the last sitting day of the prior Council.

Wentworth proposed an elected Legislative Council with high property qualifications and a proportional representation quota system. This turned out to be too liberal for Cowper, who let it lapse, preferring reasonable appointees to popularly elected members.

==Death and burial==
Wentworth died on 20 March 1872 at Merley House, Wimborne, Dorset, in England. His combined wealth at the time of his passing was £170,000 (). At his request his body was returned to Sydney for burial. He was given the colony&#x27;s first state funeral on 6 May 1873, a day declared by the governor as a public holiday. Around 65,000 people lined the route of the funeral procession to Vaucluse where Wentworth was buried. The Wentworth Mausoleum was soon after constructed over his grave, overseen by his wife Sarah.

==Marriage and family==
On 26 October 1829 at St Philip&#x27;s Church, Sydney, Wentworth married Sarah Cox (1805–1880). Sarah, the daughter of two convicts, Francis Cox and Frances Morton, had been represented by Wentworth in her successful 1825 breach of promise lawsuit against a certain Captain John Payne. Carol Liston, biographer of Sarah Wentworth, noted that her commissioning of various domestic duties was fundamental to the success of her husband and children. William and Sarah had seven daughters and three sons::24-25
* Thomasine Wentworth (1825–1913)
* William Charles Wentworth (1827–1859)
* Fanny Katherine Wentworth (1829–1893), named after her parents’ mothers:21-22
* Fitzwilliam Wentworth (1833–1915) married Mary Jane Hill, daughter of George Hill
** William Charles Wentworth III (1871–1949) married Florence Denise Griffiths, daughter of George Neville Griffiths
*** William Charles Wentworth IV (1907–2003) (known as Bill Wentworth, Liberal member of Parliament 1949–77, inaugural Minister in charge of Aboriginal Affairs under the Prime Minister)
*** Diana Wentworth Wentworth married Mungo Ballardie MacCallum (1913–99)
**** Mungo Wentworth MacCallum (1941–2020)
* Sarah Eleanor Wentworth (1835–1857)
* Eliza Sophia Wentworth (1838–1898)
* Isabella Christiana (&quot;Christina&quot;) Wentworth (1840–1856)
* Laura Wentworth (1842–1887) married Henry William Keays-Young in 1872.
* Edith Wentworth (1845–1891) married Rev. Sir Charles Gordon-Cumming-Dunbar, 9th Baronet in 1872.
* D&#x27;Arcy Bland Wentworth (1848–1922).

In 1830, he fathered a child, Henry, out of wedlock with Jamima Eagar, the estranged wife of Edward Eagar. Wentworth had supported her with money and a house on Macquarie Street after Edward abandoned her.

Wentworth financially supported his various half-brothers and sisters from his father and Anne Lawes, paying for their education.:26

==Legacy==

The towns of Wentworth and Wentworth Falls, the federal Division of Wentworth in Sydney&#x27;s Eastern Suburbs, the Wentworth Falls waterfall, Wentworth Avenue in the Canberra suburb of Kingston, and the Wentworth Shire were named after him. Wentworth Park in Sydney&#x27;s Inner West was named after Wentworth in 1882.

The University of Sydney Wentworth Medal was established in 1854 from a gift of £200 from Wentworth. It was initially presented to the best essay in English prose and now rewards &quot;an outstanding essay addressing a nominated question.&quot; The Wentworth Fellowship, a postgraduate research scholarship within the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, was established in 2020 from an 1862 donation by Wentworth. The Wentworth Building, built in 1972 to accommodate the University of Sydney Union, is named after him. The Wentworth Institute of Higher Education, established in 2010, is named after Wentworth.

A large portrait of Wentworth was erected in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly in 1859 following a motion from Sir Henry Parkes. The original Legislative Council room in New South Wales Parliament House now adjoining the Legislative Assembly chamber was in 2013 named the Wentworth Room after D&#x27;Arcy and William Charles Wentworth.

Wentworth&#x27;s estate in Vaucluse became Australia&#x27;s first official house museum, established as such in 1915. He is recognised in the name of the Wentworth Memorial Church, built in honour of servicemen and women of the Second World War. The church and the adjacent Wentworth Mausoleum fall within the former boundaries of Wentworth&#x27;s estate.

Historian Manning Clark described Wentworth as &quot;Australia&#x27;s greatest native son,&quot; which Jeremy Stoljar writes &quot;seems to have been a description of Wentworth&#x27;s standing in the colony at the time – specifically, at about the time of Wentworth&#x27;s marriage in 1829&quot;. K. R. Cramp of the Royal Australian Historical Society refers to Wentworth as &quot;Australia&#x27;s greatest son&quot; in his booklet &quot;William Charles Wentworth of Vaucluse House&quot;, first published in 1918. Robert Lowe referred to the unselfish devotion to his nation by &quot;this great son of Australia&quot;.

Wentworth&#x27;s clash with Darling was dramatised in the TV series &quot;The Patriots&quot; (1962).

In 1963 he was honoured, together with Blaxland and Lawson, on a postage stamp issued by Australia Post depicting the Blue Mountains crossing, and again in 1974 on the anniversary of the first newspaper publication.

A statue of Wentworth, sculpted by Pietro Tenerani of Rome, stands at the University of Sydney. Another statue of Wentworth is located on the exterior of the Department of Lands building in Sydney. A bust of him was unveiled in Coronation Park, Wentworth Falls in 2016.
==Works==
* &quot;A Statistical Account of the British Settlements in Australasia&quot;, 1819
* &quot;Journal of an expedition, across the Blue Mountains, 11 May-6 June 1813&quot;, 1813
* &quot;Australasia: a poem written for the Chancellor&#x27;s Medal at the Cambridge commencement, July 1823&quot;, London: G. and W.B. Whittaker, 1823

==Sources==
* Barton, &quot;The Poets and Prose Writers of New South Wales&quot; (Sydney, 1866)
* Rusden, &quot;History of Australia&quot; (London, 1883)
* Sir Bernard Burke. &quot;History of the Colonial Gentry&quot; Vol 1: 1891: pps.95-97: Wentworth
* Lewis Deer and John Barr: &quot;Australia&#x27;s First Patriot: The Story of William C. Wentworth&quot;: Angus &amp; Robertson Ltd.: Sydney 1911.
* K. R. Cramp, M. A.: &quot;William Charles Wentworth of Vaucluse House&quot;: A.H. Pettifer Government Printer: Third Edition 1923
* Michael Persse: &quot;Wentworth, William Charles (1790–1872)&quot;
* Michael Persse. &quot;W. C. Wentworth&quot;, Oxford University Press, Melbourne 1972 (comprising 30 pages).
* Carol Liston (1988). &quot;Sarah Wentworth, Mistress of Vaucluse&quot;: Historic Houses Trust of NSW .
* John Ritchie (1997). &quot;The Wentworths: Father and Son.&quot; The Miegunyah Press at Melbourne University Press. .
* Ivy Bailey (1999). &quot;Single-handed Patriot: A Story of William Charles Wentworth&quot;: Book House: Glebe, NSW. .
* Andrew Tink (2009), &quot;William Charles Wentworth: Australia&#x27;s greatest native son&quot; Allen &amp; Unwin. 
* Robert Griffin, Joy Hughes, Anne Toy and Peter Watts: &quot;Vaucluse House: A History and Guide&quot;: Historic Houses Trust of New South Wales: 3rd Edition 2006.

==See also==
* Political families of Australia: &quot;Wentworth/Hill/Griffiths/Scott/Cooper family&quot;
* Wentworth family

== References ==
== External links ==
* Portrait of William Charles Wentworth (bronze medallion) in the National Portrait Gallery, London
* Portrait of William Charles Wentworth (copy print) digitised and held by the State Library of Queensland
* The Wentworth family
* New South Wales State Library: Catalogue: Crossing the Blue Mountains
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q963153" start="0" end="25" title="William Wentworth" label="William Charles Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="225" end="240" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440952" start="299" end="318" title="Culture of Australia" label="Australian identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368998" start="374" end="385" title="Emancipist" label="emancipists"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="387" end="400" title="Jury trial" label="trial by jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="405" end="419" title="Representative democracy" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="420" end="435" title="Responsible government" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365521" start="533" end="562" title="Parliament of New South Wales" label="Parliament of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962575" start="602" end="629" title="The Australian (1824 newspaper)" label="first independent newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350859" start="647" end="661" title="Robert Wardell" label="Robert Wardell"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="689" end="702" title="Freedom of the press" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894104" start="744" end="763" title="universal education" label="universal education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="804" end="819" title="State school" label="state education"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="901" end="921" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241351" start="1142" end="1178" title="President of the New South Wales Legislative Council" label="President of the Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="1240" end="1262" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607143" start="1377" end="1393" title="Henry Parkes" label="Sir Henry Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174825" start="1447" end="1457" title="History of Australia" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397132" start="1462" end="1485" title="History of New South Wales" label="New South Wales history"/>
<link wikidata="Q962593" start="1526" end="1542" title="Gregory Blaxland" label="Gregory Blaxland"/>
<link wikidata="Q249724" start="1547" end="1561" title="William Lawson (explorer)" label="William Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q883156" start="1566" end="1585" title="1813 crossing of the Blue Mountains" label="the 1813 expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q667529" start="1597" end="1611" title="Blue Mountains (New South Wales)" label="Blue Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457405" start="1727" end="1751" title="Surprize (1780 ship)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Surprize&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="1793" end="1807" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272905" start="1826" end="1847" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977267" start="1971" end="1987" title="Wentworth family" label="Wentworth family"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="2021" end="2036" title="highwayman" label="highway robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2101" end="2116" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21319" start="2552" end="2562" title="Parramatta, New South Wales" label="Parramatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q22020748" start="2671" end="2677" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth Jr." label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2704" end="2711" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718658" start="2757" end="2774" title="Alexander Crombie" label="Alexander Crombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="2778" end="2787" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q142599" start="2835" end="2861" title="East India Company College" label="East India Company College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573631" start="2870" end="2892" title="Royal Military Academy, Woolwich" label="Royal Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144894" start="3013" end="3022" title="Hyde Park, Sydney" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252814" start="3111" end="3126" title="Provost Marshal" label="Provost Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="3130" end="3138" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q467694" start="3139" end="3156" title="Lachlan Macquarie" label="Lachlan Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q646893" start="3203" end="3215" title="Nepean River" label="Nepean River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138798" start="3238" end="3245" title="Cobbitty, New South Wales" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q962593" start="3311" end="3327" title="Gregory Blaxland" label="Gregory Blaxland"/>
<link wikidata="Q249724" start="3332" end="3346" title="William Lawson (explorer)" label="William Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q667529" start="3398" end="3412" title="Blue Mountains (Australia)" label="Blue Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651890" start="3754" end="3765" title="South Creek (New South Wales)" label="South Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567289" start="4342" end="4357" title="Wentworth Falls" label="Wentworth Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122366" start="4518" end="4528" title="sandalwood" label="sandalwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q471793" start="4652" end="4661" title="Rarotonga" label="Rarotonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="4974" end="4983" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q650068" start="4988" end="4998" title="Peterhouse, Cambridge" label="Peterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="5011" end="5031" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683816" start="5063" end="5082" title="admitted to the bar" label="admitted to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5191" end="5196" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424449" start="5261" end="5281" title="squattocracy" label="pastoral aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700948" start="5413" end="5427" title="John Macarthur (wool pioneer)" label="John Macarthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q24033923" start="5804" end="5816" title="George Molle" label="George Molle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627286" start="6303" end="6314" title="bushranger" label="bushranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831265" start="6331" end="6343" title="Michael Howe (bushranger)" label="Michael Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350859" start="7120" end="7134" title="Robert Wardell" label="Robert Wardell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962575" start="7241" end="7255" title="The Australian (1824 newspaper)" label="The Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q376367" start="7388" end="7403" title="Thomas Brisbane" label="Thomas Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041168" start="7466" end="7484" title="The Sydney Gazette" label="The Sydney Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="7611" end="7631" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368998" start="7721" end="7731" title="emancipist" label="emancipist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365838" start="7784" end="7797" title="Ralph Darling" label="Ralph Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049280" start="7895" end="7918" title="Bank of New South Wales" label="Bank of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="8009" end="8017" title="flogging" label="flogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="8708" end="8728" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="British Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916383" start="9885" end="9893" title="Vaucluse, New South Wales" label="Vaucluse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917248" start="9920" end="9934" title="Vaucluse House" label="Vaucluse House"/>
<link wikidata="Q965020" start="9961" end="9970" title="Petersham, New South Wales" label="Petersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531585" start="10008" end="10016" title="Homebush, New South Wales" label="Homebush"/>
<link wikidata="Q109887078" start="10057" end="10066" title="Sarah Wentworth" label="Sarah Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002581" start="10088" end="10101" title="Currency lads and lasses" label="currency lass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959116" start="10157" end="10174" title="breach of promise" label="breach of promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="10460" end="10479" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Imperial Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419824" start="10639" end="10656" title="Executive Council of New South Wales" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014209" start="10810" end="10833" title="The Monitor (Sydney)" label="&amp;quot;The Monitor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059039" start="10862" end="10871" title="road gang" label="road gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424449" start="10956" end="10981" title="Squatting (Australian history)" label="pastoral grazing licenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q652814" start="11038" end="11051" title="Merriwa, New South Wales" label="Gammon Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935040" start="11078" end="11088" title="Windermere, New South Wales" label="Windermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q765836" start="11110" end="11122" title="Hunter River (New South Wales)" label="Hunter River"/>
<link wikidata="Q621609" start="11241" end="11256" title="Macquarie River" label="Macquarie River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336126" start="11262" end="11271" title="Narromine" label="Narromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624119" start="11275" end="11285" title="Mumblebone, New South Wales" label="Haddon Rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q302946" start="11376" end="11387" title="Namoi River" label="Namoi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q368304" start="11395" end="11402" title="Manilla, New South Wales" label="Manilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q475597" start="11411" end="11429" title="Murrumbidgee River" label="Murrumbidgee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q20748337" start="11457" end="11472" title="Augustus Morris" label="Augustus Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997569" start="11658" end="11663" title="Bundure, New South Wales" label="Yanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576838" start="11691" end="11695" title="Yanga National Park" label="Tala"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642636" start="11709" end="11718" title="Wambianna, New South Wales" label="Wambianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="12077" end="12088" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="12107" end="12116" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851693" start="12154" end="12163" title="Tūhawaiki" label="Tūhawaiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="12420" end="12432" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q255492" start="12446" end="12469" title="Edward Gibbon Wakefield" label="Edward Gibbon Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396584" start="12475" end="12487" title="Te Rauparaha" label="Te Rauparaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396620" start="12591" end="12603" title="George Gipps" label="George Gipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="12735" end="12740" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132669" start="13229" end="13248" title="Henry Bulwer, 1st Baron Dalling and Bulwer" label="Henry Lytton Bulwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28184198" start="13501" end="13533" title="Australian Patriotic Association" label="Australian Patriotic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636853" start="13918" end="13931" title="William Bland" label="William Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="14416" end="14454" title="Legislative Council of New South Wales" label="Legislative Council of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162658" start="14853" end="14867" title="Electoral district of City of Sydney" label="Town of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958816" start="14967" end="14981" title="Charles Cowper" label="Charles Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424449" start="15376" end="15388" title="squattocracy" label="squattocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138667" start="15925" end="15940" title="James Macarthur (politician)" label="James Macarthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q548135" start="16005" end="16011" title="coolie" label="coolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039722" start="16143" end="16158" title="Spanish dollars" label="Spanish dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134950" start="16667" end="16677" title="penal treadmill" label="treadmills"/>
<link wikidata="Q320291" start="17749" end="17758" title="Henry Grey, 3rd Earl Grey" label="Earl Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="17838" end="17859" title="Federation of Australia" label="Australian federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="17907" end="17920" title="Hunter Region" label="Hunter Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q127691193" start="17964" end="17992" title="Hunter River Railway Company" label="Hunter River Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736025" start="18028" end="18075" title="Main North railway line, New South Wales" label="the railway line between Newcastle and Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q869660" start="18220" end="18225" title="Scone" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="18335" end="18345" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18439" end="18447" title="William Wentworth#President of the Legislative Council" label="agreeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="18562" end="18584" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="20893" end="20906" title="orang utan" label="ourang-outang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785309" start="21260" end="21280" title="Myall Creek massacre" label="Myall Creek massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41790626" start="21901" end="21912" title="Appin Massacre" label="a slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q864079" start="22421" end="22434" title="Australian native police" label="Native Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498975" start="22704" end="22720" title="Frederick Walker (native police commandant)" label="Frederick Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743503" start="22880" end="22888" title="Stockman (Australia)" label="stockmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659951" start="23313" end="23327" title="Sydney Grammar School" label="Sydney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="23410" end="23433" title="Education in New South Wales" label="state primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600070" start="23500" end="23528" title="Stanley letter" label="system of national education"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="24060" end="24080" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="24158" end="24172" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081249" start="24211" end="24228" title="Charles Nicholson" label="Charles Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635089" start="24250" end="24288" title="University of Edinburgh Medical School" label="University of Edinburgh Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756589" start="26778" end="26804" title="The People&amp;#x27;s Advocate and New South Wales Vindicator" label="The People&amp;#x27;s Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630010" start="28254" end="28288" title="Australian Constitutions Act 1850" label="Australian Colonies Government Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="29125" end="29145" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="29257" end="29264" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216955" start="29579" end="29593" title="Daniel Deniehy" label="Daniel Deniehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997980" start="29659" end="29677" title="bunyip aristocracy" label="bunyip aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q645961" start="30007" end="30015" title="Rail transport in Australia" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="30109" end="30132" title="Federation of Australia" label="Australian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="30347" end="30360" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334355" start="30869" end="30880" title="Robert Lowe" label="Robert Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092910" start="31530" end="31543" title="Circular Quay" label="Circular Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="31774" end="31783" title="Baronet" label="baronetcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="31809" end="31827" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163032" start="31836" end="31853" title="Conservative Club" label="Conservative Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q17529353" start="32006" end="32017" title="Merley House, Wimborne" label="Merly House"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="32060" end="32084" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374053" start="32208" end="32234" title="Royal Commonwealth Society" label="Royal Commonwealth Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352111" start="32428" end="32447" title="Robertson Land Acts" label="Robertson Land Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="32709" end="32736" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17529353" start="32935" end="32957" title="Merley House, Wimborne" label="Merley House, Wimborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="33139" end="33152" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279349" start="33327" end="33346" title="Wentworth Mausoleum" label="Wentworth Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505123" start="33465" end="33496" title="St Philip&amp;#x27;s Church, Sydney" label="St Philip&amp;#x27;s Church, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959116" start="33665" end="33682" title="breach of promise" label="breach of promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q21538167" start="34176" end="34187" title="George Hill (Australian politician)" label="George Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20810952" start="34280" end="34304" title="George Griffiths (Australian politician)" label="George Neville Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236225" start="34309" end="34337" title="Bill Wentworth" label="William Charles Wentworth IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236225" start="34360" end="34374" title="Bill Wentworth" label="Bill Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="34376" end="34383" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007714" start="34424" end="34489" title="Minister for Indigenous Australians" label="Minister in charge of Aboriginal Affairs under the Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936041" start="34570" end="34595" title="Mungo Wentworth MacCallum" label="Mungo Wentworth MacCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160283" start="34867" end="34913" title="Sir Charles Gordon-Cumming-Dunbar, 9th Baronet" label="Sir Charles Gordon-Cumming-Dunbar, 9th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342714" start="35060" end="35072" title="Edward Eagar" label="Edward Eagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725008" start="35128" end="35144" title="Macquarie Street, Sydney" label="Macquarie Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107680" start="35333" end="35342" title="Wentworth, New South Wales" label="Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567289" start="35347" end="35362" title="Wentworth Falls, New South Wales" label="Wentworth Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973891" start="35376" end="35397" title="Division of Wentworth" label="Division of Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538030" start="35436" end="35451" title="Wentworth Falls (waterfall)" label="Wentworth Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="35487" end="35495" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197126" start="35506" end="35514" title="Kingston, Australian Capital Territory" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q820695" start="35524" end="35539" title="Wentworth Shire" label="Wentworth Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q768500" start="35562" end="35576" title="Wentworth Park" label="Wentworth Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896397" start="36113" end="36139" title="University of Sydney Union" label="University of Sydney Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402071" start="36431" end="36463" title="Parliament House, Sydney" label="New South Wales Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917248" start="36615" end="36621" title="Vaucluse House" label="estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279700" start="36752" end="36777" title="Wentworth Memorial Church" label="Wentworth Memorial Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36826" end="36842" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890752" start="36965" end="36978" title="Manning Clark" label="Manning Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373750" start="37271" end="37306" title="Royal Australian Historical Society" label="Royal Australian Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756360" start="37649" end="37661" title="The Patriots (TV series)" label="The Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142936" start="37766" end="37780" title="Australia Post" label="Australia Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q662727" start="37929" end="37944" title="Pietro Tenerani" label="Pietro Tenerani"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="37968" end="37988" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260373" start="38052" end="38080" title="Department of Lands building" label="Department of Lands building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566669" start="38517" end="38523" title="Bernard Barton" label="Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892968" start="38663" end="38676" title="Bernard Burke" label="Bernard Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q63940037" start="39216" end="39228" title="Carol Liston" label="Carol Liston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758736" start="39561" end="39572" title="Andrew Tink" label="Andrew Tink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210303" start="39858" end="39889" title="Political families of Australia" label="Political families of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977267" start="39950" end="39966" title="Wentworth family" label="Wentworth family"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="40072" end="40105" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="40185" end="40212" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297953" wikidata="Q298046" url="?curid=297953" title="Yang Guifei">
<text>Yang Yuhuan (; 719 – 15 July 756), often known as Yang Guifei (, with &quot;Guifei&quot; being the highest rank for imperial consorts during her time), and known briefly by the Taoist nun name Taizhen (), was the beloved consort of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang during his later years. She is known as one of the Four Beauties of ancient China.

During the An Lushan Rebellion, as Emperor Xuanzong and his cortege were fleeing from the capital Chang&#x27;an to Chengdu, the emperor&#x27;s guards demanded that he put Yang to death because they blamed the rebellion on her cousin Yang Guozhong and the rest of her family. The emperor capitulated and reluctantly ordered his attendant Gao Lishi to supervise her forced suicide.

==Background==
Yang was born in 719 during the Tang dynasty, early in the reign of Emperor Xuanzong. Her great-great-grandfather Yang Wang () was a key official during the reign of Emperor Yang of Sui, and, after the fall of the Sui dynasty, served one of the contenders to succeed Sui, Wang Shichong; Yang Wang was then killed when Wang Shichong was defeated by Tang forces in 621. Yang Wang was from Huayin (; in modern Weinan, Shaanxi), but his clan subsequently relocated to Yongle (; in modern Yuncheng, Shanxi).

Yang&#x27;s father Yang Xuanyan () served as a census official at Shu Prefecture (; in modern Chengdu, Sichuan), and his family went there with him. He appeared to have had no sons, but had four daughters who were known to history—Yang Yuhuan and three older sisters. Yang Xuanyan died when Yang Yuhuan was still young, so the latter was raised by her uncle Yang Xuanjiao (), who was a low-ranking official at Henan Municipality (; modern Luoyang).

==Princess and Taoist nun==
On 10 Feb 736, seventeen-year-old Yang Yuhuan married Li Mao, the Prince of Shou and the son of Emperor Xuanzong and Consort Wu. She thus carried the title of Princess of Shou. After Consort Wu died in January 738, Emperor Xuanzong was greatly saddened by the death of his then-favorite concubine. Some time after that, however, Princess Yang somehow came into Xuanzong&#x27;s favor and the Emperor decided to take her as his consort. However, since Princess Yang was already the wife of his son, Emperor Xuanzong stealthily arranged her to become a Taoist nun, with the tonsured name Taizhen, in order to prevent criticism that would affect his plan of making her his concubine. Yang then stayed, for a brief moment, as a Taoist nun in the palace itself, before Emperor Xuanzong made her an imperial consort after bestowing a new wife on his son Li Mao. Yang became the favorite consort of the Emperor.

==Imperial consort==

On 19 September 745, after Emperor Xuanzong gave the third daughter of the general Wei Zhaoxun () to Li Mao as his new wife and princess on 28 August, he officially made Taizhen an imperial consort—with the newly restored rank of &quot;Guifei&quot;, which was greater than the previously highest rank of &quot;Huifei&quot;, carried by Consort Wu. He bestowed posthumous honors on her father Yang Xuanyan and granted her mother the title of Lady of Liang. He also gave high offices to her uncle Yang Xuangui () and cousins Yang Xian () and Yang Qi (). Since 745, all within the imperial court and the palace had treated her like the new empress (像皇后, Xiàng huánghòu), and bowed to her as if she was the most powerful woman in the land (Tiānxià Mǔ, 天下母), and in the palace, they called her lady (娘子, Niángzǐ), like the honorific used for the empress. Her three older sisters were conferred the ranks of Ladies of Han, Guo, and Qin, and it was said that whenever the noble women were summoned to imperial gatherings, even Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s highly honored sister Li Chiying (), the Princess Yuzhen, did not dare to take a seat more honorable than theirs. Emperor Xuanzong also gave his favorite daughter, Princess Taihua (born of Consort Wu), to Yang Qi in marriage. The five Yang households—those of Yang Xian, Yang Qi, and the Ladies of Han, Guo, and Qin—were said to be exceedingly honored and rich, and all of the officials fought to flatter them.

Around the same time, Consort Yang introduced her second cousin Yang Zhao (whose name was later changed to Yang Guozhong) to Emperor Xuanzong. Yang Zhao, who flattered the emperor, rose quickly in the ranks.

Consort Yang became so favored that whenever she rode a horse, the eunuch Gao Lishi would attend her. Seven hundred laborers were conscripted to sew fabrics for her. Officials and generals flattered her by offering her exquisite tributes. In 746, she angered Emperor Xuanzong by being jealous and rude to him, and he had her sent to her cousin Yang Xian&#x27;s mansion. Later that day, however, his mood was such that he could not eat, and he battered his servants for minor offenses. Gao knew that he missed Consort Yang, and requested that the treasures in Consort Yang&#x27;s palace be sent to her. Emperor Xuanzong agreed, and sent imperial meals to her as well. That night, Gao requested that Emperor Xuanzong welcome Consort Yang back to the palace, a request that Emperor Xuanzong easily agreed to. Thereafter, she was even more favored, and no other imperial consort drew his favor.

In 747, when the military governor (&quot;jiedushi&quot;) An Lushan arrived at the capital Chang&#x27;an to meet Emperor Xuanzong, Emperor Xuanzong showed him much favor and allowed him into the palace. He had An honor Consort Yang as his mother and Consort Yang&#x27;s cousins and sisters as his brothers and sisters.

In 750, Consort Yang again offended Emperor Xuanzong with her words, and he sent her back to her clan. The official Ji Wen () told Emperor Xuanzong that he had overreacted, and Emperor Xuanzong regretted his actions. He again sent imperial meals to her, and she wept to the eunuchs delivering the meal, stating:

She cut off some of her hair and had the hair taken back to Emperor Xuanzong. Emperor Xuanzong had Gao escort her back to the palace, and thereafter had even greater love for her.

In 751, An Lushan again visited Chang&#x27;an. On An&#x27;s birthday on 20 February, 751, Emperor Xuanzong and Consort Yang rewarded him with clothing, treasures, and food. On 23 February, when An was summoned to the palace, Consort Yang, in order to please Emperor Xuanzong, had an extra-large infant wrapping made, and wrapped the obese An in it, causing much laughter among the ladies in waiting and eunuchs. When Emperor Xuanzong asked what was going on, Consort Yang&#x27;s attendants joked that Consort Yang gave birth three days before and was washing her baby Lushan. Emperor Xuanzong was amused by the comic situation and rewarded both Consort Yang and An greatly. Thereafter, whenever An visited the capital, he was allowed free admittance to the palace, and there were rumors that he and Consort Yang had an affair, but Emperor Xuanzong discounted the rumors.

Consort Yang&#x27;s cousin, Yang Guozhong, had been serving—remotely—as commander of Jiannan Circuit (; headquartered in modern Chengdu, Sichuan). In 752, following Nanzhao incursions against Jiannan Circuit, chancellor Li Linfu wanted to send Yang Guozhong to Jiannan to personally supervise defenses against the Nanzhao attacks. Consort Yang interceded on Yang Guozhong&#x27;s behalf, and Yang Guozhong did not actually report to Jiannan.

Li Linfu soon died, and Yang Guozhong became chancellor.

==An Lushan&#x27;s rebellion and Consort Yang&#x27;s death==
Yang Guozhong and An Lushan soon were in conflict, and Yang Guozhong repeatedly acted provocatively, such as arresting and executing staff members from An&#x27;s mansion in Chang&#x27;an.

In 755, An finally rebelled and marched his troops toward the capital. In order to try to placate the populace, which believed that Yang Guozhong&#x27;s conflict with An Lushan had provoked the rebellion, Emperor Xuanzong considered passing the throne to his crown prince, Li Heng. Yang Guozhong, who was not on good terms with the prince, feared this development, and persuaded Consort Yang and her sisters, the Ladies of Han, Guo, and Qin, to speak against it. Emperor Xuanzong, for the time being, did not abdicate the throne.

In 756, Yang Guozhong forced General Geshu Han to engage An Lushan, at least partly out of fear that the general himself might attempt to usurp the throne. Geshu Han was defeated and Tong Pass, the last major imperial defense, fell to An&#x27;s forces. With the situation becoming desperate, Yang Guozhong suggested fleeing to Chengdu, the capital of Jiannan Circuit. On 14 July, Emperor Xuanzong, along with Consort Yang, her family, and his immediate clan members, secretly left Chang&#x27;an, heading toward Chengdu. With him were Yang Guozhong, his fellow chancellor Wei Jiansu, the official Wei Fangjin (), the general Chen Xuanli, and some eunuchs and ladies in waiting close to him.

On 15 July, Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s cortege reached Mawei Courier Station (, in modern Xianyang, Shaanxi). The imperial guards were hungry and angry at Yang Guozhong. Tibetan emissaries, who had followed the emperor, were also complaining to Yang Guozhong that they had not been fed. General Chen Xuanli believed that Yang Guozhong&#x27;s actions had provoked this disaster and reported to Li Heng that he planned to accuse Yang Guozhong.

In this tense situation, soldiers of the imperial guard declared that Yang Guozhong was planning treason in collaboration with the Tibetan emissaries. They killed Yang Guozhong, his son Yang Xuan (), Consort Yang&#x27;s sisters, the ladies of Han and Qin, and Wei Fangjin. (Wei Jiansu was severely injured and nearly killed, but was spared at the last moment.) Yang Guozhong&#x27;s wife Pei Rou () and his son Yang Xi (), along with Consort Yang&#x27;s sister, the Lady of Guo, and her son Pei Hui () tried to flee, but were killed. The soldiers then surrounded Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s pavilion and refused to leave, even after the Emperor came out to comfort them and ordered them to disperse.

Emperor Xuanzong then sent Gao Lishi to ask General Chen Xuanli for his advice. Chen&#x27;s reply was to urge the Emperor to put Consort Yang to death. Initially the Emperor refused, but after Wei E (, Wei Jiansu&#x27;s son) and Gao Lishi spoke in agreement with Chen, the Emperor eventually agreed. He had Gao take Consort Yang to a Buddhist shrine and allow her a forced suicide, considered a more dignified death than execution. When Consort Yang&#x27;s body was shown to Chen and the other imperial guard generals, the soldiers dispersed and prepared to continue the journey. Consort Yang was buried at Mawei, without a coffin, but with masses of fragrance wrapped in purple blankets.

In 757, Prince Li Heng, who had taken the throne as Emperor Suzong, recaptured Chang&#x27;an and welcomed ex-Emperor Xuanzong, then &quot;Taishang Huang&quot; (retired emperor) back to the capital. Emperor Xuanzong went through Mawei on his way back to Chang&#x27;an. He wanted to locate Consort Yang&#x27;s body and rebury her with honor. The official Li Kui spoke against it, pointing out that the imperial guard might again mutiny if he did so. However, Emperor Xuanzong secretly sent eunuchs to rebury her with a coffin. When they found the body, it had decomposed, but the fragrance bag buried with her was still fresh. The eunuchs returned with the fragrance bag, and upon its presentation to Emperor Xuanzong, he wept bitterly. When he returned to Chang&#x27;an, he had a painter create a picture of Consort Yang in a secondary palace, and often went there to view the portrait.

==Personal characteristics==

Yang was known for having a larger figure in an era of Chinese history where such body types were preferred. Because of that, Yang is often compared and contrasted with Empress Zhao Feiyan, who is known for being a slender person. This, in turn, led to the four-character idiom &quot;huanfei yanshou&quot; (), describing the physical range of the types of beauties between Zhao and Yang.

Modern-day description of Yang&#x27;s physical size differs. She has been variously described as &quot;rotund&quot;, &quot;well rounded&quot;, &quot;full-bodied&quot;, &quot;portly&quot;, and &quot;obese&quot;. However, some consider the description of Yang as an obese woman to be either a misinterpretation of ancient Chinese texts, or a misapplication of modern standards on body size.

Lychee was a favorite fruit for Yang, and the emperor had the fruit, which was only grown in southern China, delivered by the imperial courier&#x27;s fast horses, whose riders would take shifts day and night in a Pony Express-like manner, to the capital. Most historians believe the fruits were delivered from modern Guangdong, but some believe they came from modern Sichuan.

A copy of the outline of her right hand still exists, having been carved on a large stone at the site of the Xi&#x27;an Palace.

Yang was granted use of the Huaqing Pool which had been the exclusive private pool of previous Tang emperors.

==Fashion influence==
Yang is sometimes credited with the invention of the hezi, an ancient Chinese bodice.

==Cultural depiction==
Yang&#x27;s story has been often retold. While some literature describes her as the author of much misfortune, other writings sympathize with her as a scapegoat. In the following generation, a long poem, &quot;Chang Hen Ge&quot; (&quot;&quot;), was written by the poet Bai Juyi describing Emperor Xuanzong&#x27;s love for her and perpetual grief at her loss. It became an instant classic, known to and memorized by Chinese schoolchildren far into posterity.

The story of Yang and the poem also became highly popular in Japan and served as sources of inspiration for the classical novel &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; which begins with the doomed love between an emperor and a consort, Kiritsubo, who is likened to Yang. Noh plays have been staged based on her story. A Japanese rumour states that Yang had been rescued, escaped to Japan and lived her remaining life there. In Japanese, she is known as &quot;Yōkihi&quot;. Legend says that her final resting place was at Atsuta Shrine in Nagoya, where she found refuge. A water spring is dedicated to her. The east gate &quot;Shunkō-mon&quot; (春敲門) of the shrine was also connected to her memory. The gate was a National Treasure and was lost in the Pacific War. 

In the novel &quot;Dream of the Red Chamber&quot;, the two ladies Lin Daiyu and Xue Baochai besides the main character Jia Baoyu had the images of Xi Shi and Yang Guifei. Both Lin and Xi Shi are sick and weak, Xue and Yang are plump and healthy. In chapter 30, Xue got angry because Jia said she is like Yang and she is chubby. The real reason is that Xue does not have a brother like Yang Guozhong.

Other works retelling her story include:

===Literature===
* &quot;Chang Hen Ge&quot; – &quot;&quot; or &quot;&quot; () by Bai Juyi
* &quot;The Unofficial Biography of Yang Taizhen&quot; ( &quot;Yang Taizhen Waizhuan&quot;) by Yue Shi ()
* &quot;The Biography – Song of the Everlasting Sorrow&quot; ( &quot;Changhen Kezhuan&quot;)
* &quot;Under Heaven&quot; (Fictionalized as Wen Jian) by Guy Gavriel Kay
* Yang Yuhuan&#x27;s death is featured in the &quot;wuxia&quot; novel &quot;Datang Youxia Zhuan&quot; by Liang Yusheng.

===Operas===
* &quot;The Drunken Concubine&quot; ( &quot;Guifei Zuijiu&quot;)
* &quot;The Unofficial Biography of Taizhen&quot; ( &quot;Taizhen Waizhuan&quot;)
* &quot;The Slope of Mawei&quot; ( &quot;Mawei Po&quot;) by Chen Hong ()
* &quot;The Great Concubine of Tang&quot; ( Da Tang Guifei), a contemporary Beijing opera with historical motif.

===Stage plays===
* &quot;The Hall of Longevity&quot; ( &quot;Changshen Dian&quot;) by Hong Sheng (洪昇) of the Qing dynasty
* &quot;The Mirror to Grind Dust&quot; ( &quot;Mocheng Jian&quot;) by an anonymous playwright of the Ming dynasty
* &quot;The Records of Shocking Grandeur&quot; ( &quot;Jinghong Ji&quot;) by Wu Shimei () of the Ming dynasty
* &quot;The Records of Colourful Hair&quot; ( &quot;Caihao Ji&quot;) by Tu Longlong () of the Ming dynasty
* &quot;Tang Minghuang on an Autumn Night with Wutong Tree and Rain&quot; ( &quot;Tang Minghuang Qiuye Wutong Yu&quot;) by Bai Pu () of the Yuan dynasty
* &quot;Cathay: Three Tales of China&quot; by Ping Chong

===Film===
* &quot;Princess Yang Kwei-Fei&quot; (), 1955 Japanese film starring Machiko Kyō, directed by Kenji Mizoguchi.
* &quot;The Magnificent Concubine&quot; (&quot;Yang Kwei Fei&quot;), 1962 Hong Kong film directed by Li Han-hsiang, starring Li Li-hua. 
* &quot;Yang Guifei&quot; (), 1992 Chinese film directed by Chen Jialin.
* &quot;Offspring of Concubine Yang&quot; (), 1996 Chinese film directed by Xiao Feng, with Hou Junjie in the title role.
* &quot;Lady of the Dynasty&quot;, 2015 Chinese film starring Fan Bingbing.
* &quot;Legend of the Demon Cat&quot;, 2017 Chinese film directed by Chen Kaige, with Sandrine Pinna as Yang Guifei in a supporting role.

===Television===
* &quot;Lady Yang&quot; (), a 1976 Hong Kong series produced by TVB, starring Lina Yan as Yang Yuhuan.
* &quot;Yang Gui Fei&quot; (), a 1985 Taiwanese series aired on CTS.
* &quot;Tang Ming Huang&quot; (), a 1990 Chinese series starring Liu Wei and Lin Fangbing as Emperor Xuanzong and Yang Yuhuan respectively.
* &quot;The Legend of Lady Yang&quot; (), a 2000 Hong Kong series produced by TVB, starring Anne Heung and Kwong Wa as Yang Yuhuan and Emperor Xuanzong respectively.
* &quot;Whatever is Takes&quot; a 2001 TVB series has Annie Man and Benny Chan (actor) portray Yang Yuhan and Emperor Xuanzong in the final episode. 
* &quot;Da Tang Fu Rong Yuan&quot; (), a 2007 Chinese series starring Fan Bingbing and Winston Chao as Yang Yuhuan and Emperor Xuanzong respectively.
* &quot;The Legend of Yang Guifei&quot;, a 2010 Chinese series starring Yin Tao and Anthony Wong as Yang Yuhuan and Emperor Xuanzong respectively.
* &quot;The Longest Day in Chang&#x27;an&quot;, a 2019 Chinese series with Xu Lu as Yang Yuhuan

===Video games===
* Yang Guifei appears in the mobile game Fate/Grand Order as a foreigner-class servant - her beauty and the unrest it causes are attributed to her serving an Outer God.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Huaqing Pool
* Li Bai

==Notes and references==

* &quot;Old Book of Tang&quot;, vol. 51.
* &quot;New Book of Tang&quot;, vol. 76.
* &quot;Zizhi Tongjian&quot;, vols. 215, 216, 217, 218.

==External links==
* The Yang Kwei-fei story Yang Kwei-fei and &quot;The Song of Eternal Sorrow&quot; in The Tale of Genji</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q298046" start="0" end="11" title="Yang Guifei" label="Yang Yuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298046" start="50" end="61" title="Yang Guifei" label="Yang Guifei"/>
<link wikidata="Q378348" start="116" end="133" title="Imperial Chinese harem system" label="imperial consorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298046" start="193" end="200" title="Yang Guifei" label="Taizhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9746" start="232" end="256" title="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang" label="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202919" start="308" end="338" title="Four Beauties" label="Four Beauties of ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q253774" start="352" end="371" title="An Lushan Rebellion" label="An Lushan Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="439" end="452" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="456" end="463" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069299" start="574" end="587" title="Yang Guozhong" label="Yang Guozhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q707146" start="678" end="687" title="Gao Lishi" label="Gao Lishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746270" start="705" end="719" title="forced suicide" label="forced suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="769" end="781" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9746" start="805" end="821" title="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang" label="Emperor Xuanzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419" start="903" end="922" title="Emperor Yang of Sui" label="Emperor Yang of Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="951" end="962" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q708305" start="1009" end="1022" title="Wang Shichong" label="Wang Shichong"/>
<link wikidata="Q126995" start="1144" end="1150" title="Weinan" label="Weinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="1152" end="1159" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q73073" start="1221" end="1229" title="Yuncheng, Shanxi" label="Yuncheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="1231" end="1237" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="1335" end="1342" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="1344" end="1351" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="1680" end="1687" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972977" start="1773" end="1779" title="Li Mao" label="Li Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178742" start="1836" end="1846" title="Empress Zhenshun" label="Consort Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069299" start="4165" end="4174" title="Yang Guozhong" label="Yang Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q707146" start="4384" end="4393" title="Gao Lishi" label="Gao Lishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688932" start="5244" end="5252" title="jiedushi" label="jiedushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q360559" start="5260" end="5269" title="An Lushan" label="An Lushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="5293" end="5306" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q360559" start="6024" end="6033" title="An Lushan" label="An Lushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="7016" end="7023" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="7025" end="7032" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045322" start="7053" end="7060" title="Kingdom of Nanzhao" label="Nanzhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070804" start="7097" end="7107" title="chancellor of the Tang dynasty" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q713000" start="7108" end="7116" title="Li Linfu" label="Li Linfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q253774" start="7646" end="7665" title="An Lushan Rebellion" label="An finally rebelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q9749" start="7911" end="7918" title="Emperor Suzong of Tang" label="Li Heng"/>
<link wikidata="Q837589" start="8206" end="8215" title="Geshu Han" label="Geshu Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757995" start="8352" end="8361" title="Tong Pass" label="Tong Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567072" start="8740" end="8750" title="Wei Jiansu" label="Wei Jiansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090950" start="8793" end="8804" title="Chen Xuanli" label="Chen Xuanli"/>
<link wikidata="Q497341" start="8947" end="8955" title="Xianyang" label="Xianyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="8957" end="8964" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431480" start="9027" end="9034" title="Tibetan Empire" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746270" start="10362" end="10376" title="forced suicide" label="forced suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9749" start="10701" end="10708" title="Emperor Suzong of Tang" label="Li Heng"/>
<link wikidata="Q44731715" start="10824" end="10838" title="Taishang Huang" label="Taishang Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538931" start="11039" end="11045" title="Li Kui (chancellor)" label="Li Kui"/>
<link wikidata="Q706244" start="11772" end="11791" title="Empress Zhao Feiyan" label="Empress Zhao Feiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28060424" start="11860" end="11880" title="Chinese idiom" label="four-character idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13182" start="12382" end="12388" title="Lychee" label="Lychee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="12475" end="12489" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q859130" start="12595" end="12607" title="Pony Express" label="Pony Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="12699" end="12708" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="12749" end="12756" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044027" start="12868" end="12885" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Palace" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133842" start="12916" end="12928" title="Huaqing Pool" label="Huaqing Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q15896176" start="13074" end="13078" title="Hezi (clothing)" label="hezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844796" start="13341" end="13353" title="Chang hen ge (poem)" label="Chang Hen Ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q313324" start="13400" end="13408" title="Bai Juyi" label="Bai Juyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269" start="13724" end="13741" title="The Tale of Genji" label="The Tale of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q226887" start="13851" end="13854" title="Noh" label="Noh"/>
<link wikidata="Q482065" start="14101" end="14114" title="Atsuta Shrine" label="Atsuta Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8265" start="14364" end="14388" title="Dream of the Red Chamber" label="Dream of the Red Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178958" start="14411" end="14420" title="Lin Daiyu" label="Lin Daiyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045205" start="14425" end="14436" title="Xue Baochai" label="Xue Baochai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8428650" start="14464" end="14473" title="Jia Baoyu" label="Jia Baoyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155976" start="14492" end="14498" title="Xi Shi" label="Xi Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069299" start="14730" end="14743" title="Yang Guozhong" label="Yang Guozhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q844796" start="14813" end="14825" title="Chang hen ge (poem)" label="Chang Hen Ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q313324" start="14869" end="14877" title="Bai Juyi" label="Bai Juyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883104" start="15085" end="15097" title="Under Heaven (novel)" label="Under Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q95099" start="15135" end="15150" title="Guy Gavriel Kay" label="Guy Gavriel Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q754803" start="15203" end="15208" title="wuxia" label="wuxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227469" start="15227" end="15246" title="Datang Youxia Zhuan" label="Datang Youxia Zhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q587083" start="15256" end="15269" title="Liang Yusheng" label="Liang Yusheng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15568" end="15616" title="Peking opera#Repertoire" label="contemporary Beijing opera with historical motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q836845" start="15645" end="15666" title="The Palace of Eternal Life" label="The Hall of Longevity"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15718" end="15720" title=":zh:洪昇" label="洪昇"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="15729" end="15741" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="15843" end="15855" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q776705" start="16120" end="16131" title="Firmiana simplex" label="Wutong Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q704910" start="16196" end="16202" title="Bai Renfu" label="Bai Pu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="16213" end="16225" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195660" start="16272" end="16282" title="Ping Chong" label="Ping Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q936295" start="16303" end="16325" title="Princess Yang Kwei-Fei" label="Princess Yang Kwei-Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q180602" start="16364" end="16375" title="Machiko Kyō" label="Machiko Kyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q55401" start="16389" end="16404" title="Kenji Mizoguchi" label="Kenji Mizoguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106365" start="16414" end="16439" title="The Magnificent Concubine" label="The Magnificent Concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q716564" start="16507" end="16520" title="Li Han-hsiang" label="Li Han-hsiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260699" start="16531" end="16540" title="Li Li-hua" label="Li Li-hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8940554" start="16603" end="16614" title="Chen Jialin" label="Chen Jialin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055661" start="16746" end="16765" title="Lady of the Dynasty" label="Lady of the Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q381074" start="16800" end="16812" title="Fan Bingbing" label="Fan Bingbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28868421" start="16822" end="16845" title="Legend of the Demon Cat" label="Legend of the Demon Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q202597" start="16883" end="16893" title="Chen Kaige" label="Chen Kaige"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551164" start="16900" end="16914" title="Sandrine Pinna" label="Sandrine Pinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195543" start="17034" end="17037" title="Television Broadcasts Limited" label="TVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q707546" start="17137" end="17140" title="Chinese Television System" label="CTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922802" start="17150" end="17165" title="Tang Ming Huang (TV series)" label="Tang Ming Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746739" start="17290" end="17313" title="The Legend of Lady Yang" label="The Legend of Lady Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q866670" start="17374" end="17384" title="Anne Heung" label="Anne Heung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692593" start="17389" end="17397" title="Kwong Wa" label="Kwong Wa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769377" start="17502" end="17511" title="Annie Man" label="Annie Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q700235" start="17516" end="17534" title="Benny Chan (actor)" label="Benny Chan (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207312" start="17606" end="17626" title="Da Tang Fu Rong Yuan" label="Da Tang Fu Rong Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q381074" start="17668" end="17680" title="Fan Bingbing" label="Fan Bingbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q710548" start="17685" end="17697" title="Winston Chao" label="Winston Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746793" start="17756" end="17781" title="The Legend of Yang Guifei" label="The Legend of Yang Guifei"/>
<link wikidata="Q381561" start="17832" end="17844" title="Anthony Wong (Hong Kong actor)" label="Anthony Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q48927926" start="17903" end="17935" title="The Longest Day in Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="The Longest Day in Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935348" start="17970" end="17975" title="Xu Lu" label="Xu Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18339082" start="18051" end="18067" title="Fate/Grand Order" label="Fate/Grand Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133842" start="18207" end="18219" title="Huaqing Pool" label="Huaqing Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071" start="18222" end="18228" title="Li Bai" label="Li Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146980" start="18264" end="18280" title="Old Book of Tang" label="Old Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q386073" start="18305" end="18321" title="New Book of Tang" label="New Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q207062" start="18346" end="18360" title="Zizhi Tongjian" label="Zizhi Tongjian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18374" end="18377" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷215" label="215"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18379" end="18382" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷216" label="216"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18384" end="18387" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷217" label="217"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18389" end="18392" title=":zh:s:資治通鑑/卷218" label="218"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269" start="18500" end="18517" title="Tale of genji" label="The Tale of Genji"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297958" wikidata="Q51747" url="?curid=297958" title="Air China">
<text>Air China, officially Air China Limited, () is a major Chinese airline and the flag carrier of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. It is headquartered in Shunyi, Beijing. The airline offers both domestic and international flights to different destinations around China and the world.

The airline was established in 1988 after the former Chinese flag carrier CAAC was split into six airlines, one of them being Air China. The airline is one of the largest airlines in China. It is 53.46% owned by the state-owned China National Aviation Holding.

Air China&#x27;s hub airports are based in Beijing and Chengdu. In 2017, the airline carried 102 million domestic and international passengers with an average load factor of 81%. The airline joined Star Alliance in 2007.

==History==
===Early years===

Air China was established and commenced operations on 1 July 1988 as a result of the Chinese government&#x27;s decision in late 1987 to split the operating divisions of Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC Airlines) into six separate airlines: Air China, China Eastern, China Southern, China Northern, China Southwest, and China Northwest. Air China was given chief responsibility for intercontinental flights and took over CAAC&#x27;s long haul aircraft (Boeing 707s, 747s and 767s) and routes.

In January 2001, the former CAAC&#x27;s six airlines agreed on a merger plan, according to which Air China was to acquire China Southwest Airlines. Before this acquisition, Air China was the country&#x27;s fourth largest domestic airline. The merger created a group with assets of 56 billion yuan (US$8.63 billion) and a fleet of 118 aircraft. In October 2002, Air China consolidated with the China National Aviation Holding and China Southwest Airlines.

On 15 December 2004, Air China was successfully listed on the Hong Kong and London Stock Exchanges. In 2006, Air China signed an agreement to join the Star Alliance. It became a member of the alliance on 12 December 2007 alongside Shanghai Airlines.

In July 2009, Air China acquired $19.3 million of shares from its troubled subsidiary Air Macau, lifting its stake in the carrier from 51% to 81%. One month later, Air China spent HK$6.3 billion (US$813 million) to raise its stake in Cathay Pacific from 17.5% to 30%, expanding its presence in Hong Kong.

===Development since 2010===
In April 2010, Air China completed the increase of shareholdings in Shenzhen Airlines and became the controlling shareholder of Shenzhen Airlines, allowing Air China to further enhance its position in Beijing, Chengdu, and Shanghai, as well as achieve a more balanced domestic network.

On 2 December 2010, Air China received Spain&#x27;s highest tourism industry award, the &quot;Plaque for Tourist Merit.&quot; Air China was the first foreign airline to receive the award, which is given to organisations and individuals contributing to the Spanish tourism industry.

On 23 December 2010, Air China became the first Chinese airline to offer combined tickets that include domestic flights and shuttle bus services to nearby cities. The first combined flight-shuttle bus ticket connected Tianjin via shuttle bus with domestic flights passing through Beijing.

Air China began offering free Wi-Fi internet service on board its aircraft on 15 November 2011, making it the first Chinese carrier to offer this service. However the service is not allowed on smartphones, but only on tablets and laptops.

In 2012, after pressure from PETA, Air China stated that it would no longer transport monkeys to laboratories. PETA welcomed the airline&#x27;s announcement.

On 3 July 2013, in time for the company&#x27;s 25th anniversary, Air China successfully tested Wireless LAN in flight. It was the first global satellite internet flight in Mainland China.

In early 2015, it was announced that the airline had selected the Boeing 737 Next Generation and 737 MAX for its fleet renewal programme of 60 aircraft. The deal, with a value of over $6 billion at current list prices, has yet to be finalised.

==Corporate affairs==


The entity Air China Limited was registered in 2003, and its shares began trading in Hong Kong and London on 15 December 2004. Originally, the airline corporate entity was Air China International, which was founded in 2002. Air China International incorporated China Southwest Airlines and the air transportation services of the China National Aviation Corporation, becoming a new entity.

The Air China HQ Building (), the corporate headquarters, is located in Zone A of the Tianzhu Airport Industrial Zone () in Shunyi District, Beijing. The company registered office is on the ninth floor of the Blue Sky Mansion (), also in Zone A of the Tianzhu Airport Industrial Zone.
Air China is primarily based in its hub of Beijing Capital International Airport (IATA: PEK), where it operates numerous long-range aircraft on routes to North America, Europe, South America, Africa and Australia. Its fleet is made up of an assortment of Boeing and Airbus aircraft, including: Boeing 737s, 747s, 777s and 787s, along with Airbus A319s, A320s, A321s, A330s and A350s. Air China also operates hubs in Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport, where it primarily flies domestic routes, as well as Shanghai Pudong International Airport, from which many international routes are served.

=== Ownership structure ===
===Branding and livery===
The enterprise logo of Air China consists of an artistic &quot;Fenghuang&quot; pattern, the name of the airline written in calligraphy by former national leader Deng Xiaoping, and &quot;AIR CHINA&quot; in English. The phoenix logo is also the artistic transfiguration of the word &quot;VIP&quot;. Air China is a member of the Star Alliance.
==Destinations==
Air China&#x27;s route network extends throughout Asia to the Middle East, Western Europe, and North America from its hubs at Beijing Capital International Airport and Chengdu Tianfu International Airport. It also currently reaches a significant number of Asian, Australian and European destinations from Shanghai. Some international routes operate from Chengdu, Chongqing, Dalian, Hangzhou, Kunming and Shenzhen. It is one of the few world airlines that fly to all six habitable continents.

On 10 December 2006, Air China began serving its first South American destination, São Paulo-Guarulhos (via Madrid-Barajas). This is the airline&#x27;s longest direct flight. The service was initiated with a Boeing 767-300ER, but due to increased demand, the service&#x27;s aircraft has been modernized to an Airbus A330-200, and later to a Boeing 787-9.

Regular flights between mainland China and Taiwan started in July 2009. Due to the political status of Taiwan, all Air China airframes that operate flights to and from Taiwan are required to cover the flag of the People&#x27;s Republic of China on the fuselage.

Air China introduced its new Airbus A330-300 to long-haul operations beginning with services to Düsseldorf, Germany in summer 2011. These aircraft provided the same two-class cabin standard as the Airbus A330-200, except that the economy cabin had no seat-back entertainment system installed (with the exception of the first two economy rows which also had increased legroom). Düsseldorf is now the third German destination on the Air China network. The airline launched a new Beijing-Milan-Malpensa service on 15 June 2011, complementing the airline&#x27;s existing service to Milan from Shanghai.

Deliveries of the carrier&#x27;s 19 new Boeing 777-300ERs commenced in mid 2011, with the aircraft forming the new &quot;backbone of its future long-haul operations.&quot; The new Boeing 777-300ERs replaced the Boeing 747-400s on routes to U.S. destinations such as Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco, but was expected to first enter service on flights to Paris from March 2012. The Boeing 777-300ER began to replace most 747 services once sufficient numbers entered the fleet. Air China expanded its operations in India with a Beijing-Mumbai route in September 2011, while the existing Delhi route was upgraded to the A330. The airline also launched service to Mumbai from Chengdu on 2 May 2012. The airline began using the Boeing 777-300ER on one of its two daily Beijing-Los Angeles flights on 1 February 2012. From late 2012 to early 2013, the airline replaced the Boeing 747-400s servicing the New York and San Francisco routes with the Boeing 777-300ER. With the addition of the Boeing 777-300ERs on the US routes, Air China increased frequency on the Beijing-New York route, changing the flights from 7 to 11 flights a week by adding two new flights to the route (CA989/990). On 21 January 2014, the airline launched its service to Hawaii with flights from Beijing to Honolulu, the first nonstop flights between the two cities. The airline also increased the frequency of service on the Beijing-Houston Intercontinental route from four times weekly to daily service from 30 March 2014. Beginning 10 June 2014, Air China introduced new nonstop service from Beijing to Washington-Dulles, operated by a Boeing 777-300ER. As of 29 September 2015, Air China also introduced a three times weekly flight to Montréal–Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport in a codeshare with Air Canada. The Montreal flight was extended to Havana from 27 December 2015.

Air China started its direct flights to Johannesburg, South Africa from 29 October 2015.

===Codeshare agreements===
Air China codeshares with the following airlines:
* Air Canada 
* Air Dolomiti
* Air India
* Air Macau
* Air New Zealand
* Air Serbia
* All Nippon Airways
* Asiana Airlines
* Austrian Airlines
* Avianca
* Cathay Pacific
* China Express Airlines
* Egyptair
* El Al
* Ethiopian Airlines
* EVA Air
* Finnair
* Hawaiian Airlines
* Juneyao Air
* Kunming Airlines
* LATAM Brasil
* LATAM Chile
* LOT Polish Airlines
* Lufthansa
* MIAT Mongolian Airlines 
* Scandinavian Airlines
* Shandong Airlines
* Shenzhen Airlines
* Singapore Airlines
* South African Airways
* Swiss International Air Lines
* TAP Air Portugal
* Tibet Airlines
* Turkish Airlines
* Uni Air
* United Airlines
* Virgin Atlantic
* WestJet
=== Interline agreements ===
Air China has interline agreements with the following airlines:
* Pakistan International Airlines

==Fleet==
===Current fleet===
, Air China operates the following aircraft:

===Former fleet===

==Air China Cargo==
Air China Cargo, is a subsidiary of Air China, that focuses on freight delivery and does not transport passengers. It operates routes across Asia, Europe and North America with its fleet of Airbus A330-200/P2F, Boeing 747-400F and Boeing 777F.

==Services==
===Cabin===
;Forbidden Pavillion

Forbidden Pavillion is Air China&#x27;s first class, and is offered on all Boeing 747-400, Boeing 747-8 and some Boeing 777-300ER. 

First Class on the 777-300ER and 747-8 is Air China&#x27;s latest flagship product, featuring Zodiac Aerospace Venus suites featuring a row pitch of 82-83 inches, and a seat width of 23 inches. The seat also features 23 inch AVODs and also has Universal AC and USB-A sockets available. 

First Class on the 747-400 has seat pitch, swiveling seat power, and fully flat bed recline. First Class on the 747-400 is one of two classes that sports AVOD screens. It is named &quot;Forbidden Pavilion&quot; due to its place in the cabin.

;Capital Pavillion
Capital Pavillion is Air China&#x27;s business class, and is offered on all Air China aircraft, excluding the Comac C909-700.

On Air China&#x27;s narrow-body fleet, business class seats are recliners arranged in an 2-2 configuration.

On the Boeing 777-300ER and Boeing 787, Business Class would be located at the front of the cabin in a 2-2-2 configuration. Business class on these aircraft features Collins Parallel Diamond seats, which can convert into a 6&#x27;-4&quot; lie-flat bed. The seats have a width of 21 inches, and also feature a 15-16 inch touchscreen along with Universal AC and USB-A sockets.

The Business Class on the Airbus A330 would be located in a small area at the front of the cabin. On newer A330s, Business Class features Zodiac Aura Lite, which consists of rectangle-like seats, with two reading lights located between seats in a 2-2-2 configuration and seat-back screens would be provided. These seats provide full recline and can convert into a 6&#x27;-4&quot; lie-flat bed. The seats also have a row pitch of 79 inches, a seat width of 21 inches, and also features a 15 inch touch screen display, as well as Universal AC and USB-A sockets. On older A330s, the screens would be smaller and there would be no storage space between screens, and a recline of 165 degrees.

The Airbus A350 feature Air China&#x27;s latest product. On older A350s, the seats feature a &quot;reverse herringbone&quot; Collins Aerospace Super-Diamond seat arrangement at the front of the cabin in 8 1-2-1 configurated rows. The seats would be full flat reclinable, along with a shoulder belt for safety. There are no mid-overhead bins, allowing the cabin to look and feel bigger. There would also be aisle access to all seats, and 18-inch HD IFE screens. On newer Airbus A350s, the cabin features Recaro CL6720 seats arranged in a 1-2-1 configuration. The seats can convert to a 6&#x27;-4&quot; lie-flat bed, and has a seat width of 21 inches. Each seat features a 18 inch HD touch screen display and Universal AC and USB-A sockets.
On the Boeing 747s, Business Class is located in the nose of the aircraft and the Upper Deck, with a painted collage of the Summer Palace, which symbolizes good luck in China. On the Boeing 747-8, Business class features Collins Parallel Diamond seats arranged in a 2-2-2 configuration, which can convert to a 6&#x27;-4&quot; lie-flat bed. The seat has a width of 21 inches and also features a 16 inch touch screen display as well as Universal AC and USB-A sockets. On the Boeing 747-400, the seats have partial recline, with a touch-screen function and remote function IFE screen on the back of seats and also located in the armrests. It was located in a 2-2-2 configuration at the back, with 2-2 rows continuing to the front and on the Upper Deck. These seats feature seat-back AVOD screens.

;Premium Economy Class

Premium economy is offered on all of Air China&#x27;s Airbus A330-300, Airbus A350-900, Boeing 747-8 and Boeing 787-9.
The Premium Economy class on the A350-900 is the newest product, with extra recline, a seat pitch of 38.5-39 inches and a seat width of 18.5 inches, in a 2-4-2 configuration. Premium Economy on A330-300s, 747-8s and 787-9s have a seat pitch of 36-38 inches and a width of 17.1-18 inches. In older A330s, these seats also featured AVOD screens and headrests, which the Economy Class did not.
;Economy Class

Economy class is offered on all Air China aircraft. IFE with AVOD functionality is available on Boeing 777-300ER, Boeing 787-9, Airbus A350-900, Boeing 747 and newer Airbus A330 aircraft with different screen sizes and different systems from Panasonic and Thales. Universal power port and USB availability is different upon aircraft. Seats typically have a seat pitch of 31 inches, and a width of 17-18 inches, depending on aircraft. On Airbus A330s, economy class is in a 2-4-2 configuration, whilst on Airbus A350s and Boeing 787s, a 3-3-3 configuration is present. Boeing 747s and 777s have a 3-4-3 configuration. All narrowbody jets are configured in a 3-3 configuration except for the Comac ARJ21s, which have a 3-2 configuration.

===PhoenixMiles===
PhoenixMiles (, literally &quot;Phoenix Partner&quot;), is the frequent flyer program of Air China and its subsidiary Air China Inner Mongolia, Air Macau, Beijing Airlines, Dalian Airlines, Kunming Airlines, Shandong Airlines and Shenzhen Airlines. This is the first frequent flyer program launched in mainland China. It was designed to reward frequent flyers traveling internationally and domestically with Air China and its partner airlines.

==Accidents and incidents==
*On 15 April 2002, Air China Flight 129, a Boeing 767-200ER from Beijing to Busan, South Korea, crashed into a hill while trying to land at Gimhae International Airport during inclement weather, killing 129 of the 166 people on board.
*On 27 August 2019, Air China Flight 183, an Airbus A330-343X from Beijing to Tokyo, Japan, was damaged beyond repair due to a cargo fire while on the ground at Beijing just shortly before departure. No one was injured.

==Controversies and passenger incidents==
;2003 SARS spreading incident
On 15 March 2003, Air China Flight 112, operated by a Boeing 737-36N carried a 72 year old man infected with SARS. The infection later transmitted to 20 other passengers during the flight, causing five of them to later die from SARS. It was the largest in-flight super-spread transmission of SARS during the 2003 SARS epidemic.

;Wings of China incident
Air China&#x27;s inflight magazine &quot;Wings of China&quot; faced accusations of racism when they stated &quot;London is generally a safe place to travel, however precautions are needed when entering areas mainly populated by Indians, Pakistanis, and black people.&quot; in their September 2016 issue. On 8 September 2016, Air China issued an apology. Air China Media, which publishes the &quot;Wings of China&quot; magazine, said it wished to apologise to &quot;readers and passengers who are feeling uncomfortable&quot;. It added: &quot;This invariably inappropriate description... was purely a work mistake by the editors and it&#x27;s not the magazine&#x27;s views...We will immediately recall this entire issue of magazines and draw lessons from this incident.&quot;

;Use of Russian airspace

Despite the international sanctions imposed on Russia due to its ongoing invasion of Ukraine, Air China continues to operate flights to and from Russia. This strategy has bolstered its dominance in the China-Europe market but has drawn criticism for indirectly supporting Russia&#x27;s economy during its military aggression in Ukraine. Some believe Air China&#x27;s ongoing operations to Russia disregard the ethical implications of the conflict, prioritizing profits over solidarity with international sanctions aimed at curbing Russia&#x27;s actions.

== See also ==

* Aviation industry in the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* List of airlines of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* List of airports in the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* List of companies of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Transportation in the People&#x27;s Republic of China
==Notes==

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51747" start="0" end="9" title="Air China" label="Air China"/>
<link wikidata="Q51747" start="22" end="39" title="Air China" label="Air China Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="79" end="91" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="99" end="130" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q393482" start="155" end="161" title="Shunyi, Beijing" label="Shunyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="163" end="170" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="264" end="269" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060596" start="360" end="364" title="CAAC (airline)" label="CAAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017849" start="514" end="545" title="China National Aviation Holding" label="China National Aviation Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="591" end="598" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="603" end="610" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142594" start="707" end="718" title="Passenger load factor" label="load factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189709" start="746" end="759" title="Star Alliance" label="Star Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329619" start="970" end="1008" title="Civil Aviation Administration of China" label="Civil Aviation Administration of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060596" start="1010" end="1023" title="CAAC Airlines" label="CAAC Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="1064" end="1077" title="China Eastern" label="China Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q291090" start="1079" end="1093" title="China Southern" label="China Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138118" start="1095" end="1109" title="China Northern" label="China Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730206" start="1111" end="1126" title="China Southwest Airlines" label="China Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073368" start="1132" end="1147" title="China Northwest Airlines" label="China Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="1265" end="1275" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="1278" end="1282" title="Boeing 747" label="747s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="1287" end="1291" title="Boeing 767" label="767s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730206" start="1428" end="1452" title="China Southwest Airlines" label="China Southwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017849" start="1699" end="1730" title="China National Aviation Holding" label="China National Aviation Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730206" start="1735" end="1759" title="China Southwest Airlines" label="China Southwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="1824" end="1833" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="1838" end="1859" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q189709" start="1913" end="1926" title="Star Alliance" label="Star Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q721994" start="1993" end="2010" title="Shanghai Airlines" label="Shanghai Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q407478" start="2099" end="2108" title="Air Macau" label="Air Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q32141" start="2247" end="2261" title="Cathay Pacific" label="Cathay Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q974899" start="2416" end="2433" title="Shenzhen Airlines" label="Shenzhen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="2549" end="2556" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="2558" end="2565" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="2571" end="2579" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="3136" end="3143" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="3477" end="3481" title="PETA" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="3702" end="3714" title="Wireless LAN" label="Wireless LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="3779" end="3793" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="4150" end="4159" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4164" end="4170" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730206" start="4326" end="4350" title="China Southwest Airlines" label="China Southwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017849" start="4394" end="4429" title="China National Aviation Holding" label="China National Aviation Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q393482" start="4579" end="4594" title="Shunyi District" label="Shunyi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="4596" end="4603" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48790452" start="4617" end="4634" title="registered office" label="registered office"/>
<link wikidata="Q32190" start="4783" end="4820" title="Beijing Capital International Airport" label="Beijing Capital International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="4995" end="5001" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="5006" end="5012" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="5034" end="5044" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="5047" end="5051" title="Boeing 747" label="747s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="5053" end="5057" title="Boeing 777" label="777s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="5062" end="5066" title="Boeing 787" label="787s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317803" start="5079" end="5090" title="Airbus A319" label="Airbus A319"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="5093" end="5098" title="Airbus A320" label="A320s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278675" start="5100" end="5105" title="Airbus A321" label="A321s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="5107" end="5112" title="Airbus A330" label="A330s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484" start="5117" end="5122" title="Airbus A350" label="A350s"/>
<link wikidata="Q387560" start="5156" end="5195" title="Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport" label="Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36420" start="5250" end="5287" title="Shanghai Pudong International Airport" label="Shanghai Pudong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q527525" start="5456" end="5465" title="Fenghuang" label="Fenghuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="5554" end="5567" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q189709" start="5719" end="5732" title="Star Alliance" label="Star Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="5801" end="5805" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="5813" end="5824" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="5826" end="5840" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="5846" end="5859" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q32190" start="5877" end="5914" title="Beijing Capital International Airport" label="Beijing Capital International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074678" start="5919" end="5955" title="Chengdu Tianfu International Airport" label="Chengdu Tianfu International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36420" start="6056" end="6064" title="Shanghai Pudong International Airport" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074678" start="6105" end="6112" title="Chengdu Tianfu International Airport" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q788417" start="6114" end="6123" title="Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q965083" start="6125" end="6131" title="Dalian Zhoushuizi International Airport" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197691" start="6133" end="6141" title="Hangzhou Xiaoshan International Airport" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371636" start="6143" end="6150" title="Kunming Changshui International Airport" label="Kunming"/>
<link wikidata="Q842297" start="6155" end="6163" title="Shenzhen Bao&amp;#x27;an International Airport" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="6299" end="6312" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q385406" start="6327" end="6346" title="São Paulo/Guarulhos International Airport" label="São Paulo-Guarulhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="6352" end="6366" title="Adolfo Suárez Madrid–Barajas Airport" label="Madrid-Barajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="6452" end="6468" title="Boeing 767-300ER" label="Boeing 767-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="6553" end="6568" title="Airbus A330-200" label="Airbus A330-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="6585" end="6597" title="Boeing 787-9" label="Boeing 787-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="6624" end="6638" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="6643" end="6649" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="6683" end="6709" title="political status of Taiwan" label="political status of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131147" start="6801" end="6844" title="flag of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="flag of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="6959" end="6969" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q60910" start="7348" end="7362" title="Milan Malpensa Airport" label="Milan-Malpensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="7503" end="7519" title="Boeing 777-300ER" label="Boeing 777-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="7674" end="7688" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="7729" end="7740" title="Los Angeles International Airport" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="7742" end="7750" title="John F Kennedy International Airport" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8688" start="7756" end="7769" title="San Francisco International Airport" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="9043" end="9060" title="Washington Dulles International Airport" label="Washington-Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="9076" end="9092" title="Boeing 777-300ER" label="Boeing 777-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q736627" start="9176" end="9229" title="Montréal–Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport" label="Montréal–Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q381677" start="9298" end="9304" title="Jose Marti International Airport" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="9456" end="9466" title="Codeshare agreement" label="codeshares"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="9498" end="9508" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q162174" start="9512" end="9524" title="Air Dolomiti" label="Air Dolomiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q69906" start="9527" end="9536" title="Air India" label="Air India"/>
<link wikidata="Q407478" start="9539" end="9548" title="Air Macau" label="Air Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q204296" start="9551" end="9566" title="Air New Zealand" label="Air New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q460373" start="9569" end="9579" title="Air Serbia" label="Air Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204284" start="9582" end="9600" title="All Nippon Airways" label="All Nippon Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q211165" start="9603" end="9618" title="Asiana Airlines" label="Asiana Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q781770" start="9621" end="9638" title="Austrian Airlines" label="Austrian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q308911" start="9641" end="9648" title="Avianca" label="Avianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q32141" start="9651" end="9665" title="Cathay Pacific" label="Cathay Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073273" start="9668" end="9690" title="China Express Airlines" label="China Express Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q374740" start="9693" end="9701" title="Egyptair" label="Egyptair"/>
<link wikidata="Q208489" start="9704" end="9709" title="El Al" label="El Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q245233" start="9712" end="9730" title="Ethiopian Airlines" label="Ethiopian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q715113" start="9733" end="9740" title="EVA Air" label="EVA Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q201821" start="9743" end="9750" title="Finnair" label="Finnair"/>
<link wikidata="Q642610" start="9753" end="9770" title="Hawaiian Airlines" label="Hawaiian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713277" start="9773" end="9784" title="Juneyao Air" label="Juneyao Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388103" start="9787" end="9803" title="Kunming Airlines" label="Kunming Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q690789" start="9806" end="9818" title="LATAM Brasil" label="LATAM Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q649178" start="9821" end="9832" title="LATAM Chile" label="LATAM Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q204268" start="9835" end="9854" title="LOT Polish Airlines" label="LOT Polish Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="9857" end="9866" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q564717" start="9869" end="9892" title="MIAT Mongolian Airlines" label="MIAT Mongolian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="9896" end="9917" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153602" start="9920" end="9937" title="Shandong Airlines" label="Shandong Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q974899" start="9940" end="9957" title="Shenzhen Airlines" label="Shenzhen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="9960" end="9978" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q223763" start="9981" end="10002" title="South African Airways" label="South African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q156776" start="10005" end="10034" title="Swiss International Air Lines" label="Swiss International Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q208232" start="10037" end="10053" title="TAP Air Portugal" label="TAP Air Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090978" start="10056" end="10070" title="Tibet Airlines" label="Tibet Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548" start="10073" end="10089" title="Turkish Airlines" label="Turkish Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q701761" start="10092" end="10099" title="Uni Air" label="Uni Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="10102" end="10117" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="10120" end="10135" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059770" start="10138" end="10145" title="WestJet" label="WestJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354973" start="10189" end="10208" title="Interlining" label="interline agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q204887" start="10241" end="10272" title="Pakistan International Airlines" label="Pakistan International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="10580" end="10599" title="Airbus A330-200" label="Airbus A330-200/P2F"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="10601" end="10616" title="Boeing 747-400F" label="Boeing 747-400F"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="10621" end="10632" title="Boeing 777F" label="Boeing 777F"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243721" start="10722" end="10733" title="First class (aviation)" label="first class"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="10757" end="10771" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q8791" start="10773" end="10785" title="Boeing 747-8" label="Boeing 747-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="10795" end="10811" title="Boeing 777-300ER" label="Boeing 777-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340505" start="11403" end="11417" title="business class" label="business class"/>
<link wikidata="Q44654" start="11475" end="11489" title="Comac C909" label="Comac C909-700"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="11608" end="11624" title="Boeing 777-300ER" label="Boeing 777-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="11629" end="11639" title="Boeing 787" label="Boeing 787"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="12003" end="12014" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484" start="12670" end="12681" title="Airbus A350" label="Airbus A350"/>
<link wikidata="Q358594" start="12791" end="12808" title="Collins Aerospace" label="Collins Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240477" start="14224" end="14239" title="Premium economy" label="Premium economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="14278" end="14293" title="Airbus A330-300" label="Airbus A330-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484" start="14295" end="14310" title="Airbus A350-900" label="Airbus A350-900"/>
<link wikidata="Q8791" start="14312" end="14324" title="Boeing 747-8" label="Boeing 747-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="14329" end="14341" title="Boeing 787-9" label="Boeing 787-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199254" start="14750" end="14763" title="Economy class" label="Economy class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="14846" end="14862" title="Boeing 777-300ER" label="Boeing 777-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="14864" end="14876" title="Boeing 787-9" label="Boeing 787-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484" start="14878" end="14893" title="Airbus A350-900" label="Airbus A350-900"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="14895" end="14905" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="14916" end="14927" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130064" start="14992" end="15001" title="Panasonic Avionics Corporation" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161666" start="15006" end="15012" title="Thales Group" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062332" start="15569" end="15591" title="frequent flyer program" label="frequent flyer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="15613" end="15623" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740209" start="15624" end="15648" title="Air China Inner Mongolia" label="Air China Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q407478" start="15650" end="15659" title="Air Macau" label="Air Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210916" start="15679" end="15694" title="Dalian Airlines" label="Dalian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388103" start="15696" end="15712" title="Kunming Airlines" label="Kunming Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153602" start="15714" end="15731" title="Shandong Airlines" label="Shandong Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q974899" start="15736" end="15753" title="Shenzhen Airlines" label="Shenzhen Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q489904" start="15998" end="16018" title="Air China Flight 129" label="Air China Flight 129"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="16022" end="16038" title="Boeing 767-200ER" label="Boeing 767-200ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q16520" start="16055" end="16060" title="Busan" label="Busan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="16062" end="16073" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q483223" start="16119" end="16147" title="Gimhae International Airport" label="Gimhae International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="16259" end="16275" title="Airbus A330-300" label="Airbus A330-343X"/>
<link wikidata="Q32190" start="16281" end="16288" title="Beijing Capital International Airport" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q204853" start="16292" end="16297" title="Haneda Airport" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="16299" end="16304" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63323189" start="16525" end="16545" title="Air China Flight 112" label="Air China Flight 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="16561" end="16575" title="Boeing 737-36N" label="Boeing 737-36N"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="16616" end="16620" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q109942672" start="16770" end="16795" title="Super-spreader" label="super-spread transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784039" start="16878" end="16895" title="inflight magazine" label="inflight magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27966739" start="16902" end="16916" title="Wings of China" label="Wings of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150586" start="18235" end="18291" title="Aviation industry in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Aviation industry in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q848751" start="18294" end="18349" title="List of airlines of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="List of airlines of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331352" start="18352" end="18407" title="List of airports in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="List of airports in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242970" start="18410" end="18466" title="List of companies of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="List of companies of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377007" start="18469" end="18522" title="Transportation in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Transportation in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297960" wikidata="Q348739" url="?curid=297960" title="White River">
<text>White River may refer to:

==Bodies of water==

=== Africa ===
* Bakoy River, in West Africa, called the White River over a portion of its length

=== Canada ===
* White River (British Columbia)
* White River (Vancouver Island), a river in the Discovery Passage–Johnstone Strait watersheds of British Columbia
** White River Provincial Park
* White River (Nass River), a river in the Marcus Passage watershed of British Columbia
* White River (Quebec)
* White River (Yukon)
* White River (Ontario)

===China===
* White River (China), an old name for the Hai River

===Dominica===
* White River (Dominica)

=== Estonia ===
* Valgejõgi, or &quot;white river&quot;, in northern Estonia

=== Iran ===
* Sefīd-Rūd, or &quot;the white river&quot;, in Gilan province

=== Jamaica ===
* White River (Jamaica), a river

=== New Zealand ===
* White River, New Zealand, a river in the South Island

===Montserrat===
* White River, Montserrat, a former river in Montserrat

=== United Kingdom ===
*St Austell River, a river in Cornwall also known as the White River

=== United States ===
* White River (Arizona), a tributary of the Salt River
* White River (Arkansas–Missouri), a tributary of the Mississippi River in Arkansas and southern Missouri
* White River (California), in Tulare County
* White River (Indiana), a large tributary of the Wabash River 
* White River (White Lake), a river in Michigan
* White River (Huron County, Michigan), a tributary of Lake Huron
* White River (Nevada) 
* White River (Oregon), a tributary of the Deschutes River 
* White River (Missouri River tributary), a tributary of the Missouri River in Nebraska and South Dakota
* White River (Texas), a tributary of the Brazos River of Texas
* White River (Green River tributary), a tributary of the Green River in Utah
* White River (Price River tributary), a tributary of the Price River in Utah
* White River (Vermont), a tributary of the Connecticut River 
* White River (Puyallup River), a tributary of the Puyallup River in Washington State 
* White River (Lake Wenatchee), a tributary of Lake Wenatchee in Washington State
* &quot;White River&quot;, an old name of the Cuyahoga River in Ohio
* White River (Wisconsin), a tributary of the Fox River in Wisconsin

==Places==

===Canada===
* White River, Ontario, a township

===Solomon Islands===
* White River, Honiara, the largest settlement in West Honiara

===South Africa===
* White River, Mpumalanga, a town in Mpumalanga Province

===United States===
* Whiteriver, Arizona, a census-designated place
* White River Junction, Vermont, a town where the White River flows into the Connecticut River
* White River National Forest, a national forest in northwest Colorado
* White River, South Dakota, a town in Mellette County, South Dakota
* White River State Park, an Indiana State Park just west of downtown Indianapolis
* White River (community), Wisconsin, an unincorporated community in Ashland County
* White River, Wisconsin, a town in Ashland County

==Other==
* White River Bridge, over the White River in Mount Rainier National Park
* White River Utes, a branch of the Ute people
* White River War, an 1879 conflict between the White River Ute Indians and the United States Army

==See also==

* White River Fauna, fossil animals discovered near White River (Missouri River tributary)
* White River Formation, a geological formation named for White River (Missouri River tributary)
* White River Township (disambiguation)
In other languages:
* Belaya River (disambiguation) (Russian)
* Byala Reka (disambiguation) (Bulgarian)
* Bela Reka (disambiguation) (Serbo-Croatian)
* Bijela (disambiguation) (Serbo-Croatian)
* Rivière Blanche (disambiguation) (French)
* Río Blanco (disambiguation) (Spanish)
* Belareca (Romanian)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q348739" start="0" end="11" title="White River" label="White River"/>
<link wikidata="Q789056" start="65" end="76" title="Bakoy River" label="Bakoy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995268" start="164" end="194" title="White River (British Columbia)" label="White River (British Columbia)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="197" end="227" title="White River (Vancouver Island)" label="White River (Vancouver Island)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="231" end="289" title="List of rivers of British Columbia#Discovery Passage–Johnstone Strait watersheds" label="river in the Discovery Passage–Johnstone Strait watersheds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995300" start="313" end="340" title="White River Provincial Park" label="White River Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="343" end="367" title="White River (Nass River)" label="White River (Nass River)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="371" end="408" title="List of rivers of British Columbia#Marcus Passage watershed" label="river in the Marcus Passage watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196121" start="431" end="451" title="White River (Quebec)" label="White River (Quebec)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529669" start="454" end="473" title="White River (Yukon)" label="White River (Yukon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566970" start="476" end="497" title="White River (Ontario)" label="White River (Ontario)"/>
<link wikidata="Q501253" start="554" end="563" title="Hai River" label="Hai River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995269" start="582" end="604" title="White River (Dominica)" label="White River (Dominica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q53482" start="624" end="633" title="Valgejõgi" label="Valgejõgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430986" start="699" end="708" title="Sefīd-Rūd" label="Sefīd-Rūd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995271" start="779" end="800" title="White River (Jamaica)" label="White River (Jamaica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133776" start="833" end="857" title="White River, New Zealand" label="White River, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636655" start="934" end="960" title="List of rivers of Montserrat" label="former river in Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592567" start="986" end="1002" title="St Austell River" label="St Austell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680778" start="1079" end="1100" title="White River (Arizona)" label="White River (Arizona)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813795" start="1134" end="1165" title="White River (Arkansas–Missouri)" label="White River (Arkansas–Missouri)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995267" start="1240" end="1264" title="White River (California)" label="White River (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430262" start="1285" end="1306" title="White River (Indiana)" label="White River (Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995272" start="1349" end="1373" title="White River (White Lake)" label="White River (White Lake)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995270" start="1397" end="1433" title="White River (Huron County, Michigan)" label="White River (Huron County, Michigan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995273" start="1463" end="1483" title="White River (Nevada)" label="White River (Nevada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709338" start="1487" end="1507" title="White River (Oregon)" label="White River (Oregon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126786" start="1547" end="1585" title="White River (Missouri River tributary)" label="White River (Missouri River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995275" start="1652" end="1671" title="White River (Texas)" label="White River (Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468443" start="1716" end="1751" title="White River (Green River tributary)" label="White River (Green River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62565122" start="1794" end="1829" title="White River (Price River tributary)" label="White River (Price River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566972" start="1872" end="1893" title="White River (Vermont)" label="White River (Vermont)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567786" start="1935" end="1963" title="White River (Puyallup River)" label="White River (Puyallup River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995276" start="2022" end="2050" title="White River (Lake Wenatchee)" label="White River (Lake Wenatchee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146724" start="2148" end="2162" title="Cuyahoga River" label="Cuyahoga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28147995" start="2173" end="2196" title="White River (Wisconsin)" label="White River (Wisconsin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995266" start="2268" end="2288" title="White River, Ontario" label="White River, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995265" start="2326" end="2346" title="White River, Honiara" label="White River, Honiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046203" start="2409" end="2432" title="White River, Mpumalanga" label="White River, Mpumalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818354" start="2487" end="2506" title="Whiteriver, Arizona" label="Whiteriver, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898562" start="2536" end="2565" title="White River Junction, Vermont" label="White River Junction, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566990" start="2631" end="2658" title="White River National Forest" label="White River National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269699" start="2702" end="2727" title="White River, South Dakota" label="White River, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995305" start="2771" end="2793" title="White River State Park" label="White River State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659667" start="2854" end="2888" title="White River (community), Wisconsin" label="White River (community), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887054" start="2938" end="2960" title="White River, Wisconsin" label="White River, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995281" start="3000" end="3018" title="White River Bridge" label="White River Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645177" start="3074" end="3090" title="White River Utes" label="White River Utes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227623" start="3121" end="3136" title="White River War" label="White River War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995284" start="3235" end="3252" title="White River Fauna" label="White River Fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379420" start="3326" end="3347" title="White River Formation" label="White River Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569187" start="3423" end="3460" title="White River Township (disambiguation)" label="White River Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q253305" start="3483" end="3512" title="Belaya River (disambiguation)" label="Belaya River (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170867" start="3525" end="3552" title="Byala Reka (disambiguation)" label="Byala Reka (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380844" start="3567" end="3593" title="Bela Reka (disambiguation)" label="Bela Reka (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q44052" start="3613" end="3636" title="Bijela (disambiguation)" label="Bijela (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222569" start="3656" end="3688" title="Rivière Blanche (disambiguation)" label="Rivière Blanche (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q412613" start="3700" end="3727" title="Río Blanco (disambiguation)" label="Río Blanco (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881912" start="3740" end="3748" title="Belareca" label="Belareca"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297962" wikidata="Q82128" url="?curid=297962" title="Temuco">
<text>Temuco () is a city and commune, capital of the Cautín Province and of the Araucanía Region in southern Chile. The city is located south of Santiago. The city grew out from a fort of the same name established in 1881 during Chile&#x27;s invasion of Araucanía. Temuco lies in the middle of the historic Araucanía, a traditional land of the indigenous Mapuche.

Temuco&#x27;s central place in Araucanía with easy access to the Andean valleys, lakes and coastal areas makes it a hub for tourism, agricultural, livestock and forestry operations as well as a communication and trade centre for the numerous small towns of Araucanía. Temuco has recently been regarded as a university city as it houses two large universities: University of the Frontier and Temuco Catholic University. Nobel laureates Gabriela Mistral and Pablo Neruda both lived in Temuco for some time.

==Etymology==

The word Temuco comes from the Mapudungun language, meaning &quot;temu water&quot;; &quot;&quot;temu&quot; is the common name of two native trees of the family Myrtaceae, &quot;Luma apiculata&quot; (also known as arrayán in Spanish) and &quot;Blepharocalyx cruckshanksii&quot;. Both species are characterized by their orange-reddish bark and by having aromatic fruits and leaves which are commonly used by the Mapuche for medicinal purposes. While &quot;Blepharocalyx cruckschankii&quot; is endangered, &quot;Luma apiculata&quot; is relatively common and in Temuco it is possible to see it in the Cerro Ñielol Natural Monument (in its natural state) as well as in city gardens and sidewalks. The blend between the words &quot;temu&quot; and &quot;co&quot;&quot; (water), probably reflects the fact that these trees frequently grow beside water bodies.

==History==

The area around Temuco began to be settled by non-indigenous Chileans in the mid-1870s, when for example Labranza began to be settled.

The city was founded by Chilean army on February 24, 1881, as a fort during the Occupation of the Araucanía. Manuel Recabarren, in charge of the project, named the place Fuerte (Fort) Recabarren.

Formed as a military encampment, Temuco had in its origins the attributes of a camp, and a year after its founding, the first major streets started to form in the downtown area.

On April 15, 1888, the first city officers were elected including the first mayor José del Rosario Muñoz. The city grew quickly; a census in 1895 indicated a population of 7,708 people, and when Cautin was declared a province, Temuco became its capital, with its population by that time of 16,037 people.

Chilean poetry has deep roots in Temuco. Nobel laureates Gabriela Mistral and Pablo Neruda (Neftalí Reyes) both lived in Temuco. Mistral was the principal of an all-girls school where Neruda would visit her and show her his first verses when he was around 15 years old.

In 2010 Temuco was affected by the earthquake on February 27 centered to the north. It was one of the most affected regions of Chile besides Santiago, Concepcion, Valparaíso and others. The earthquake registered 8.8 Mw on the moment magnitude scale. Though landlocked Temuco avoided the tsunamis the earthquake caused, many very strong aftershocks throughout the country followed, including a 7.1 MW earthquake northwest of the city. 
Nowadays, Temuco is a fast growing city with diversified commerce and services.


==Demographics==

According to the 2017 census by the National Statistics Institute (&quot;INE&quot;), Temuco had a communal population of 282,415 (134,289 men and 148,126 women). Of these, 263,165 (93.2%) lived in urban areas and 19,250 (6.8%) in rural areas. The population grew by 15.11% (37,068 persons) between the 2002 and 2017 censuses. The &quot;INE&quot; projected the 2024 population to be 309,696, The Greater Temuco metropolitan area, including the neighbouring commune of Padre Las Casas, has a population of 410,520 people, which makes it the second largest city south of Santiago (behind Concepción), and the sixth largest in the country. One of the distinctive features of Temuco is the strong presence of the Mapuche culture, who make up 23.1% of the population in the Temuco commune, and numerous German immigrant colonies (9.8%). Temuco proper has a population of 227,086.

The locals are called &quot;temuquenses&quot;. The inhabitants have diverse origins. Temuco has a high percentage of people of Basque ancestry, as well as Castilian and other Spanish nationalities. There is a substantial indigenous component, mainly Mapuche, accounting for 13% of the population of Temuco, which makes it the city of Chile with the largest indigenous presence. 
There is also a large percentage of &quot;temuquences&quot; directly descended from European immigrants, many of whom arrived during 1883–1901 after the pacification of Araucanía. The main European sources are Switzerland, Spain, France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom. Others, less numerous and from many other parts of Europe such as the Netherlands, Austria, Croatia, Armenia, Greece, Portugal, etc., arrived after that first migration, especially during the World Wars. During the Spanish Civil War (1930s), a large percentage of Aragonese, Asturians, Catalans, Galicians, Navarrese and Basques reached a significant number of immigrants from Europe (mainly Spain).

There are also small communities of Jews, from Russia, Poland, Macedonia, Hungary, as well as Central and Eastern Europe in general, and Arabs, from Lebanon, Syria and Palestine. This immigration from Europe and, to a lesser extent, Jewish and Arabic areas helps to explain the various clubs, schools, and sections of the city of Temuco. There are East Asian colonies of Chinese, Japanese and Koreans in Temuco, dating back to the end of the Korean War in the 1950s when thousands of Korean refugees settled through U.N. relocation programs to Chile.

===Notable people===
* Yanara Aedo, professional footballer
* Gustavo Becerra-Schmidt, composer
* Rosa Catrileo, member of the Constitutional Convention and land rights advocate
* Fuad Chahín, politician, former president of the Christian Democratic Party
* María José Ferrada, children&#x27;s author and journalist
* Dagoberto Godoy, aviator
* Fabiola Letelier, lawyer and human rights advocate
* Marcelo Moren Brito, member of Pinochet&#x27;s secret police, convicted of crimes against humanity
* Pablo Neruda, 1971 winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature
* Leonor Oyarzún, former first lady of Chile
* Andrea Parra, politician
* Natalia Riffo, politician in Bachelet administration and psychologist
* Karina Riquelme Viveros, human rights lawyer
* Jorge Saffirio, politician
* Marcelo Salas, retired footballer, chairman of local football club Deportes Temuco
* Luis Salvadores Salvi, Chilean basketball player
* Raúl Sohr, journalist, sociologist and writer
* Tanza Varela, actress and model
* Ena von Baer, journalist and right-wing politician

==Geography==
Temuco is located in a valley in the center-south of Chile, equidistant between the Pacific Ocean to the west and the Andes to the east. Morphologically, the city placement corresponds to Cautín River-originated fluvial land masses that developed in a crushed form between two hills, Ñielol (350m) and Conunhueno (360m).

== Economy and environment ==

The city is surrounded by a landscape typical to central-southern Chile, consisting mostly of plantations of exotic species used in forestry along with prairies. The original ecosystem of the area consisting in temperate forest is present mostly in the Ñielol hill. Given that burning wood is the primary source of heat during the cold months in Temuco, air pollution is a recurrent problem during autumn and winter. As a consequence, Air quality in Temuco is the third lowest in Chile.

== Climate ==
Climatologically, Temuco lies at the border of Chile&#x27;s central valley Mediterranean region, albeit with a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Csb&quot;). Through the year, cyclonic and anticyclonic influences alternate, with a distinct drier summer period (although not as dry as Santiago or other central valley cities, receiving just enough precipitation to avoid a Mediterranean climate classification). Its mean annual temperature is , with highest median during the warmest month of and lowest median during the coldest month of (Ciren-Corfo, 1992). Annual mean rain during 1961-1990 (Dirección Meteorológica de Chile, 1991) was (Capelli de Steffens et al., 1997).

==Administration==
As a commune, Temuco is a third-level administrative division of Chile administered by a municipal council, headed by an alcalde who is directly elected every four years. The 2008-2012 alcalde is Miguel Becker Alvear (RN).

Within the electoral divisions of Chile, Temuco is represented in the Chamber of Deputies by Germán Becker (RN) and René Saffirio (PDC) as part of the 50th electoral district, together with Padre Las Casas. The commune is represented in the Senate by José Garcia Ruminot (RN) and Eugenio Tuma Zedan (PPD) as part of the 15th senatorial constituency (Araucanía-South).

==Sports==
Temuco, is as well known as &quot;La ciudad del deporte&quot; which means, the city of sports. Temuco hosts one of the newest as well as biggest stadiums in the country, the &quot;German Becker&quot; stadium; home to the local soccer team &quot;Deportes Temuco&quot;.

This stadium has hosted numerous local sports events, as well as international ones. They are as follows:
*FIFA U20 Women&#x27;s World Cup in 2008
*WORLD RUGBY&#x27;s U20 RUGBY WORLD TROPHY in 2013
*AMERICAN CUP&#x27;s in 2015

Temuco was also one of the host cities of the official 1959 Basketball World Cup, where Chile won the bronze medal. Further to that, Temuco has numerous gyms and parks where people can go on their leisure time.

==Transportation==


Buses and collective taxis are the most popular modes of mass transit. The bus fare is CLP$150 for students and $450 for adults; the &quot;colectivos&quot; charge $500 ($650 at night). 

La Araucanía Airport is commercial air terminal for Temuco located to the south of the city, near the town of Freire, about 20 minutes south of Temuco.

The railroad connects Temuco with Victoria to the north and points in between.

Temuco does not have a rapid transit rail system.

Long-haul buses run from the Terminal Rodoviario de la Araucania, at the northern approach to town.

Private transport by car is commonly used which causes traffic congestion at peak hours.

The recent proliferation of bike lanes has placed transportation by bicycle as an emerging trend. By 2017, of bike lanes are expected to be operative.

==Important places==
* Cerro Ñielol
The Ñielol Hill houses the original temperate forest at this latitude in southern Chile as it was before the Spanish people colonised it. Currently, it has the status of natural monument and as such, it is a protected area. It has also a special meaning for the Mapuche people living in the Region, housing near the top a ceremonial area called La Patagua. We can also find a restaurant at the top of the Hill and a viewpoint of the east side of the city and Padre Las Casas, across the river. It is easily accessed by foot or car. The Southern Andean Volcano Observatory has its office there.

* Central market
The central market is one of the best places to get Mapuche crafts. It has a meat market and shops selling woodcrafts, artifacts, wool knits, and similar goods. A fire has recently affected its structure. Reconstruction is planned, but the original market is currently closed.

* Feria Pinto
One of the most traditional places in the city. Fresh fruits and vegetables are sold here in a daily basis. People from the city and from rural nearby towns come here for trade.

* Alemania Avenue
Is the principal artery in Temuco. Here we can find The Araucaria Museum building (19th century Chilean style); the Menchaca Lira Campus of Art Building (a Victorian Style building, recently restored); The English Alley, where we can find the Red Cross Building and not long ago a blue house which was dismantled to be rebuilt elsewhere (as a Heritage recovery project by the school of architecture of a known University of Temuco), both Neoclassical styled.

Recently, Alemania Av. has become an important commercial centre. Several restaurants, night clubs, pubs, bistros, pharmacies, boutiques, banks, supermarkets and two shopping malls have been opened there. There is also a Casino and a five stars hotel in the same avenue.

* Anibal Pinto Square
The core of Downtown Temuco is the Main Square Anibal Pinto. Temuco&#x27;s Main Square is the only one in Chile that was not built with a water fountain in its centre; an art gallery was built in 1981 as part of a total renewal. Compared to other main squares of southern Chile, Temuco&#x27;s looks very modern. It was named one of Chile&#x27;s most beautiful plazas.
It is a tradition, in all creole cities in Chile, that some specific buildings must be in front of the main square; in Temuco, this tradition has been broken. Main Squares are supposed to be surrounded by: a Cathedral (which is in front of Temuco&#x27;s main square, as traditionally), the Municipality (which also, is located in front of the square), a Theatre (there used to be a film theatre in front of it), a Fire Station (there is not a fire station in front of the square, as it should), a School (there is no school in front of the main square), and a Bank (there are four banks around the main square).

==References==
==External links==

* Ilustre Municipalidad de Temuco
* Mercado Municipal de Temuco</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82128" start="0" end="6" title="Temuco" label="Temuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q490055" start="15" end="19" title="List of cities in Chile" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840161" start="24" end="31" title="Communes of Chile" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="33" end="40" title="capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q201237" start="48" end="63" title="Cautín Province" label="Cautín Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176" start="75" end="91" title="Araucanía Region" label="Araucanía Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="104" end="109" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="140" end="148" title="Santiago de Chile" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422135" start="224" end="258" title="Occupation of Araucanía" label="Chile&amp;#x27;s invasion of Araucanía"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492932" start="302" end="311" title="Araucanía (historic region)" label="Araucanía"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="350" end="357" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551326" start="720" end="746" title="University of the Frontier" label="University of the Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744138" start="751" end="777" title="Temuco Catholic University" label="Temuco Catholic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q80871" start="795" end="811" title="Gabriela Mistral" label="Gabriela Mistral"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="816" end="828" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33730" start="912" end="922" title="Mapudungun" label="Mapudungun"/>
<link wikidata="Q699330" start="1058" end="1072" title="Luma apiculata" label="Luma apiculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q110513540" start="1124" end="1151" title="Blepharocalyx cruckshanksii" label="Blepharocalyx cruckshanksii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="1291" end="1298" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1852" end="1860" title="Labranza" label="Labranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422135" start="1963" end="1990" title="Occupation of the Araucanía" label="Occupation of the Araucanía"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994171" start="1992" end="2009" title="Manuel Recabarren" label="Manuel Recabarren"/>
<link wikidata="Q80871" start="2622" end="2638" title="Gabriela Mistral" label="Gabriela Mistral"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="2643" end="2655" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q151835" start="2871" end="2896" title="2010 Chile earthquake" label="earthquake on February 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="3062" end="3084" title="moment magnitude scale" label="moment magnitude scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3393" end="3399" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288549" start="3407" end="3436" title="National Statistics Institute (Chile)" label="National Statistics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="3568" end="3578" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="3601" end="3611" title="rural area" label="rural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114600" start="3766" end="3780" title="Greater Temuco" label="Greater Temuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="3781" end="3798" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q51063" start="3838" end="3853" title="Padre Las Casas, Chile" label="Padre Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="3956" end="3966" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="4079" end="4086" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="4373" end="4379" title="Basque people" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573855" start="4401" end="4410" title="Castilian people" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="4421" end="4428" title="Spaniards" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="4496" end="4503" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="4580" end="4585" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819571" start="4709" end="4728" title="European emigration" label="European immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492932" start="4794" end="4803" title="Araucanía (historic region)" label="Araucanía"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="4994" end="5001" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="5003" end="5010" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="5117" end="5134" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706746" start="5166" end="5175" title="Aragonese people" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573453" start="5177" end="5186" title="Asturians" label="Asturians"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="5188" end="5196" title="Catalan people" label="Catalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q752526" start="5198" end="5207" title="Galicians" label="Galicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="5209" end="5218" title="Navarrese" label="Navarrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="5223" end="5230" title="Basques" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="5366" end="5375" title="North Macedonia" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="5397" end="5404" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="5409" end="5416" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="5440" end="5445" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="5452" end="5459" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5461" end="5466" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="5471" end="5480" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="5651" end="5660" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="5745" end="5755" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427871" start="5878" end="5889" title="Yanara Aedo" label="Yanara Aedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q375263" start="5917" end="5940" title="Gustavo Becerra-Schmidt" label="Gustavo Becerra-Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106905427" start="5953" end="5966" title="Rosa Catrileo" label="Rosa Catrileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q100877806" start="5982" end="6007" title="Constitutional Convention (Chile)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005571" start="6012" end="6023" title="indigenous land rights" label="land rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869979" start="6035" end="6046" title="Fuad Chahín" label="Fuad Chahín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395049" start="6084" end="6110" title="Christian Democratic Party (Chile)" label="Christian Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42171835" start="6113" end="6131" title="María José Ferrada" label="María José Ferrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q321578" start="6173" end="6188" title="Dagoberto Godoy" label="Dagoberto Godoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55223013" start="6200" end="6216" title="Fabiola Letelier" label="Fabiola Letelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995871" start="6253" end="6272" title="Marcelo Moren Brito" label="Marcelo Moren Brito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="6284" end="6299" title="Pinochet dictatorship" label="Pinochet&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q545054" start="6300" end="6313" title="Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="6328" end="6351" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="6354" end="6366" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="6387" end="6412" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514230" start="6415" end="6429" title="Leonor Oyarzún" label="Leonor Oyarzún"/>
<link wikidata="Q50426468" start="6460" end="6472" title="Andrea Parra" label="Andrea Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16302038" start="6487" end="6500" title="Natalia Riffo" label="Natalia Riffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q748015" start="6516" end="6539" title="Bachelet administration" label="Bachelet administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q56324199" start="6559" end="6582" title="Karina Riquelme Viveros" label="Karina Riquelme Viveros"/>
<link wikidata="Q111367394" start="6606" end="6620" title="Jorge Saffirio" label="Jorge Saffirio"/>
<link wikidata="Q295438" start="6635" end="6648" title="Marcelo Salas" label="Marcelo Salas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917292" start="6720" end="6741" title="Luis Salvadores Salvi" label="Luis Salvadores Salvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16624451" start="6771" end="6780" title="Raúl Sohr" label="Raúl Sohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995052" start="6819" end="6831" title="Tanza Varela" label="Tanza Varela"/>
<link wikidata="Q522073" start="6853" end="6865" title="Ena von Baer" label="Ena von Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="7037" end="7042" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="7056" end="7071" title="Geomorphology" label="Morphologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054716" start="7107" end="7119" title="Cautín River" label="Cautín River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="7885" end="7906" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7908" end="7937" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365122" start="8531" end="8563" title="administrative division of Chile" label="administrative division of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="8582" end="8599" title="municipal council" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663900" start="8614" end="8621" title="alcalde" label="alcalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422826" start="8711" end="8713" title="National Renewal (Chile)" label="RN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356264" start="8728" end="8756" title="electoral divisions of Chile" label="electoral divisions of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119518" start="8787" end="8806" title="Chamber of Deputies of Chile" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185221" start="8848" end="8851" title="Christian Democratic Party" label="PDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q51063" start="8907" end="8922" title="Padre Las Casas, Chile" label="Padre Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119458" start="8958" end="8964" title="Senate of Chile" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759292" start="9017" end="9020" title="Party for Democracy (Chile)" label="PPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q220952" start="9649" end="9674" title="1959 Basketball World Cup" label="1959 Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533541" start="9682" end="9687" title="Chile national basketball team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="9827" end="9832" title="Buses" label="Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q842389" start="9837" end="9853" title="Share taxi" label="collective taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516120" start="10014" end="10034" title="La Araucanía Airport" label="La Araucanía Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q13049" start="10124" end="10130" title="Freire, Chile" label="Freire"/>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="10171" end="10179" title="train" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="10270" end="10283" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="10939" end="10946" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569620" start="11213" end="11248" title="Southern Andean Volcano Observatory" label="Southern Andean Volcano Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="11934" end="11943" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="12021" end="12030" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="12216" end="12228" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="12638" end="12643" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q498640" start="12926" end="12932" title="Creole peoples" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="13108" end="13117" title="Cathedral" label="Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="13190" end="13202" title="Municipality" label="Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="13254" end="13261" title="Theatre" label="Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195942" start="13314" end="13326" title="Fire Station" label="Fire Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914" start="13397" end="13403" title="School" label="School"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="13460" end="13464" title="Bank" label="Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297970" wikidata="Q597680" url="?curid=297970" title="Urban sociology">
<text>Urban sociology is the sociological study of cities and urban life. One of the field’s oldest sub-disciplines, urban sociology studies and examines the social, historical, political, cultural, economic, and environmental forces that have shaped urban environments. 
Like most areas of sociology, urban sociologists use statistical analysis, observation, archival research, census data, social theory, interviews, and other methods to study a range of topics, including poverty, racial residential segregation, economic development, migration and demographic trends, gentrification, homelessness, blight and crime, urban decline, and neighborhood changes and revitalization. Urban sociological analysis provides critical insights that shape and guide urban planning and policy-making. 

The philosophical foundations of modern urban sociology originate from the work of sociologists such as Karl Marx, Ferdinand Tönnies, Émile Durkheim, Max Weber and Georg Simmel who studied and theorized the economic, social and cultural processes of urbanization and its effects on social alienation, class formation, and the production or destruction of collective and individual identities.

These theoretical foundations were further expanded upon and analyzed by a group of sociologists and researchers who worked at the University of Chicago in the early twentieth century. In what became known as the Chicago School of sociology the work of Robert Park, Louis Wirth and Ernest Burgess on the inner city of Chicago revolutionized not only the purpose of urban research in sociology but also the development of human geography through its use of quantitative and ethnographic research methods. The importance of theories developed by the Chicago School within urban sociology has been critically sustained and critiqued but still, remains one of the most significant historical advancements in understanding urbanization and the city within the social sciences. The discipline may draw from several fields, including cultural sociology, economic sociology, and political sociology.

==Development and rise==
Urban sociology rose to prominence within North American academics through a group of sociologists and theorists at the University of Chicago from 1910s to 1940s in what became known as the Chicago School of Sociology. The Chicago School of Sociology combined sociological and anthropological theory with ethnographic fieldwork in order to understand how individuals, groups, and communities interact within urban social systems. Unlike the primarily macro-based sociology that had marked earlier subfields, members of the Chicago School placed greater emphasis on micro-scale social interactions that sought to provide subjective meaning to how humans interact under structural, cultural and social conditions. The theory of symbolic interaction, the basis through which many methodologically groundbreaking ethnographies were framed in this period, took primitive shape alongside urban sociology and shaped its early methodological leanings. Symbolic interaction was forged out of the writings of early micro-sociologists George Mead and Max Weber, and sought to frame how individuals interpret symbols in everyday interactions. With early urban sociologists framing the city as a &#x27;superorganism&#x27;, the concept of symbolic interaction aided in parsing out how individual communities contribute to the seamless functioning of the city itself.

Scholars of the Chicago School originally sought to answer a single question: how did an increase in urbanism during the time of the Industrial Revolution contribute to the magnification of contemporary social problems? Sociologists centred on Chicago due to its &quot;&quot; state, having expanded from a small town of 10,000 in 1860 to an urban metropolis of over two million in the next half-century. Along with this expansion came many of the era&#x27;s emerging social problems – ranging from issues with concentrated homelessness and harsh living conditions to the low wages and long hours that characterized the work of the many newly arrived European immigrants. Furthermore, unlike many other metropolitan areas, Chicago did not expand outward at the edges as predicted by early expansionist theorists, but instead &#x27;reformatted&#x27; the space available in a concentric ring pattern. As with many modern cities the business district occupied the city centre and was surrounded by slum and blighted neighbourhoods, which were further surrounded by workingmens&#x27; homes and the early forms of the modern suburbs. Urban theorists suggested that these spatially distinct regions helped to solidify and isolate class relations within the modern city, moving the middle class away from the urban core and into the privatized environment of the outer suburbs.

Due to the high concentration of first-generation immigrant families in the inner city of Chicago during the early 20th century, many prominent early studies in urban sociology focused on the transmission of immigrants&#x27; native culture roles and norms into new and developing environments. Political participation and the rise in inter-community organizations were also frequently covered in this period, with many metropolitan areas adopting census techniques that allowed for information to be stored and easily accessed by participating institutions such as the University of Chicago. Park, Burgess and McKenzie, professors at the University of Chicago and three of the earliest proponents of urban sociology, developed the Subculture Theories, which helped to explain the often-positive role of local institutions on the formation of community acceptance and social ties. When race relations break down and expansion renders one&#x27;s community members anonymous, as was proposed to be occurring in this period, the inner city becomes marked by high levels of social disorganization that prevent local ties from being established and maintained in local political arenas.

The rise of urban sociology coincided with the expansion of statistical inference in the behavioural sciences, which helped ease its transition and acceptance in educational institutions along with other burgeoning social sciences. Micro-sociology courses at the University of Chicago were among the earliest and most prominent courses on urban sociological research in the United States.

==Evolution of the discipline==
The evolution and transition of sociological theory from the Chicago School began to emerge in the 1970s with the publication of Claude Fischer&#x27;s (1975) &quot;Toward a Theory of Subculture Urbanism&quot; which incorporated Bourdieu&#x27;s theories on social capital and symbolic capital within the invasion and succession framework of the Chicago School in explaining how cultural groups form, expand and solidify a neighbourhood. The theme of transition by subcultures and groups within the city was further expanded by Barry Wellman&#x27;s (1979) &quot;The Community Question: The Intimate Networks of East Yorkers&quot; which determined the function and position of the individual, institution and community in the urban landscape in relation to their community. Wellman&#x27;s categorization and incorporation of community-focused theories such as &quot;Community Lost&quot;, &quot;Community Saved&quot;, and &quot;Community Liberated&quot; which centre around the structure of the urban community in shaping interactions between individuals and facilitating active participation in the local community are explained in detail below:

Community lost: The earliest of the three theories, this concept was developed in the late 19th century to account for the rapid development of industrial patterns that seemingly caused rifts between the individual and their local community. Urbanites were claimed to hold networks that were “impersonal, transitory and segmental”, maintaining ties in multiple social networks while at the same time lacking the strong ties that bound them to any specific group. This disorganization in turn caused members of urban communities to subsist almost solely on secondary affiliations with others and rarely allowed them to rely on other members of the community for assistance with their needs.

Community saved: A critical response to the community lost theory that developed during the 1960s, the community saved argument suggests that multistranded ties often emerge in sparsely-knit communities as time goes on, and that urban communities often possess these strong ties, albeit in different forms. Especially among low-income communities, individuals have a tendency to adapt to their environment and pool resources in order to protect themselves collectively against structural changes. Over time urban communities have tendencies to become “urban villages”, where individuals possess strong ties with only a few individuals that connect them to an intricate web of other urbanities within the same local environment.

Community liberated: A cross-section of the community lost and community saved arguments, the community liberated theory suggests that the separation of workplace, residence and familial kinship groups has caused urbanites to maintain weak ties in multiple community groups that are further weakened by high rates of residential mobility. However, the concentrated number of environments present in the city for interaction increases the likelihood of individuals developing secondary ties, even if they simultaneously maintain distance from tightly knit communities. Primary ties that offer the individual assistance in everyday life form out of sparsely-knit and spatially dispersed interactions, with the individual&#x27;s access to resources dependent on the quality of the ties they maintain within their community.

Along with the development of these theories, urban sociologists have increasingly begun to study the differences between the urban, rural and suburban environments within the last half-century. Consistent with the community-liberated argument, researchers have in large part found that urban residents tend to maintain more spatially-dispersed networks of ties than rural or suburban residents. Among lower-income urban residents, the lack of mobility and communal space within the city often disrupts the formation of social ties and lends itself to creating an unintegrated and distant community space. While the high density of networks within the city weakens relations between individuals, it increases the likelihood that at least one individual within a network can provide the primary support found among smaller and more tightly knit networks.
Since the 1970s, research into social networks has focused primarily on the types of ties developed within residential environments. Bonding ties, common in tightly knit neighbourhoods, consist of connections that provide an individual with primary support, such as access to income or upward mobility among a neighbourhood organization. Bridging ties, in contrast, are the ties that weakly connect strong networks of individuals together. A group of communities concerned about the placement of a nearby highway may only be connected through a few individuals that represent their views at a community board meeting, for instance.

However, as the theory surrounding social networks has developed, sociologists such as Alejandro Portes and the Wisconsin model of sociological research began placing increased leverage on the importance of these weak ties. While strong ties are necessary for providing residents with primary services and a sense of community, weak ties bring together elements of different cultural and economic landscapes in solving problems affecting a great number of individuals. As theorist Eric Oliver notes, neighbourhoods with vast social networks are also those that most commonly rely on heterogeneous support in problem-solving, and are also the most politically active.

As the suburban landscape developed during the 20th century and the outer city became a refuge for the wealthy and, later, the burgeoning middle class, sociologists and urban geographers such as Harvey Molotch, David Harvey and Neil Smith began to study the structure and revitalization of the most impoverished areas of the inner city. In their research, impoverished neighbourhoods, which often rely on tightly knit local ties for economic and social support, were found to be targeted by developers for gentrification which displaced residents living within these communities. Political experimentation in providing these residents with semi-permanent housing and structural support – ranging from Section 8 housing to Community Development Block Grant programs- has in many cases eased the transition of low-income residents into stable housing and employment. Yet research covering the social impact of forced movement among these residents has noted the difficulties individuals often have with maintaining a level of economic comfort, which is spurred by rising land values and inter-urban competition between cities as a means to attract capital investment. The interaction between inner-city dwellers and middle class passersby in such settings has also been a topic of study for urban sociologists.

In a September 2015 issue of &quot;City &amp; Community(C&amp;C),&quot; the article discusses future plans and discusses research needed for the coming future. The article proposes certain steps in order to react to urban trends, create a safer environment, and prepare for future urbanization. The steps include: publishing more C&amp;C articles, more research towards segregation in metropolitan areas, focusing on trends and patterns in segregation and poverty, decreasing micro-level segregation, and research towards international urbanization changes. However, in a June 2018 issue of C&amp;C, Mike Owen Benediktsson argues that spatial inequality, the idea of a lack of resources through a specific space, would be problematic for the future of urban sociology. Problems in neighbourhoods arise from political forms and issues. He argues that attention should be more on the relationship between spaces rather than the expansion of more urban cities.

==Criticism==

Many theories in urban sociology have been criticized, most prominently directed toward the ethnocentric approaches taken by many early theorists that lay the groundwork for urban studies throughout the 20th century. Early theories that sought to frame the city as an adaptable “superorganism” often disregarded the intricate roles of social ties within local communities, suggesting that the urban environment itself rather than the individuals living within it controlled the spread and shape of the city. For impoverished inner-city residents, the role of highway planning policies and other government-spurred initiatives instituted by the planner Robert Moses and others have been criticized as unsightly and unresponsive to residential needs. The slow development of empirically based urban research reflects the failure of local urban governments to adapt and ease the transition of local residents to the short-lived industrialization of the city.

Some modern social theorists have also been critical of the apparent shortsightedness that urban sociologists have shown toward the role of culture in the inner city. William Julius Wilson has criticized theory developed throughout the middle of the twentieth century as relying primarily on the structural roles of institutions, and not how culture itself affects common aspects of inner-city life such as poverty. The distance shown toward this topic, he argues, presents an incomplete picture of inner-city life. The urban sociological theory is viewed as one important aspect of sociology.

The concept of urban sociology as a whole has often been challenged and criticized by sociologists through time. Several different aspects from race, land, resources, etc. have broadened the idea. Manuel Castells questioned if urban sociology even exists and devoted 40 years&#x27; worth of research in order to redefine and reorganize the concept. With the growing population and majority of Americans living in suburbs, Castells believes that most researchers focus their work of urban sociology around cities, neglecting the other major communities of suburbs, towns, and rural areas. He also believes that urban sociologists have overcomplicated the term of urban sociology and should possibly create a more clear and organized explanation for their studies, arguing that a &quot;Sociology of Settlements,&quot; would cover most issues around the term.

Urban sociologists focus on a range of concepts such as peri-urban settlements, human overpopulation, and field studies of urban social interaction. Perry Burnett, who studied at the University of Southern Indiana, researched the idea of Urban sprawl and city optimization for the human population. Some sociologists study relationships between urban patterns/policy and social issues like racial discrimination or high-income taxes.

==See also==

* Bibliography of sociology
* Community studies
* Ekistics
* Index of urban studies articles
* Garden city movement
* List of urban sociology topics
* Rural sociology
* Social geography
* Social theory
* Sociology of architecture
* Sociology of space
* Urban anthropology
* Urban culture
* Urban economics
* Urban history
* Urban planning
* Urban tribe
* Urban vitality
==References==

===Further reading===

* Berger, Alan S., &quot;The City: Urban Communities and Their Problems&quot;, Dubuque, Iowa : William C. Brown, 1978.
* Bourdieu, P., &quot;Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste&quot;, (trans) Nice, R., Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984. 
* Durkheim, E., &quot;The Division of Labor in Society&quot;, (trans) Coser, L.A., New York: Free Press, 1997.
* Fischer, C.S., &quot;Toward a Subculture Theory of Urbanism&quot;. &quot;American Journal of Sociology&quot;, 80, pp. 1319–1341, 1975.
* Harvey, D., &quot;From Managerialism to Entrepreneurialism: The Transformation in Urban Governance in Late Capitalism&quot;. &quot;Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography,&quot; 71, pp. 3–17, 1989. 
* Hutchison, R., Gottdiener M., and Ryan, M.T.: &quot;The New Urban Sociology.&quot; Westview Press, Google E-Book, 2014.
* Marx, K., &quot;A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy&quot;, (trans) Stone, N.I., Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, 1911.
* Marx, K., &quot;Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Vol. 1&quot;, (trans) Fowkes, B., New York: Penguin, 1976.
* Molotch, H., &quot;The City as a Growth Machine: Toward a Political Economy of Place&quot;. &quot;American Journal of Sociology&quot;, 82(2), pp. 309–332, 1976.
* Molotch, H. and Logan, J., &quot;Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place&quot;, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1987.
* Portes, A., and Sensenbrenner, J., &quot;Embeddedness and immigration: notes on the social determinants of economic action&quot;, &quot;American Journal of Sociology&quot;, 98, pp. 1320–1350, 1993.
* Simmel, G., &quot;The Sociology of Georg Simmel&quot;, (trans) Wolff, K.H., Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 1950.
* Smith, N., &quot;The New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and The Revanchist City&quot;, London: Routledge, 1996. 
* Tonnies, F., &quot;Community and Society&quot;, (trans) Loomis, C.P, East Lansing: Michigan State Press, 1957. 
* Weber, M., &quot;The City&quot;, (trans) Martindale, D., and Neuwirth, G., New York: The Free Press, 1958
* Weber, M., &quot;The Protestant Ethic and the &quot;Spirit&quot; of Capitalism and Other Writings&quot;, (trans) Baehr, P. and Wells, G.C., New York: Penguin, 2002. 
* Wellman, B., &quot;The Community Question: The Intimate Networks of East Yorkers&quot;. &quot;American Journal of Sociology&quot;, 84(5), pp. 1201–31, 1979.
* Wilson, W.J., &quot;When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor&quot;, New York: Knopf, 1996.
* Wirth, L., &quot;Urbanism as a Way of Life&quot;. &quot;American Journal of Sociology&quot;, 44(1), pp. 1–24, 1938.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q597680" start="0" end="15" title="Urban sociology" label="Urban sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="23" end="35" title="sociology" label="sociological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="890" end="899" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q21163" start="901" end="918" title="Ferdinand Tönnies" label="Ferdinand Tönnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="920" end="934" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="936" end="945" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76849" start="950" end="962" title="Georg Simmel" label="Georg Simmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="1036" end="1048" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="1068" end="1085" title="social alienation" label="social alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072063" start="1393" end="1420" title="Chicago school (sociology)" label="Chicago School of sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q919081" start="1433" end="1444" title="Robert E. Park" label="Robert Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q692056" start="1446" end="1457" title="Louis Wirth" label="Louis Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q990849" start="1462" end="1476" title="Ernest Burgess" label="Ernest Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1498" end="1505" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12831143" start="1601" end="1616" title="human geography" label="human geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="1898" end="1910" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q295978" start="3122" end="3133" title="George Herbert Mead" label="George Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="3138" end="3147" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163216" start="3323" end="3343" title="symbolic interaction" label="symbolic interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3696" end="3703" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q214339" start="5063" end="5068" title="roles" label="roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="5073" end="5078" title="Norm (social)" label="norms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5554" end="5573" title="Subculture Theories" label="Subculture Theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="6065" end="6086" title="statistical inference" label="statistical inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919817" start="6094" end="6114" title="behavioural sciences" label="behavioural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614079" start="6237" end="6252" title="Microsociology" label="Micro-sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129017" start="6556" end="6570" title="Claude Fischer" label="Claude Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156268" start="6655" end="6670" title="Pierre Bourdieu" label="Bourdieu&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q214693" start="6683" end="6697" title="social capital" label="social capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751638" start="6702" end="6718" title="symbolic capital" label="symbolic capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892939" start="6953" end="6966" title="Barry Wellman" label="Barry Wellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714631" start="11387" end="11403" title="Alejandro Portes" label="Alejandro Portes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027369" start="11412" end="11452" title="Wisconsin model" label="Wisconsin model of sociological research"/>
<link wikidata="Q690068" start="12137" end="12154" title="urban geography" label="urban geographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677447" start="12163" end="12177" title="Harvey Molotch" label="Harvey Molotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q343055" start="12179" end="12191" title="David Harvey (geographer)" label="David Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q945584" start="12196" end="12206" title="Neil Smith (geographer)" label="Neil Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="12474" end="12488" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154716" start="12690" end="12723" title="Community Development Block Grant" label="Community Development Block Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123518" start="13313" end="13333" title="City &amp;amp; Community" label="City &amp;amp; Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q23578769" start="14426" end="14439" title="urban studies" label="urban studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="14904" end="14916" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q111536" start="15376" end="15397" title="William Julius Wilson" label="William Julius Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310161" start="16001" end="16016" title="Manuel Castells" label="Manuel Castells"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="16742" end="16762" title="human overpopulation" label="human overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="16900" end="16912" title="Urban sprawl" label="Urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903441" start="17113" end="17138" title="Bibliography of sociology" label="Bibliography of sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155068" start="17141" end="17158" title="Community studies" label="Community studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076155" start="17161" end="17169" title="Ekistics" label="Ekistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37468" start="17172" end="17203" title="Index of urban studies articles" label="Index of urban studies articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="17206" end="17226" title="Garden city movement" label="Garden city movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019089" start="17229" end="17259" title="List of urban sociology topics" label="List of urban sociology topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q396246" start="17262" end="17277" title="Rural sociology" label="Rural sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q524273" start="17280" end="17296" title="Social geography" label="Social geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990987" start="17299" end="17312" title="Social theory" label="Social theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q635370" start="17315" end="17340" title="Sociology of architecture" label="Sociology of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133414" start="17343" end="17361" title="Sociology of space" label="Sociology of space"/>
<link wikidata="Q27977" start="17364" end="17382" title="Urban anthropology" label="Urban anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q778407" start="17385" end="17398" title="Urban culture" label="Urban culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q385256" start="17401" end="17416" title="Urban economics" label="Urban economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569011" start="17419" end="17432" title="Urban history" label="Urban history"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="17435" end="17449" title="Urban planning" label="Urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="17452" end="17463" title="Urban tribe" label="Urban tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q110608929" start="17466" end="17480" title="Urban vitality" label="Urban vitality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297971" wikidata="Q454237" url="?curid=297971" title="Amanda de Cadenet">
<text>Amanda de Cadenet () (born 29 February 1972) is a British photographer, and media personality based in Los Angeles, United States. She began her entertainment career in the 1990s, first as a presenter for British series &quot;The Word&quot; and &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot; before moving to Los Angeles to briefly pursue an acting career. A tabloid figure at the time, she transitioned to a more private career as a photographer in the 2000s. She has hosted an eponymous interview series on the Lifetime Channel.

== Career ==

=== 1990–1999: Early career ===
At age 18, de Cadenet began her career as a co-presenter for &quot;The Word&quot;, a late-night Channel 4 entertainment show in 1990–1995. She also co-hosted the British television show &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot;.

Her career and reputation as a &#x27;wild child&#x27; made her a British tabloid figure and she became only more well known when she married Duran Duran bassist John Taylor in 1991 at age 19. They moved from the United Kingdom to Los Angeles the following year. She embarked upon a short-lived movie career, appearing in Allison Anders&#x27;s segment of the 1995 anthology film &quot;Four Rooms&quot;, &quot;Fall&quot; (1997) and &quot;Brokedown Palace&quot; (1999).

=== 2000–present: New ventures ===
Her career then turned to fashion and portrait photography, working for magazines such as &quot;Spin&quot;, &quot;Jane&quot; and &quot;Harper’s Bazaar&quot;, among others. In 2005, she published a photo book entitled &quot;Rare Birds&quot;. Her celebrity subjects have included Drew Barrymore, Sofia Coppola, Demi Moore, Olivia Wilde, Mary J. Blige, Keanu Reeves, Beck Hansen, and the members of The Strokes.

In the 2010s, she returned to television and worked on a series of eponymous interview projects. In 2011, it was announced that de Cadenet would be the host of a new television interview series called &quot;The Conversation with Amanda de Cadenet&quot;, airing on the Lifetime Channel, with Demi Moore as a co-executive producer. On the show, de Cadenet has interviewed female guests such as Hillary Clinton, Lady Gaga, Portia de Rossi, Rita Wilson, Gwyneth Paltrow, Zoe Saldana and Jane Fonda. During the production of &quot;The Conversation&quot;, she developed a second show with Lifetime, a weekly late-night television talk show featuring de Cadenet entitled, &quot;Undone with @AmandadeCadenet&quot;. The show ran for six episodes in 2014. In 2018, she worked with Showtime to develop a pilot for a half-hour weekly news-magazine show tentatively titled &quot;Now What With Amanda de Cadenet&quot;. The show did not air. In 2019, she developed a ten-episode spin-off podcast of &quot;The Conversation&quot; in partnership with Spotify&quot;.&quot;

In 2016, de Cadenet founded Girlgaze, a global online, multi-sided platform which connects women and non-binary creatives with different businesses, companies and brands. Speaking on her role as CEO and past experience as a photographer, she said “I&#x27;m interested in the stories [women and nonbinary] people have to tell, because of my own experience of being shut out of so many creative opportunities because of my gender.” For this work, Fast Company named her one of 2020&#x27;s &quot;Most Creative People in Business.&quot;

In 2017, she released her second book and collection of photography, &quot;#girlgaze: How Girls See the World.&quot; This was followed in 2018 by a book of essays published by Harper Wave titled &quot;It&#x27;s Messy: On Boys, Boobs, and Badass Women&quot;.

== Personal life ==
De Cadenet was born in Hampstead, London. She is the daughter of Anna and racing car driver Alain de Cadenet. De Cadenet lived in England until 1992, when she moved to the United States.

De Cadenet was married to Duran Duran bassist John Taylor from 1991 until 1997. At the time of their marriage, according to de Cadenet herself, she was only 19 and pregnant. Taylor and de Cadenet have one daughter, Atlanta Noo de Cadenet Taylor.

In 2006, she married guitarist Nick Valensi of American rock band the Strokes, after meeting at one of the band&#x27;s performances in 2002. Their twin children Ella and Silvan were born in 2007.

== Filmography ==

=== Talk shows ===

* &quot;The Word&quot; (1990–1994); presenter
* &quot;The Big Breakfast&quot; (1994–1995); co-presenter
* &quot;The Conversation&quot; (2012, 2015–2016); host, executive producer
* &quot;Chelsea Lately&quot; (2012); guest host
* &quot;Project Runway&quot; (2014); guest judge
* &quot;The Talk&quot; (2014); guest co-host
* &quot;Undone with @AmandadeCadenet&quot; (2014); host, executive producer
* &quot;Now What With Amanda de Cadenet&quot; (unaired pilot, 2018); host, executive producer

=== Acting ===

* &quot;The Rachel Papers&quot; (1989)
* &quot;The Blue Flame&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Four Rooms&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Grace of My Heart&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Fall&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Hunger&quot; (1997); TV series, 1 episode
* &quot;Implicated&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Mascara&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Brokedown Palace&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Arrested Development&quot; (2013); TV series, 1 episode

=== Podcasts ===

* &quot;The Conversation&quot; (2019–present); host

=== Other appearances ===

* &quot;Whatever Happened to the Wild Child?&quot; (2005); TV documentary
* &quot;Barely Famous&quot; (2015); reality TV series, 1 episode
* &quot;Embrace: The Documentary&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Elles&quot; (2018); TV documentary

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q454237" start="0" end="17" title="Amanda de Cadenet" label="Amanda de Cadenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="103" end="114" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q947873" start="191" end="200" title="Television presenter" label="presenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031410" start="226" end="234" title="The Word (TV series)" label="The Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="251" end="268" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="496" end="512" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031410" start="628" end="636" title="The Word (TV series)" label="The Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="657" end="666" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="753" end="770" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="920" end="931" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q540283" start="940" end="951" title="John Taylor (bass guitarist)" label="John Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="991" end="1005" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1009" end="1020" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838329" start="1100" end="1114" title="Allison Anders" label="Allison Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137372" start="1163" end="1173" title="Four Rooms" label="Four Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394424" start="1187" end="1191" title="Fall (1997 film)" label="Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q925562" start="1215" end="1231" title="Brokedown Palace" label="Brokedown Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="1378" end="1382" title="Spin magazine" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151058" start="1396" end="1400" title="Jane (magazine)" label="Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="1417" end="1432" title="Harper’s Bazaar" label="Harper’s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q676094" start="1560" end="1574" title="Drew Barrymore" label="Drew Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="1576" end="1589" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="1591" end="1601" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q200355" start="1603" end="1615" title="Olivia Wilde" label="Olivia Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="1617" end="1630" title="Mary J. Blige" label="Mary J. Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="1632" end="1644" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="1646" end="1657" title="Beck Hansen" label="Beck Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211583" start="1678" end="1689" title="The Strokes" label="The Strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="1960" end="1976" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="1983" end="1993" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="2084" end="2099" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="2101" end="2110" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q215366" start="2112" end="2127" title="Portia de Rossi" label="Portia de Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234144" start="2129" end="2140" title="Rita Wilson" label="Rita Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="2142" end="2157" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q190162" start="2159" end="2170" title="Zoe Saldana" label="Zoe Saldana"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="2175" end="2185" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346673" start="3192" end="3204" title="Fast Company" label="Fast Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="3457" end="3468" title="HarperCollins" label="Harper Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="3583" end="3592" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705713" start="3652" end="3668" title="Alain de Cadenet" label="Alain de Cadenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="3774" end="3785" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q540283" start="3794" end="3805" title="John Taylor (bass guitarist)" label="John Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q955635" start="4026" end="4038" title="Nick Valensi" label="Nick Valensi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211583" start="4061" end="4072" title="the Strokes" label="the Strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031410" start="4239" end="4247" title="The Word (TV series)" label="The Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717547" start="4285" end="4302" title="The Big Breakfast" label="The Big Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892062" start="4418" end="4432" title="Chelsea Lately" label="Chelsea Lately"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122661" start="4466" end="4480" title="Project Runway" label="Project Runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768034" start="4515" end="4523" title="The Talk (talk show)" label="The Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347896" start="4747" end="4764" title="The Rachel Papers" label="The Rachel Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137372" start="4822" end="4832" title="Four Rooms" label="Four Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q584662" start="4854" end="4871" title="Grace of My Heart" label="Grace of My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394424" start="4893" end="4897" title="Fall (1997 film)" label="Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402306" start="4919" end="4929" title="The Hunger (TV series)" label="The Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q925562" start="5034" end="5050" title="Brokedown Palace" label="Brokedown Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="5072" end="5092" title="Arrested Development" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865207" start="5309" end="5322" title="Barely Famous" label="Barely Famous"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297972" wikidata="Q847120" url="?curid=297972" title="Half-pipe">
<text>A half-pipe is a structure used in gravity extreme sports such as skateboarding, snowboarding, skiing, freestyle BMX, skating, and scooter riding.

==Overview==
The structure resembles a cross-section of a swimming pool, essentially two concave ramps (or quarter-pipes), topped by copings and decks, facing each other across a flat transition, also known as a &quot;tranny&quot;. Originally half-pipes were half sections of a large diameter pipe. Since the 1980s, half-pipes contain an extended &quot;flat bottom&quot; between the quarter-pipes. The original style half-pipes are no longer built. Flat ground provides time to regain balance after landing and more time to prepare for the next trick.

Half-pipe applications include leisure recreation, skills development, competitive training, amateur and professional competition, demonstrations, and as an adjunct to other types of skills training.
A skilled athlete can perform in a half-pipe for an extended period of time by pumping to attain extreme speeds with relatively little effort. Large (high amplitude) half-pipes make possible many of the aerial tricks in BMX, skating and skateboarding.

For winter sports such as freestyle skiing and snowboarding, a half-pipe can be dug out of the ground or snow perhaps combined with snow buildup. The plane of the transition is oriented downhill at a slight grade to allow riders to use gravity to develop speed and facilitate drainage of melt. In the absence of snow, dug out half-pipes can be used by dirt-boarders, motorcyclists, and mountain bikers.

Performance in a half-pipe has been rapidly increasing over recent years. The current limit performed by a top-level athlete for a rotational trick in a half-pipe is 1440 degrees (four full 360 degree rotations). In top level competitions, rotation is generally limited to emphasize style and flow.

== Origin ==
In the early 1970s, swimming pools were used by skateboarders in a manner similar to surfing ocean waves. In 1975, some teenagers from Encinitas, California, and other northern San Diego County communities began using water pipes in the central Arizona desert associated with the Central Arizona Project, a federal public works project to divert water from the Colorado River to the city of Phoenix. Tom Stewart, one of these young California skateboarders, looked for a more convenient location to have a similar skateboarding experience. Stewart consulted with his brother Mike, an architect, on how to build a ramp that resembled the Arizona pipes. With his brother&#x27;s plans in hand, Tom built a wood frame half-pipe in the front yard of his house in Encinitas.

In a few days, the press had gotten word about Tom&#x27;s creation and contacted him directly. Tom then went on to create Rampage, Inc. and began selling blueprints for his half-pipe design. About five months later, &quot;Skateboarder&quot; magazine featured both Tom Stewart and Rampage.

== Design ==

The character of a half-pipe depends on the relationship between four attributes: most importantly, the transition radius and the height, and less so, the degree of flat bottom and width. Extra width allows for longer slides and grinds. The flat bottom, while valued for recovery time, serves no purpose if it is longer than it needs to be.
Thus, it is the ratio between height and transition radius that determines the personality of a given ramp, because the ratio determines the angle of the lip.

On half-pipes which are less than vertical, the height, typically between 50% and 75% of the radius, profoundly affects the ride up to and from the lip, and the speed at which tricks must be executed. Ramps near or below of height sometimes fall below 50% of the height of their radius. Technical skaters use them for advanced flip tricks and spin maneuvers. Smaller transitions that maintain the steepness of their larger counterparts are commonly found in pools made for skating and in custom mini ramps. The difficulty of technical tricks is increased with the steepness, but the feeling of dropping in from the coping is preserved.

The standard design in the construction of ramps is to use a constant radius in transitions:
Most of the ramps are built with a quarter circle of constant radius for easy construction, and this method is tried and true. But some of the best ramps are not constant radius but a roughly elliptical with somewhat less final &quot;vert&quot; (vertical).
The design is supposed to allow for easy big air with return still on the curve and less danger of landing on the flat (&quot;bottoming out&quot;). 

=== Mathematics ===
A cycloid profile will theoretically give the fastest half-pipe if friction is neglected. It is then called a brachistochrone curve. Such a curve in its pure form has infinitely short verts and is π times as wide as it is high.

=== Skateboarding, freestyle BMX, scootering, and aggressive inline skating ===

Frame and support for skateboard, BMX, and vert skating half-pipes frequently consist of a 2×6×8&quot; lumber (actual 38 × 140 × 184 mm) framework sheathed in plywood finished with sheets of masonite or Skatelite. Also, a metal frame finished in wood or metal is sometimes used.

Most commercial and contest ramps are surfaced by attaching sheets of some form of masonite to a frame. Many private ramps are surfaced in the same manner but may use plywood instead of masonite as surface material. Some ramps are constructed by spot-welding sheet metal to the frame, resulting in a fastener-free surface. Recent developments in technology have produced various versions of improved masonite substances such as Skatelite, RampArmor, and HARD-Nox. These ramp surfaces are far more expensive than traditional materials.

Channels, extensions, and roll-ins are the basic ways to customize a ramp. Sometimes a section of the platform is cut away to form a roll-in and a channel to allow skaters to commence a ride without dropping in and perform tricks over the gap. Extensions are permanent or temporary additions to the height of one section of the ramp that can make riding more challenging.

Creating a spine ramp is another variation of the half-pipe. A spine ramp is basically two quarter pipes connected at the vertical edge.
== Snow half-pipes ==

Half-pipes in snow were originally done in large part by hand or with heavy machinery. Pipes were cut into snow using an apparatus similar to a grain auger. Colorado farmer Doug Waugh created the Pipe Dragon used in both the 1998 and 2002 Winter Olympics. One current method of half-pipe cutting is by use of a Zaugg Pipe Monster, which uses five snow-cutting edges to create an elliptical shape that is purportedly safer and allows the rider to gain more speed. 

In winter sports, a halfpipe is called a superpipe. The tallest snow superpipe in the world () is located near Laax, Switzerland. With a height of 6.90 m (22.6 ft), this halfpipe has held the world record since the 2014–2015 season, and regularly hosts the LAAX Open.

The current world record for highest jump in a half-pipe is held by freestyle skier Joffrey Pollet-Villard. He set the record at the FIS Freestyle Ski and Snowboarding World Championships in 2015, when he achieved a height of 8.04 meters (26ft, 3in) above a 22-ft superpipe.

== See also ==

* Freestyle BMX
* Glossary of cycling

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q847120" start="2" end="11" title="Half-pipe" label="half-pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q309162" start="43" end="56" title="extreme sport" label="extreme sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q842284" start="66" end="79" title="skateboarding" label="skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="81" end="93" title="snowboarding" label="snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="95" end="101" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192643" start="103" end="116" title="freestyle BMX" label="freestyle BMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034982" start="118" end="125" title="Inline skating" label="skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118172" start="980" end="987" title="pump (skateboarding)" label="pumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="1056" end="1065" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034982" start="1126" end="1133" title="Inline skating" label="skating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1138" end="1151" title="skateboarding trick#Aerial" label="skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q189472" start="1180" end="1196" title="freestyle skiing" label="freestyle skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="1201" end="1213" title="snowboarding" label="snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="1540" end="1555" title="mountain biking" label="mountain bikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q532711" start="2006" end="2027" title="Encinitas, California" label="Encinitas, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053686" start="2151" end="2174" title="Central Arizona Project" label="Central Arizona Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534126" start="2863" end="2875" title="Skateboarder (magazine)" label="Skateboarder"/>
<link wikidata="Q204072" start="4605" end="4612" title="cycloid" label="cycloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q529985" start="4713" end="4734" title="brachistochrone curve" label="brachistochrone curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131150" start="4956" end="4968" title="vert skating" label="vert skating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5024" end="5030" title="Lumber#North American softwoods" label="actual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808397" start="5104" end="5112" title="masonite" label="masonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974641" start="6406" end="6417" title="grain auger" label="grain auger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6435" end="6445" title="Doug Waugh" label="Doug Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9664" start="6487" end="6491" title="1998 Winter Olympics" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="6496" end="6516" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368003" start="6768" end="6777" title="superpipe" label="superpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q69606" start="6838" end="6842" title="Laax" label="Laax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6984" end="6988" title="Laax#Ski-region of Flims, Laax and Falera" label="LAAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189472" start="7064" end="7079" title="Freestyle skiing" label="freestyle skier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18919266" start="7080" end="7102" title="Joffrey Pollet-Villard" label="Joffrey Pollet-Villard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743582" start="7129" end="7191" title="FIS Freestyle Ski and Snowboarding World Championships 2015" label="FIS Freestyle Ski and Snowboarding World Championships in 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192643" start="7290" end="7303" title="Freestyle BMX" label="Freestyle BMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109222" start="7306" end="7325" title="Glossary of cycling" label="Glossary of cycling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297978" wikidata="Q1033165" url="?curid=297978" title="Canfor">
<text>Canfor Corporation is an integrated forest products company based in Vancouver, British Columbia.

==History==
The company traces its roots to the late 1930s when brothers-in-law John G. Prentice and L.L.G. &quot;Poldi&quot; Bentley and their families left their native Austria just before the outbreak of World War II. They settled in Vancouver and built a small mill that was the beginning of the more than 75-year-old company.

In 2006, the company was subject to a proxy fight between billionaires Jim Pattison and Stephen A. Jarislowsky, who owned 30% and 18% of the firm&#x27;s shares, respectively. Pattison won and ousted CEO Jim Shepherd over Canfor&#x27;s poor performance and declining share price, which saw Jim Pattison appointed interim CEO.

==Current status==

Poldi Bentley&#x27;s son Peter Bentley (1930-2021) was the Chairman Emeritus of the Board of Directors. Canfor produces softwood lumber, specialty wood products, and engineered wood products. Canfor also owns a controlling share in Canfor Pulp Limited, which produces northern softwood kraft pulp and kraft paper in BC.

As of 2016, the company has an annual production capability of 5.9 billion board feet of lumber, 1.1 million tonnes of northern softwood market kraft pulp, approximately 220,000 tonnes of BCTMP and 140,000 tonnes of kraft paper.

Operations or offices are located in:

On November 15, 2018 Canfor announced that it had entered into an agreement to acquire a 70% share of the Vida Group, a wood products company based in Sweden. The prior owners of Vida maintain a 30% share and manage day-to-day operations.

Canfor formerly owned the Englewood Railway on Vancouver Island, but sold it to Western Forest Products in 2006.

Canfor has 6,380 employees as of 2016.

Canfor is a member of the Forest Products Association of Canada.

==References==
==External links==
* Canfor Corporation website
* Canfor Careers website
* Canfor Pulp website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1033165" start="0" end="18" title="Canfor" label="Canfor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469189" start="36" end="50" title="forest product" label="forest product"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="69" end="78" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="80" end="96" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252895" start="469" end="480" title="proxy fight" label="proxy fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q555549" start="502" end="514" title="Jim Pattison" label="Jim Pattison"/>
<link wikidata="Q975890" start="519" end="541" title="Stephen A. Jarislowsky" label="Stephen A. Jarislowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172784" start="802" end="815" title="Peter Bentley (businessman)" label="Peter Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="897" end="912" title="Softwood" label="softwood lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="943" end="967" title="engineered wood products" label="engineered wood products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755609" start="1063" end="1073" title="kraft pulp" label="kraft pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755609" start="1078" end="1089" title="kraft paper" label="kraft paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378131" start="1633" end="1650" title="Englewood Railway" label="Englewood Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="1654" end="1670" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529482" start="1687" end="1710" title="Western Forest Products" label="Western Forest Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469083" start="1787" end="1824" title="Forest Products Association of Canada" label="Forest Products Association of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297979" wikidata="Q132589" url="?curid=297979" title="Camilo José Cela">
<text>Camilo José Cela y Trulock, 1st Marquess of Iria Flavia (; 11 May 1916 – 17 January 2002) was a Spanish novelist, poet, story writer and essayist associated with the Generation of &#x27;36 movement.

He was awarded the 1989 Nobel Prize in Literature &quot;for a rich and intensive prose, which with restrained compassion forms a challenging vision of man&#x27;s vulnerability&quot;.

==Childhood and early career==
Camilo José Cela was born in the rural parish of Iria Flavia, in Padrón, A Coruña, Spain, on 11 May 1916. He was the oldest child of nine. His father, Camilo Crisanto Cela y Fernández, was Galician. His mother, Camila Emanuela Trulock y Bertorini, was a Galician of English and Italian ancestry. The family was upper-middle-class and Cela described his childhood as being &quot;so happy it was hard to grow up.&quot;

He lived with his family in Vigo from 1921 to 1925, when they moved to Madrid. There, Cela studied at a Piarist school. In 1931 he was diagnosed with tuberculosis and admitted to the sanatorium of Guadarrama, where he took advantage of his free time to work on his novel &quot;Pabellón de reposo&quot;. While recovering from the illness Cela began intensively reading works by José Ortega y Gasset and Antonio de Solís y Ribadeneyra.

The Spanish Civil War broke out in 1936 when Cela was 20 years old and just recovering from his illness. His political leanings were conservative and he escaped to the rebel zone. He enlisted himself as a soldier but was wounded and hospitalized in Logroño.

==Career==
The civil war ended in 1939; after the war, Cela became indecisive towards his university studies and ended up working in a bureau of textile industries. It was here where he began to write what would become his first novel, (&quot;The Family of Pascual Duarte&quot;), which was finally published when he was 26, in 1942. Pascual Duarte has trouble finding validity in conventional morality and commits a number of crimes, including murders, for which he feels nothing. The novel is of particular importance as it played a large part in shaping the direction of the post-World War II Spanish novel.

Cela became a censor in Francoist Spain in 1943. Perhaps his best-known work was produced during a period where his own writing came under scrutiny from his fellow censors, including (&quot;The Hive&quot;) which was published in Buenos Aires in 1951, having been banned in Spain because of the perceived immorality of its content referencing erotic themes. This meant that his name could no longer appear in the printed media. The novel features more than 300 characters and a style showing the influence of both Spanish realism and contemporary English and French-language authors. Cela&#x27;s signature style—a sarcastic, often grotesque, form of realism—is epitomized in . Cela remained loyal to Francoist Spain, even working as an informer for the Spanish secret police by reporting on the activities of dissident groups and betraying fellow intellectuals.

From the late 1960s, with the publication of &quot;San Camilo, 1936&quot;, Cela&#x27;s work became increasingly experimental. In 1988 he wrote &quot;Christ Versus Arizona&quot; (), which tells the story of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral in a single sentence that is more than one hundred pages long.

In his later years Cela became known for his scandalous outbursts; in an interview with Mercedes Milá for Spanish state television he boasted of his ability to absorb litres of water via his anus while offering to demonstrate. Cela had already scandalized Spanish society with his (Secret Dictionary, 1969–1971), a dictionary of slang and taboo words. In 1998, Cela expressed discomfort towards the presence of homosexual groups at the commemoration of Federico García Lorca&#x27;s centenary, stating that, &quot;For me, I would prefer a more straightforward and less anecdotal commemoration without the support of gay groups. I have nothing against gays, I just do not take it up the ass&quot;.

==Distinctions==
On 26 May 1957, Cela was appointed a member of the Royal Spanish Academy and given Seat Q. He was appointed Royal Senator in the Constituent Cortes, where he exerted some influence in the wording of the Spanish Constitution of 1978. In 1987, he was awarded the Prince of Asturias Award for Literature.

Cela was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1989 &quot;for a rich and intensive prose, which with restrained compassion forms a challenging vision of man&#x27;s vulnerability&quot;.

In 1994, he was awarded the Premio Planeta, although some question the objectivity of the awards, and winners on occasion have refused to accept it. Two years later, in recognition of his contributions to literature, Cela was ennobled on 17 May 1996 by King Juan Carlos I, who gave Cela the hereditary title of Marquess of Iria Flavia in the nobility of Spain. On his death the title passed to his son Camilo José Cela Conde.

Cela described the Spanish Cervantes Prize for lifetime achievement as a writer as being &quot;covered with shit&quot;. In 1995 he was offered the prize, which he accepted.

==Death==
Cela died from heart disease on 17 January 2002 at the Hospital Centro in Madrid, aged 85. He was buried in his hometown at the parish cemetery of &quot;Santa María de Adina&quot;.

Cela&#x27;s will was contested because he favoured his widow and second younger wife, Marina Castaño, over his son Camilo José Cela Conde from his first marriage to Rosario Conde.

==Selected works==
===Spanish===
====Novels====
* 
* 
* (Also published under the title &quot;Historias de Venezuela&quot;.)
* 
* 
* 
* 

====Short-story collections====
* 
* 

====Drama and poetry collections====
* 
* 
* 

====Travel writing====
* 
* 
* 
* 

====Essays====
* 

====Criticism====

====Reference works====

* (Updated since initial publication.)
* (4 volumes.)
* 

====Memoirs====
* 

====Correspondence====

* (Cela&#x27;s correspondence with 13 exiled Spanish writers: María Zambrano, Rafael Alberti, Américo Castro, Fernando Arrabal, Jorge Guillén, Max Aub, Emilio Prados, Luis Cernuda, Manuel Altolaguirre, León Felipe, Corpus Barga, Francisco Ayala, Ramón J. Sender.)

====Collected works====

* (Volumes published as completed since 1962.) Volume 1: Las tres primeras novelas (1942—44); Volume 2: Cuentos (1941—53); Volume 3: Apuntes carpetovetonicos. Novelas cortas (1941–56); Volume 4: Viajes por España, 1 (1948—52); Volume 5: Viajes por España, 2 (1952—58); Volume 6: Viajes por España, 3 (1959—64)l Volume 7: Tres novelas más (1951—55); Volume 8: Los amigos y otra novela (1960—62); Volume 9: Glosa del mundo en torno. Articulos, 1. (1940—53). Mesa revuelta. 5. ed.; Volume 10: Glosa del mundo en torno. Articulos, 2. (1944—59). Cajón de sastre. 4. ed; Paginas de geografía errabunda. 3. ed.; Volume 1:. Glosa del mundo en torno. Artʹiculos, 3 (1945-1954). Las compañías convenientes y otros fingimientos y cegueras. 3a ed. Garito de hospicianos o Guirigay de imposturas y bambollas. 4a ed.; Volume 12: Glosa del mundo en torno. Artículos, 4 (1943—61). La rueda de los ocios. 4a ed. Cuatro figuras del 98. 2a ed.; Volume 14: Enciclopedia del erotismo, 1. Aachen—Cirene; Volume 15: Enciclopedia del erotismo, 1. Cirial—Futrʹosofo; Volume 16: Enciclopedia del erotismo, 3. Gabacho—Óvulo; Volume 17: Enciclopedia del erotismo, 4. Pabst—Zurrucarse.

===English translations===
* (Reprinted: New York: New York: Noonday Press, 1990.) Translation of &quot;La colmena&quot;.
* Translation of &quot;Viaje a la Alcarria&quot;.
* Authorized translation of &quot;Mrs. Caldwell habla con su hijo&quot;.
* Translation of &quot;Visperas, festividad y octava de San Camilo del año 1936 en Madrid&quot;.
* Translation of &quot;Mazurca para dos muertos&quot;.
* Translation of &quot;Madera de boj&quot;.
* &quot;The Hive&quot;. Translated by Womack, James. New York Review Books. 2023.

==See also==
* Journey to the Alcarria
* Café Gijón (Madrid)
* Universidad Camilo José Cela

==References==
==External links==

* Camilo José Cela Foundation
* BBC obituary
* Biography of Camilo José Cela
* Genealogy of Cela Family




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132589" start="0" end="55" title="Camilo José Cela" label="Camilo José Cela y Trulock, 1st Marquess of Iria Flavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="96" end="103" title="Spaniards" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309283" start="166" end="188" title="Generation of &amp;#x27;36" label="Generation of &amp;#x27;36"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468625" start="219" end="249" title="1989 Nobel Prize in Literature" label="1989 Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332445" start="464" end="475" title="Iria Flavia" label="Iria Flavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q500494" start="480" end="486" title="Padrón" label="Padrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q82119" start="488" end="496" title="Province of A Coruña" label="A Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q752526" start="604" end="612" title="Galician people" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="681" end="688" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="693" end="700" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8745" start="861" end="865" title="Vigo" label="Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="904" end="910" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q273894" start="937" end="944" title="Piarist" label="Piarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="983" end="995" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="1016" end="1026" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q517450" start="1030" end="1040" title="Guadarrama" label="Guadarrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q56119267" start="1110" end="1128" title="Rest Home (novel)" label="Pabellón de reposo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153020" start="1210" end="1230" title="José Ortega y Gasset" label="José Ortega y Gasset"/>
<link wikidata="Q952846" start="1235" end="1265" title="Antonio de Solís y Ribadeneyra" label="Antonio de Solís y Ribadeneyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="1272" end="1289" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14325" start="1517" end="1524" title="Logroño" label="Logroño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002647" start="1770" end="1798" title="The Family of Pascual Duarte" label="The Family of Pascual Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2109" end="2121" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="2162" end="2177" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="2659" end="2666" title="Literary realism" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="2837" end="2852" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118511" start="3051" end="3067" title="San Camilo, 1936" label="San Camilo, 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791732" start="3149" end="3170" title="Christ Versus Arizona" label="Christ Versus Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347682" start="3210" end="3237" title="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral" label="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral"/>
<link wikidata="Q611566" start="3390" end="3403" title="Mercedes Milá" label="Mercedes Milá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3713" end="3723" title="Human male sexuality#Homosexuality" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="3755" end="3776" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993457" start="4067" end="4088" title="Royal Spanish Academy" label="Royal Spanish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111912980" start="4145" end="4163" title="Constituent Cortes" label="Constituent Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="4219" end="4247" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="4277" end="4316" title="Prince of Asturias Award for Literature" label="Prince of Asturias Award for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="4340" end="4365" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630979" start="4536" end="4550" title="Premio Planeta" label="Premio Planeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="4761" end="4779" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="King Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772760" start="4819" end="4842" title="Marquess of Iria Flavia" label="Marquess of Iria Flavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554364" start="4850" end="4867" title="Spanish nobility" label="nobility of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8256275" start="4910" end="4932" title="Camilo José Cela Conde" label="Camilo José Cela Conde"/>
<link wikidata="Q81466" start="4962" end="4977" title="Premio Cervantes" label="Cervantes Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="5134" end="5147" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="5193" end="5199" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8256275" start="5416" end="5438" title="Camilo José Cela Conde" label="Camilo José Cela Conde"/>
<link wikidata="Q30006553" start="7894" end="7917" title="Journey to the Alcarria" label="Journey to the Alcarria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025608" start="7920" end="7939" title="Café Gijón" label="Café Gijón (Madrid)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894248" start="7942" end="7970" title="Universidad Camilo José Cela" label="Universidad Camilo José Cela"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297982" wikidata="Q690370" url="?curid=297982" title="Young Socialists in the SPD">
<text>Working Group of&quot; Young Socialists &quot;in the SPD (, Jusos) is a volunteer youth organization of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD).

As of 2025, there are over 50,000 official Juso members.


== Membership ==
Every member of the SPD who is aged between 14 and 35 years old is automatically enrolled in the Jusos. Since 1994, people in that age group have been able to become a Juso member without party membership. Until 2011 membership was free, but ended after a two 2-year period. There is now a membership fee of €1 per month. It is only possible to be a member of the Jusos until you reach your 35th birthday.

== History ==
=== 1918–1969 ===
At the (Reich Youth Day) of the Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany for young workers in Weimar in 1920, in which around 1,000 young people took part, the focus was on dealing with nature, art and culture and less on political issues. The main speaker was the spokesman for the Magdeburg young workers, 19-year-old Erich Ollenhauer, who identified the founding of the republic as a necessary condition for the young workers&#x27; movement to gain strength. Here, the later party song of the SPD, , was presented to the participants. Overall, the Workers&#x27; Youth Day took a positive stance on the policies of the mother party M-SPD. Following the (Workers&#x27; Youth Day), the (Association of Workers&#x27; Youth Associations in Germany) held its first national conference.

The Jusos were founded between 1918 and 1920, when groups of members of the SPD between 20 and 25 years of age began to meet. In terms of numbers, the Jusos remained small, with between 3,000 and 5,000 members. They were dissolved in 1931 as a result of an internal controversy.

After the end of World War II, the Jusos were reestablished in 1946. The Young Socialists, were initially just a working group of the Social Democratic Party. The SPD wanted to bind young people more closely to the party, which was initially successful. In the 1950s, the Jusos were a loyal youth organization; a relatively indistinctive wing of the SPD.

=== Move to the left in 1969 ===
From the mid-1960s onwards the German wing of the student movement in many western countries, the extra-parliamentary opposition (APO), was directed against the suppression of the Nazi past, the Vietnam War and the German Emergency Acts. This led to a strong politicization of the Juso base and a left turn was achieved. On the Juso Federal Congress (Bundeskongress) 1969 they decided to become a left-wing political federation in their own right instead of being simply an extension of the SPD. The congress began with the scandal that the delegates booed the SPD Federal Managing Director (Bundesgeschäftsführer Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski, who had come as a guest, and described him as incompetent and his planned presentation was voted off the agenda. Chairman of Jusos Peter Corterier&#x27;s statement of accounts was also voted off the agenda, and he then offered his immediate resignation, which the Congress declined. Since then, the Jusos have seen themselves as a socialist and feminist association within the SPD.

In the same year, the party executive decided that the Juso federal secretary should be subject to the instructions of the Juso federal executive.

From then on, the Jusos developed into an independent, socialist youth association that was involved in the party and in social movements at the same time. Jusos were involved in the peace movement, international solidarity movements, West German anti-nuclear movement and anti-fascist movements. The content of these movements was to be brought into the party, which led to tough disputes between the party and the Jusos in the 1970s.

=== Up from 1990 ===
In the course of the upheaval in the GDR, a youth organization was founded there in 1990, which initially called itself &quot;Young Social Democrats&quot;. Since 1991 the youth association in all parts of the Federal Republic of Germany is called Jusos.

In 2017 Kevin Kühnert was elected as chair-men of Jusos. At the SPD federal party conference in December 2019, Kühnert was elected as the first incumbent federal chairman of the Jusos, as deputy party chairman of the SPD at the same time. In 2021 he was elected secretary general of the SPD.

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===


== External links ==

* Official homepage of &quot;Jusos&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q690370" start="60" end="65" title="Young Socialists in the SPD" label="Jusos"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809493" start="82" end="100" title="youth organisation" label="youth organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="108" end="142" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708632" start="698" end="741" title="Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q62185" start="989" end="1005" title="Erich Ollenhauer" label="Erich Ollenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1750" end="1762" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="1867" end="1890" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723851" start="2220" end="2250" title="extra-parliamentary opposition" label="extra-parliamentary opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2317" end="2328" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q314537" start="2337" end="2358" title="German Emergency Acts" label="German Emergency Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q67517" start="2736" end="2759" title="Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski" label="Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q100805" start="2892" end="2907" title="Peter Corterier" label="Peter Corterier"/>
<link wikidata="Q574572" start="3527" end="3560" title="Anti-nuclear movement in Germany" label="West German anti-nuclear movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q278364" start="3565" end="3587" title="Post–World War II anti-fascism" label="anti-fascist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q43567875" start="4013" end="4026" title="Kevin Kühnert" label="Kevin Kühnert"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297985" wikidata="Q3490670" url="?curid=297985" title="Sonny Tufts">
<text>Bowen Charlton &quot;Sonny&quot; Tufts III (July 16, 1911 – June 4, 1970) was an American stage, film, and television actor. He is best known for the films he made as a contract star at Paramount in the 1940s, including &quot;So Proudly We Hail!&quot;. He also starred in the cult classic &quot;Cat-Women of the Moon&quot;.

==Early life and family==
Bowen Charlton Tufts III (some sources give &quot;Charleston&quot;) (nicknamed &quot;Sonny&quot;) was born in Boston into a prominent banking family, the son of Octavia Emily (Williams) and Bowen Charlton Tufts. The Tufts family patriarch, Peter Tufts, sailed to America from Wilby, Norfolk, England in 1638. His granduncle was businessman and philanthropist Charles Tufts, for whom Tufts University is named.

Tufts attended the Phillips Exeter Academy, He later broke with the family banking tradition by not studying business at Harvard and attending rival Yale instead and following other pursuits. There he played for the Yale football team, served as an editor of the campus humor magazine &quot;The Yale Record&quot;, was inducted a member of the elite, secret Skull and Bones society, and performed in Yale&#x27;s famous musical group, the Whiffenpoofs.

It was while on a Whiffenpoofs tour of Europe that Tufts decided to study opera, struck by the urge during a stop in Naples. He followed up with a year of tutelage in Paris and three more in the United States.

==Career==
After graduating from Yale in 1935, Tufts auditioned with the Metropolitan Opera in New York City, but eventually worked on the Broadway stage. He appeared in &quot;Who&#x27;s Who&quot;, and &quot;Sing for Your Supper&quot; in 1939. Tufts then began singing in hotels and nightclubs.

===Paramount===
A Yale classmate of Tufts&#x27; later convinced him to move to Hollywood to begin a career as an actor. Upon arriving there, Tufts&#x27; friend, hotel manager Jack Donnelly, accompanied him to Paramount Pictures and introduced him to casting director Joe Egli. Egli shot a screen test with Tufts, who was then signed to Paramount.
His first role was as Kansas, an affable Marine and love interest of Paulette Goddard in the 1943 World War II romantic drama &quot;So Proudly We Hail!&quot;. The film was a critical and box-office hit, largely due to the three female leads: Claudette Colbert, Paulette Goddard, and Veronica Lake. Tufts&#x27; performance was praised by critics and the role served as a launching pad for his career. After the release of the film, Tufts received 1700 fan letters a week and was named &quot;The Find of 1943.&quot;

Due to an old college football injury, Tufts unable to join the military and serve overseas in the war. With Hollywood&#x27;s ranks of leading men heavily depleted by the war effort, Tufts was borrowed by RKO to play opposite leading lady Olivia de Havilland in the comedy &quot;Government Girl&quot; (1944); Paramount got a loan of Maureen O&#x27;Hara in exchange. The farm-out to RKO meant Tufts had to drop out of &quot;Standing Room Only&quot;, where he was replaced by Fred MacMurray. &quot;Government Girl&quot; was a huge hit and Tufts was voted the number one &quot;Star of Tomorrow&quot; by Australian exhibitors for 1944.

Before filming of &quot;So Proudly We Hail!&quot; was complete, director Mark Sandrich commissioned &quot;So Proudly&quot;″s screenwriter Allan Scott to write a vehicle for Tufts and his co-star Paulette Goddard. That film, entitled &quot;I Love a Soldier&quot; (1944) was a mild hit.

Sandrich directed Tufts&#x27; next film, &quot;Here Come the Waves&quot; (1944), which was a huge success, due in part to stars Bing Crosby and Betty Hutton. Sandrich died in 1945.

Tufts made another musical comedy &quot;Bring On the Girls&quot; (1945) with Eddie Bracken and Veronica Lake, replacing Dick Powell. Tufts sang several songs, but the film was a box-office disappointment. He made a cameo along with most Paramount stars in &quot;Duffy&#x27;s Tavern&quot; (1945), singing &quot;Swinging on a Star&quot;.

He was reunited with Lake in &quot;Miss Susie Slagle&#x27;s&quot; (1946) alongside Joan Caulfield.

Paramount tried him in a Western &quot;The Virginian&quot; (1946), though it was in a supporting role. He was reunited with De Havilland in &quot;The Well-Groomed Bride&quot; (1946), replacing Dennis O&#x27;Keefe but she wound up with Ray Milland at the end of the film. However, Paramount did give Tufts the star part in &quot;Swell Guy&quot; (1946) opposite Ann Blyth. He also co-starred opposite Betty Hutton in &quot;Cross My Heart&quot; (1946).

Tufts was the romantic male lead in &quot;Easy Come, Easy Go&quot; (1947), a Barry Fitzgerald vehicle. It was directed by John Farrow, who also used Tufts in &quot;Blaze of Noon&quot; (1947) playing one of four brothers who fly air mail. After a cameo in &quot;Variety Girl&quot; (1947), Tufts left Paramount.

===Freelance actor===
He starred in a Western, &quot;The Untamed Breed&quot; (1948). He was in a film noir with John Payne, &quot;The Crooked Way&quot; (1949) where he played a ruthless villain. He received praise for his performance, with critics noting that he &quot;work[ed] against type quite effectively&quot;. Tufts was Victor Mature&#x27;s friend in &quot;Easy Living&quot; (1949) at RKO. He was arrested for public drunkenness in 1950 and 1951.

By the early 1950s, Tufts&#x27; popularity began to wane and his career began to decline. He separated from his wife in 1951 and she divorced him in 1952, saying his drinking had become &quot;intolerable&quot;. He was unemployed for a year until he received an offer from Britain to make &quot;The Gift Horse&quot; (1952) with Richard Attenborough.

In 1953, Tufts was cast opposite Barbara Payton in the low-budget comedy film &quot;Run for the Hills&quot;. Later that year, he was in &quot;No Escape&quot; and starred in another low-budget film, &quot;Cat-Women of the Moon&quot;, which became a cult classic. He had the lead in the low-budget 1954 film &quot;Serpent Island&quot;.

===Assaults===
Tufts&#x27; career decline was compounded by his alcoholism and his off-screen antics. In March 1954, a stripper named Barbara Gray Atkins sued Tufts for $25,000 in damages after she claimed he bit her left thigh while his two friends and he were visiting her home. Atkins later dropped the lawsuit against Tufts.

In April 1954, a 19-year-old dancer named Margarie Von accused Tufts of biting her on the right thigh while she was relaxing aboard a yacht docked off the coast of Balboa Peninsula, Newport Beach. Von sued Tufts for $26,000, claiming the bite left a three-inch scar. Von later settled for $600. In August 1955, a third complaint was lodged against Tufts when Adrienne Fromann claimed the actor beat and bruised her at a restaurant. She demanded $20,000 in damages.

&quot;He drinks too much and lives too lavishly&quot;, said his ex-wife Barbara.

Tufts&#x27; career briefly rebounded when he was cast in a small role in the comedy &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; (1955), starring Tom Ewell and Marilyn Monroe. In 1956, Tufts had a supporting role in drama &quot;Come Next Spring&quot; for Republic Pictures. He was in &quot;A Tale of Two Citizens&quot; for &quot;Damon Runyon Theatre&quot; (1956). After filming &quot;The Parson and the Outlaw&quot; in 1957, and being arrested for public drunkenness again, Tufts retreated to a ranch in Texas.

===Later career===
In 1962, he returned to Hollywood to produce and star in a film &quot;All the Way&quot; about paratroopers. It was not made.

Tufts returned to acting in 1963 with a guest appearance on &quot;The Virginian&quot; playing the father of Trampas (Doug McClure) and in a Bob Hope TV special &quot;Have Girls Will Travel&quot; (1964). He was in &quot;Town Tamer&quot; (1965) and &quot;The Ordeal of Bud Windom&quot; on &quot;The Loner&quot; (1965) with Lloyd Bridges and his son Jeff. His final onscreen roles were &quot;Cottonpickin&#x27; Chickenpickers&quot; (1967) and the 1968 television movie &quot;Land&#x27;s End&quot;. He appeared several times as himself in &quot;Rowan &amp; Martin&#x27;s Laugh-In&quot; in 1968.

==Personal life==

In 1938, Tufts married Spanish dancer Barbara Dare. They separated in 1949, and Dare filed for divorce in 1951, citing Tufts&#x27; excessive drinking as the reason for the breakup of their marriage. Dare was granted an interlocutory divorce on October 21, 1951 which was final the following year.

==Death==
On June 4, 1970, Tufts died of pneumonia at age 58 at St. John&#x27;s Hospital in Santa Monica, California. Tufts&#x27; private funeral was held on June 7 in Beverly Hills after which he was buried in Munroe Cemetery in Lexington, Massachusetts.

==Filmography==


==References==
==External links==
* 
* Don&#x27;t Drink and Act (Movie Morlocks on Sonny Tufts)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3490670" start="0" end="42" title="Sonny Tufts" label="Bowen Charlton &amp;quot;Sonny&amp;quot; Tufts III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955868" start="226" end="245" title="So Proudly We Hail!" label="So Proudly We Hail!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284402" start="295" end="316" title="Cat-Women of the Moon" label="Cat-Women of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="461" end="467" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="580" end="589" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177408" start="591" end="602" title="Peter Tufts" label="Peter Tufts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491450" start="627" end="641" title="Wilby, Norfolk" label="Wilby, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083046" start="710" end="723" title="Charles Tufts" label="Charles Tufts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="734" end="750" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426464" start="781" end="804" title="Phillips Exeter Academy" label="Phillips Exeter Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="883" end="890" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="911" end="915" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776485" start="1053" end="1068" title="The Yale Record" label="The Yale Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q195604" start="1119" end="1134" title="Skull and Bones" label="Skull and Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415197" start="1195" end="1211" title="the Whiffenpoofs" label="the Whiffenpoofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="1288" end="1293" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="1331" end="1337" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="1498" end="1516" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1564" end="1572" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="1800" end="1809" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="1930" end="1948" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q849891" start="1971" end="1987" title="casting director" label="casting director"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="2109" end="2115" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q95050" start="2137" end="2153" title="Paulette Goddard" label="Paulette Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955868" start="2200" end="2219" title="So Proudly We Hail!" label="So Proudly We Hail!"/>
<link wikidata="Q203819" start="2310" end="2327" title="Claudette Colbert" label="Claudette Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q84232" start="2351" end="2364" title="Veronica Lake" label="Veronica Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="2597" end="2613" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="2788" end="2791" title="RKO" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q95068" start="2822" end="2841" title="Olivia de Havilland" label="Olivia de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203426" start="2862" end="2877" title="Government Girl" label="Government Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q229276" start="2916" end="2935" title="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204878" start="3006" end="3024" title="Standing Room Only (1944 film)" label="Standing Room Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q356309" start="3057" end="3071" title="Fred MacMurray" label="Fred MacMurray"/>
<link wikidata="Q382529" start="3289" end="3302" title="Mark Sandrich" label="Mark Sandrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837768" start="3354" end="3365" title="Allan Scott (American screenwriter)" label="Allan Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q10299560" start="3455" end="3471" title="I Love a Soldier" label="I Love a Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559071" start="3549" end="3568" title="Here Come the Waves" label="Here Come the Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="3630" end="3641" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q152713" start="3646" end="3658" title="Betty Hutton" label="Betty Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204625" start="3724" end="3742" title="Bring On the Girls (film)" label="Bring On the Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q166212" start="3761" end="3774" title="Eddie Bracken" label="Eddie Bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q287977" start="3804" end="3815" title="Dick Powell" label="Dick Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040979" start="3946" end="3965" title="Duffy&amp;#x27;s Tavern (film)" label="Duffy&amp;#x27;s Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479430" start="3994" end="4012" title="Swinging on a Star" label="Swinging on a Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126211" start="4056" end="4080" title="Miss Susie Slagle&amp;#x27;s" label="Miss Susie Slagle&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438254" start="4104" end="4118" title="Joan Caulfield" label="Joan Caulfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796272" start="4160" end="4173" title="The Virginian (1946 film)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948645" start="4267" end="4289" title="The Well-Groomed Bride" label="The Well-Groomed Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189404" start="4314" end="4333" title="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Keefe" label="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181774" start="4356" end="4367" title="Ray Milland" label="Ray Milland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655854" start="4449" end="4458" title="Swell Guy" label="Swell Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q255378" start="4481" end="4490" title="Ann Blyth" label="Ann Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249622" start="4542" end="4556" title="Cross My Heart (1946 film)" label="Cross My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331103" start="4614" end="4632" title="Easy Come, Easy Go (1947 film)" label="Easy Come, Easy Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q290666" start="4649" end="4665" title="Barry Fitzgerald" label="Barry Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q547495" start="4694" end="4705" title="John Farrow" label="John Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925629" start="4736" end="4749" title="Blaze of Noon" label="Blaze of Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283547" start="4833" end="4845" title="Variety Girl" label="Variety Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q42048424" start="4936" end="4953" title="The Untamed Breed" label="The Untamed Breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="4980" end="4989" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q723415" start="4995" end="5005" title="John Payne (actor)" label="John Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728158" start="5013" end="5028" title="The Crooked Way" label="The Crooked Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q358317" start="5209" end="5222" title="Victor Mature" label="Victor Mature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794147" start="5246" end="5257" title="Easy Living (1949 film)" label="Easy Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124507" start="5631" end="5645" title="Gift Horse (film)" label="The Gift Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q51506" start="5664" end="5684" title="Richard Attenborough" label="Richard Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859221" start="5720" end="5734" title="Barbara Payton" label="Barbara Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42048400" start="5771" end="5788" title="Run for the Hills" label="Run for the Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q15046671" start="5829" end="5838" title="No Escape (1953 film)" label="No Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284402" start="5891" end="5912" title="Cat-Women of the Moon" label="Cat-Women of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455088" start="5999" end="6013" title="Serpent Island (film)" label="Serpent Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889678" start="6516" end="6547" title="Balboa Peninsula, Newport Beach" label="Balboa Peninsula, Newport Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q290679" start="6990" end="7009" title="The Seven Year Itch" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q427388" start="7033" end="7042" title="Tom Ewell" label="Tom Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="7047" end="7061" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151195" start="7115" end="7131" title="Come Next Spring" label="Come Next Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q774682" start="7142" end="7159" title="Republic Pictures" label="Republic Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756183" start="7271" end="7296" title="The Parson and the Outlaw" label="The Parson and the Outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="7391" end="7396" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214471" start="7610" end="7623" title="The Virginian (TV series)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251819" start="7661" end="7673" title="Doug McClure" label="Doug McClure"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="7684" end="7692" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q10383892" start="7763" end="7773" title="Town Tamer" label="Town Tamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663891" start="7837" end="7846" title="The Loner (TV series)" label="The Loner"/>
<link wikidata="Q317817" start="7865" end="7878" title="Lloyd Bridges" label="Lloyd Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q174843" start="7891" end="7895" title="Jeff Bridges" label="Jeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q42048409" start="7933" end="7966" title="Cottonpickin&amp;#x27; Chickenpickers" label="Cottonpickin&amp;#x27; Chickenpickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235088" start="8085" end="8119" title="Rowan &amp;amp; Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh-In" label="Rowan &amp;amp; Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047174" start="8374" end="8395" title="Interlocutory" label="interlocutory divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="8494" end="8503" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401436" start="8517" end="8541" title="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Health Center" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="8545" end="8569" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="8621" end="8634" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="8683" end="8707" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington, Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297987" wikidata="Q76822499" url="?curid=297987" title="Pronoia">
<text>The pronoia (plural pronoiai; Greek: πρόνοια, meaning &quot;care&quot;, &quot;forethought&quot; or &quot;providence,&quot; from πρό, &quot;before,&quot; and νόος, &quot;mind&quot;) was a system of granting dedicated streams of state income to individuals and institutions in the late Byzantine Empire. Beginning in the 11th century and continuing until the empire&#x27;s conquest in the 15th century, the system differed in significant ways from European feudalism of the same period.

==The institution==

A &quot;pronoia&quot; was a grant that temporarily transferred imperial fiscal rights to an individual or institution. These rights were most commonly taxes or incomes from cultivated lands, but they could also be other income streams such as water and fishing rights, customs collection, etc. and the various rights to a specific piece of geography could be granted to separate individuals. Grants were for a set period, usually lifetime, and revokable at will by the Emperor. When institutions, usually monasteries, received grants they were effectively in perpetuity since the institutions were ongoing. Grants were not transferable or (excluding certain exceptional cases late in the institution) hereditary; a &quot;pronoia&quot; gave the grantee possession, not ownership, which remained Imperial.

The limits and specifics of a &quot;pronoia&quot; were recorded in an Imperial document called &quot;praktika&quot; (&quot;records&quot;); holders of &quot;pronoia&quot; (the grantees, in other words) were called &quot;pronoiarios&quot;, and those working the income stream in question (for instance, farmers on the land) were called &quot;paroikoi&quot; in the documents. The word &quot;pronoia&quot; could refer to the grant itself (land, for instance), its monetary value, or the income it produced.

Although &quot;pronoia&quot; was often used to reward military service or other loyalties, it carried no specific military obligation (in contrast to feudal fiefs), although the threat of revocation provided coercive power for the state.

==Early pronoia system==
The pronoetes were the holders of pronoia. The Latin term to define this officer was curator and is to be identified with the &quot;curator domus divinae&quot;, the administrator of imperial lands since the time of Augustus.

By the 11th century, Byzantine aristocrats had ceased to hold any significant power. Honorific titles and power were granted by the emperor and competition was fierce; the most desired grants were those that involved governance and tax collecting in various pieces of the Empire. By the reign of Constantine IX in the middle part of the century they had also begun to assert sovereignty over various parts of the empire, collecting taxes for themselves and often plotting rebellions against the emperor.

In the late 11th century Alexius I attempted to reform the aristocracy, taking the pacifying measure of distributing Roman territory amongst its members. Doing so had the added benefit of removing them from Constantinople, making it harder for them to directly challenge the emperor&#x27;s authority. Most pronoiai granted by Alexius, however, were to members of his own (Comnenus) family. Alexius simply legitimized the holding of land by aristocrats, and brought it under centralized state control.

==Pronoia in the 12th century==

Alexius&#x27; grandson Manuel I Comnenus continued to grant land to the aristocrats, but also extended pronoiai to aristocratic officers in the army, in place of giving them a regular salary. Pronoiai developed into essentially a license to tax the citizens who lived within the boundaries of the grant (the paroikoi). Pronoiars (those who had been granted a pronoia) became something like tax collectors, who were allowed to keep some of the revenue they collected. This idea was not completely new; centuries before, Heraclius had reorganized the empire&#x27;s land into military districts called Themata. Under this system, military officers (strategoi) ran each district and collected rent from the peasants who farmed the land. However, the paroikoi, under either the Thema or pronoia system, were not serfs as peasants were in the feudal system of western Europe. They owed no particular loyalty or service to the strategos or pronoiar, as in both cases the emperor was still the legal owner of the land. The pronoiar was most likely not even a native of the land he had been granted.

The size and value of the pronoia, the number of paroikoi, and the duties owed by them were recorded in praktika. A pronoiar would likely be able to collect trade revenue and part of the crop harvested on the land, and could also hold hunting rights and transportation rights. A praktika also recorded the duties owed by the pronoiar to the emperor. If necessary, the emperor could request military service, although the pronoiar could not force his taxpayers to join him. Pronoiars were often reluctant to give military service if they lived a prosperous life on their grant, and they had some autonomy if they chose not to serve. If they could gain the support of their taxpayers, they could lead rebellions against the empire, but these were not as dangerous as rebellions in the capital, which Alexius&#x27; system could now more successfully avoid. Neither Alexius, Manuel, or the other 12th century emperors seemed to worry about provincial rebellions, seemingly assuming that a pronoia grant would eventually appease a rebellious noble. During the Fourth Crusade, Alexius IV still thought this way, and granted Crete to Boniface of Montferrat, under the assumption that the Crusaders would go away if their leader had some land.

==Pronoia under the Palaeologan Dynasty==

After the Crusaders captured Constantinople in 1204, the pronoia system continued in the Empire of Nicaea, where the emperors ruled in exile. John III Ducas Vatatzes also gave pronoiai to the church and noblewomen, which had not been done before. When Constantinople was recaptured by Michael VIII Palaeologus in 1261, he allowed pronoiai to be inherited, which made the empire more like the feudal states in Europe. He also audited the pronoiai to make their values more realistic according to contemporary conditions, as the empire had lost much of its land and revenue since the 11th century. Under the Palaeologans, pronoiars could more easily be organized into military units if the emperor required their service. The emperor could also confiscate the revenues for whatever reason. Andronicus II Palaeologus, for example, used the money raised by the pronoiars to finance military expeditions against the Bulgarians, but he did not require them to provide military service themselves. During this time pronoiars could also attract followers by giving them pronoia grants of their own.

Recruiting pronoiars to form an army helped unite the remnants of the empire after 1261. However, by this time, there were only a few thousand pronoiars, and although they paid for their own expenses, the emperors could not afford a full army or navy to strengthen the empire&#x27;s defenses. The impoverished empire had very little tax revenue, and pronoiars began to extract rents from the paroikoi, turning back to the old Thema system.

The empire continued to lose land to the Ottoman Empire, and Constantinople was finally lost in 1453, but the Ottomans continued to use their own version of the pronoia system, called the timar system, which they had borrowed from the Eastern Romans during their conquests.

==See also==
*Chiflik
*Dynatoi
*Timar

==Sources==

*&quot;Economics in Late Byzantine World,&quot; from Foundation of the Hellenic World
*Warren T. Treadgold. A History of the Byzantine State and Society. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997. 
*Frederick Lauritzen, Leichoudes&#x27; pronoia of the Mangana, Zbornik Radova Vizantinoloskog Instituta 55 (2018) 81-96 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="30" end="35" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="284" end="300" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="455" end="464" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="1973" end="1978" title="fiefs" label="fiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q674426" start="2165" end="2172" title="curator" label="curator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2212" end="2233" title="curator domus divinae" label="curator domus divinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2295" end="2303" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="2337" end="2347" title="Aristocracy (class)" label="aristocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39018" start="2438" end="2445" title="emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594" start="2602" end="2616" title="Constantine IX" label="Constantine IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="2738" end="2741" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q41600" start="2836" end="2845" title="Alexius I" label="Alexius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="3018" end="3032" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q163814" start="3183" end="3191" title="Comnenus" label="Comnenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41610" start="3369" end="3386" title="Manuel I Comnenus" label="Manuel I Comnenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="3587" end="3590" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="3865" end="3874" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q379817" start="3945" end="3952" title="Theme (Byzantine district)" label="Themata"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="4153" end="4157" title="serf" label="serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="4183" end="4196" title="feudalism" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4208" end="4214" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="5493" end="5507" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q37069" start="5509" end="5519" title="Alexius IV" label="Alexius IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="5556" end="5561" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q312369" start="5565" end="5587" title="Boniface of Montferrat" label="Boniface of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q181254" start="5807" end="5823" title="Empire of Nicaea" label="Empire of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37072" start="5860" end="5883" title="John III Ducas Vatatzes" label="John III Ducas Vatatzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q200033" start="6003" end="6027" title="Michael VIII Palaeologus" label="Michael VIII Palaeologus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207585" start="6324" end="6336" title="Palaeologus" label="Palaeologans"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="6506" end="6531" title="Andronicus II Palaeologus" label="Andronicus II Palaeologus"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="6629" end="6637" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7292" end="7306" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q427530" start="7439" end="7444" title="timar" label="timar"/>
<link wikidata="Q287036" start="7540" end="7547" title="Chiflik" label="Chiflik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319186" start="7549" end="7556" title="Dynatoi" label="Dynatoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q427530" start="7558" end="7563" title="Timar" label="Timar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7777" end="7796" title="Frederick Lauritzen" label="Frederick Lauritzen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297989" wikidata="Q936911" url="?curid=297989" title="Geoffrey de Mandeville, Earl of Essex">
<text>Geoffrey de Mandeville II, 1st Earl of Essex (died September 1144) was a prominent figure during the reign of King Stephen of England. His biographer, the 19th-century historian J. H. Round, called him &quot;the most perfect and typical presentment of the feudal and anarchic spirit that stamps the reign of Stephen&quot;. That characterisation has been disputed since the later 20th century.

==Early career==

He succeeded his father, William, sometime before 1129, possibly as early as 1116. A key portion of the family patrimony in Essex was in the King&#x27;s hands. William had incurred a debt to the crown, perhaps in part due to a large fine levied in 1101 by Henry I due to his displeasure at the escape of the important political prisoner Ranulph Flambard while William was in charge of the Tower of London. The King also held the substantial estate of Geoffrey&#x27;s maternal grandfather Eudo &quot;le Dapifer&quot; to which Geoffrey laid claim.

Geoffrey gained Eudo&#x27;s lands and his father&#x27;s offices during the shifting tides of fortunes of the two competitors for the English throne after Henry I&#x27;s death in 1135. He initially supported Stephen, who sometime in 1140 (most likely May of that year) made him Earl of Essex. By 1140 or 1141, King Stephen had returned to him the lucrative manors in Essex.

He founded a Benedictine priory (later Walden Abbey) at Walden, Essex and constructed a castle there. He also contributed to Hurley Priory in Berkshire, which had been founded by his grandfather Geoffrey de Mandeville I.

After the defeat and capture of Stephen at Lincoln early in 1141, Earl Geoffrey, like many barons, acknowledged Stephen&#x27;s rival Empress Matilda as his sovereign lady. She confirmed his custody of the Tower, forgave the large debts his father had incurred to the crown, granted him the Norman lands of Eudo &quot;le Dapifer&quot;, and appointed him Sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire, Middlesex and London.

When Stephen was released in December of that year, Earl Geoffrey returned to his original allegiance. There has been much scholarly debate over the dating of the charters he received from King Stephen and Empress Matilda. Depending on the order and timing of those documents, either Geoffrey appears to have been playing off one against the other to get what he wanted or his support was courted by the rival claimants to the throne. The king arrested the earl in 1143 and, threatened with execution, Geoffrey surrendered his castles of Pleshey and Saffron Walden as well as custody of the Tower of London to Stephen. In reaction, Earl Geoffrey launched a rebellion.

==Outlaw activity and death==
In 1143–1144, Earl Geoffrey maintained himself as a rebel and a bandit in the fen-country, using the Isle of Ely and Ramsey Abbey as his headquarters. He was besieged by King Stephen and met his death attacking Burwell Castle in September 1144 in consequence of an arrow wound received in a skirmish. Because he had died excommunicated, his body initially was denied burial at the monastery he had founded, Walden Priory. Wrapped in lead, it was accepted eventually by the Templar community in London for burial within the Temple Church in London. His son Geoffrey III arranged for an effigy to be placed on the floor, where it can still be seen today.

Temple Church was badly damaged by bombing during World War II and its burial vaults were ransacked by looters. Many coffins were smashed and bones thrown on the floor, and the skull of Geoffrey de Mandeville was stolen, placing suspicion for the theft on a private collector.

==Significance==
His career is interesting for several reasons. The charters he received from King Stephen and Empress Matilda illustrate the ambitions of English barons. The most important concessions are grants of offices and jurisdictions, which had the effect of making Mandeville almost a viceroy with full powers in Essex and Hertfordshire, Middlesex and London, but these were based on offices and jurisdictions his ancestors had held. His career as an outlaw exemplifies the worst excesses of the civil wars of 1140–1147, and it is possible that the deeds of Mandeville inspired the rhetorical description of this period in the &quot;Peterborough Chronicle&quot;, when &quot;men said openly that Christ and his saints were asleep&quot;. He had seized Ramsey Abbey (near Peterborough) in 1143, expelling the monks and using Ramsey as a base for forays into the surrounding region, sacking Cambridge and other smaller settlements.

==Marriage and offspring==
Geoffrey married Rohese de Vere (c. 1110–1167 or after), daughter of Aubrey de Vere II and sister of the first Earl of Oxford. He had four sons:
* Arnulf/Ernulf de Mandeville, illegitimate, supported his father in rebellion and was exiled shortly after the earl&#x27;s death. He returned to England, probably in the reign of King Henry II, and there witnessed several charters issued by his half-brothers, the 2nd and 3rd earls of Essex.
* Geoffrey III, 2nd earl of Essex (d. 1166) By a fresh grant from Henry II he was created Earl of Essex.
* William II, 3rd Earl of Essex and Count of Aumale (d. 1189)
* Robert (d. before 1189)

==Historical fiction==
An account of Geoffrey&#x27;s outlaw actions and the taking of Ramsey Abbey provides for elements of the backstory for two of Ellis Peters&#x27; &quot;Brother Cadfael&quot; books, &quot;The Potter&#x27;s Field&quot; and &quot;The Holy Thief&quot;.

In his 1969 novel &quot;Knight in Anarchy&quot;, George Shipway describes the life of Humphrey de Visdelou as he follows de Mandeville to his doom.

Geoffrey de Mandeville is a character in the 1994 historical fiction novel &quot;When Christ and His Saints Slept&quot; by Sharon Kay Penman.

==References==
==Sources==
* C. Warren Hollister, &quot;The Misfortunes of the Mandevilles&quot;, &quot;History&quot;, vol. 58, pp. 18–28, 1973
* R. H. C. Davis, J. O. Prestwich, &quot;The Treason of Geoffrey de Mandeville&quot;, &quot;The English Historical Review&quot;, vol. 103, no. 407, pp. 283–317, 1988; Prestwich, &quot;Geoffrey de Mandeville: A Further Comment&quot;, &quot;EHR&quot;, vol. 103, no. 409, pp. 960–966; Prestwich, Davis, &quot;Last Words on Geoffrey de Mandeville&quot;, &quot;EHR&quot;, vol. 105, no. 416, pp. 670–672, 1990.
* J. H. Round, &quot;Geoffrey de Mandeville, a Study of the Anarchy&quot; (London, 1892)
*George Shipway &quot;Knight in Anarchy&quot; (Cox &amp; Wyman Ltd., London, 1969)

==External links==
* &quot;English Anarchy &amp; Geoffrey de Mandeville – Scourge of the Fens&quot; http://www.ecoln.com/mandevil.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q936911" start="0" end="44" title="Geoffrey de Mandeville, Earl of Essex" label="Geoffrey de Mandeville II, 1st Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="115" end="133" title="Stephen of England" label="Stephen of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q29194" start="178" end="189" title="J. H. Round" label="J. H. Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q175780" start="437" end="444" title="William de Mandeville" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="668" end="675" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337529" start="749" end="765" title="Ranulph Flambard" label="Ranulph Flambard"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="801" end="816" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372257" start="900" end="927" title="Eudo Dapifer" label="Eudo &amp;quot;le Dapifer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="1166" end="1173" title="Stephen of Blois" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277289" start="1236" end="1249" title="Earl of Essex" label="Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961459" start="1372" end="1384" title="Walden Abbey" label="Walden Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183329" start="1389" end="1402" title="Saffron Walden" label="Walden, Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946678" start="1458" end="1471" title="Hurley Priory" label="Hurley Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q345959" start="1528" end="1552" title="Geoffrey de Mandeville (11th century)" label="Geoffrey de Mandeville I"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="1598" end="1605" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q150872" start="1688" end="1703" title="Empress Matilda" label="Empress Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="1845" end="1851" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756819" start="1908" end="1942" title="High Sheriff of Hertfordshire" label="Sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="1944" end="1953" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495002" start="1958" end="1964" title="Sheriff of London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2505" end="2512" title="Pleshey#Pleshey Castle" label="Pleshey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185821" start="2517" end="2531" title="Walden Castle" label="Saffron Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="2744" end="2747" title="The Fens" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q935339" start="2767" end="2778" title="Isle of Ely" label="Isle of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480691" start="2783" end="2795" title="Ramsey Abbey" label="Ramsey Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2877" end="2891" title="Burwell, Cambridgeshire#Burwell Castle" label="Burwell Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961459" start="3073" end="3086" title="Walden Abbey" label="Walden Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="3139" end="3146" title="Knights Templar" label="Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429312" start="3189" end="3202" title="Temple Church" label="Temple Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="3892" end="3899" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q743768" start="4103" end="4113" title="The Anarchy" label="civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242458" start="4240" end="4262" title="Peterborough Chronicle" label="Peterborough Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172438" start="4376" end="4388" title="Peterborough" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="4494" end="4503" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359735" start="4580" end="4594" title="Rohese de Vere, Countess of Essex" label="Rohese de Vere"/>
<link wikidata="Q434657" start="4632" end="4649" title="Aubrey de Vere II" label="Aubrey de Vere II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439788" start="4674" end="4688" title="Aubrey de Vere, 1st Earl of Oxford" label="Earl of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="4888" end="4901" title="Henry II of England" label="King Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534999" start="5003" end="5034" title="Geoffrey de Mandeville, 2nd Earl of Essex" label="Geoffrey III, 2nd earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581200" start="5108" end="5157" title="William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex" label="William II, 3rd Earl of Essex and Count of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q237235" start="5344" end="5362" title="Edith Pargeter" label="Ellis Peters&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720911" start="5369" end="5384" title="The Cadfael Chronicles" label="Brother Cadfael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757892" start="5404" end="5427" title="The Potter&amp;#x27;s Field (Peters novel)" label="The Potter&amp;#x27;s Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740058" start="5444" end="5458" title="The Holy Thief" label="The Holy Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544531" start="5516" end="5530" title="George Shipway" label="George Shipway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372305" start="5697" end="5729" title="When Christ and His Saints Slept" label="When Christ and His Saints Slept"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490109" start="5739" end="5756" title="Sharon Kay Penman" label="Sharon Kay Penman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544531" start="6398" end="6412" title="George Shipway" label="George Shipway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297992" wikidata="Q1380344" url="?curid=297992" title="Mil Máscaras">
<text>Mil Máscaras (born Aarón Rodríguez Arellano, July 15, 1942) is a Mexican luchador (professional wrestler) and actor. He is regarded as one of the greatest wrestlers of the lucha libre tradition in Mexico – along with El Santo and Blue Demon – and has been described as the first international superstar of lucha libre. Mil Máscaras is considered one of the most influential wrestlers of all time for enhancing and popularizing the lucha libre style around the world, both in the ring and as the star of 20 films. He is also an accomplished artist and cultural ambassador for his native country and has appeared on three of its postage stamps. Although he has never been unmasked and his true identity is generally kept a secret out of respect for lucha libre traditions, his real name is known due to appearing in the credits of the films he has starred in. His ring name is Spanish for &quot;Thousand Masks&quot;.

Mil Máscaras was inducted into the Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame in 2010, and the WWE Hall of Fame in 2012. He is a member of one of Mexico&#x27;s most prominent wrestling families; his brothers José and Pablo respectively wrestle as Dos Caras and Sicodélico. José&#x27;s oldest son Alberto is a former WWE Champion and currently wrestles as Alberto El Patron. José&#x27;s younger son Guillermo wrestles as El Hijo de Dos Caras. Pablo&#x27;s son Aaron is better known as Sicodelico Jr.

==Professional wrestling career==
Mil Máscaras made his professional wrestling debut on July 20, 1963, in Pachuca. He became popular in Mexico for being one of the best conditioned luchadores in the heavyweight division, which was dominated by foreigners at the time. It was also his size which permitted him to wrestle in the US and Japan under the heavyweight division. Mil Máscaras was one of the first masked luchadores outside of Mexico to play a non-heel role. He rarely resorted to rule breaking, instead relying on his repertoire of moves and counter-moves. Mil Máscaras was also one of the first wrestlers to introduce the high-flying moves of lucha libre, such as the plancha and tope suicida, to Japanese fans. This brought him international fame as one of the first high-flyers, something he was not considered in Mexico where he fell under the mat-power category.

Mil Máscaras made his international wrestling debut in 1968 at the Olympic Auditorium in Los Angeles, getting involved in rivalries against the likes of Ernie Ladd, John Tolos, Black Gordman and Goliath. In Mexico City, he unmasked El Halcon in a triangular tournament that included Alfonso Dantés in the 1970s. Owing to the limited spread of news at the time, he repeated the feat in a Japanese ring, winning by submission.

Mil Máscaras performed for All Japan Pro Wrestling (AJPW) during the &#x27;70s. In his Japanese debut on February 19, 1971, he defeated Kantaro Hoshino in Tokyo. It was during this time that he had his best-known international feud with American masked wrestler The Destroyer. During the &#x27;70s, Mil Máscaras also had feuds with Mexican wrestlers such as TNT, Canek, El Halcon, and Angel Blanco. These feuds took place mostly in Mexico and the US and were broadcast on Spanish language stations in the US, Mil Máscaras was also the heavyweight champion of the IWA wrestling promotion, which was founded by Eddie Einhorn, and still holds the title to this day.

In 1974, Mil Máscaras was the World Champion of the short-lived International Wrestling Association promotion based in New York City. He had major title defenses against competitors such as Ivan Koloff and Ernie Ladd.

Mil Máscaras appeared in World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now called WWE). He performed at Madison Square Garden several times after a ban on masked wrestlers was lifted for him, making him the first masked wrestler in the Garden, he defeated The Spoiler (who was not permitted to wear his mask). During this time, he feuded with Superstar Billy Graham over the WWF World Heavyweight Championship.

Mil Máscaras made many appearances during the 80s and the 90s at the World Wrestling Council in Puerto Rico. He also wrestled in World Championship Wrestling (WCW), where his most notable match was a match with Cactus Jack at &quot;Clash of the Champions X: Texas Shootout&quot; on February 6, 1990, in the Memorial Coliseum in Corpus Christi, Texas.

On September 10, 1991, at the age of 49, Mil Máscaras won his final title, the WWA (Mexico) World Heavyweight Championship. He held the title until 1994 and assumed a state of semi-retirement after his final reign.

Mil Máscaras&#x27; first American pay-per-view appearance was competing in WWF&#x27;s 1997 &quot;Royal Rumble&quot; match. He eliminated himself, diving off the top rope out of the ring onto Pierroth Jr., whom he himself had just eliminated. Such a move is common in lucha libre, but it is technically a mistake in the Royal Rumble as it leads to elimination.

On December 5, 2002, Mil Máscaras defeated Manny Fernandez at the inaugural show for Legacy Wrestling Enterprises in Fort Worth, Texas. On July 25, he celebrated his 50th in-ring anniversary to the day by teaming with his brother Sicodelico and his nephew El Hijo De Dos Caras to face one of his greatest rivals, Canek, along with Negro Navarro and Rey Bucanero in a special six-man tag.

== Acting career ==
Mil Máscaras also starred in a series of 20 luchador action films beginning with his self-titled debut in 1966 at age 24. In 1966, Mexican movie producer Luis Enrique Vergara was looking for a new &quot;enmascarado&quot; to star in his wrestling/horror movies which were then the rage of Mexican cinema. Mil Máscaras was the first Lucha Libre personality that was created specifically to be a movie star, since his whole persona and flashy look was designed initially for the movies. (His real-life wrestling career followed and grew out of the excitement generated by his film appearances.)

Vergara&#x27;s two regular movie stars had suddenly become unavailable. El Santo had walked out on him over a contract dispute, and Blue Demon was injured unexpectedly and would require a prolonged time-out. Not wanting to stop making his successful cinematic quickies, Vergara decided to transform Lucha Libre newcomer Mil Máscaras as the star of his next two movies. Mil began a movie career that has continued to this day, appearing in a total of 20 Mexican horror/wrestling/action films.

The first film, simply entitled &quot;Mil Máscaras&quot; (1966) was shot in black &amp; white and made Mil out to be a sort of super-hero. The film gave Mil Máscaras a comic book-style origin story, which seems to have been somewhat swiped from the then-popular &quot;Doc Savage&quot; pulp novels that were selling very well in science-fiction bookstores in the mid-60&#x27;s. According to the script, Mil was an infant who was found clutched in his dead mother&#x27;s arms in a war-torn area of Europe during World War 2 and was sent to an orphanage. A group of scientists (not affiliated with any particular country) adopts the boy, secretly using him as a guinea pig, subjecting the child to an intensive regimen of physical exercise and mental training as he matures.

When he reaches adulthood, Mil Máscaras is something of a superman (although without actual superpowers); both his mind and his body have been developed to perfection. The scientists then send him out into the world to help downtrodden people everywhere, to fight criminals and to right wrongs, and just basically help make the world a better place.

The plots of the first two films were rather lackluster. In both &quot;Mil Máscaras&quot; (1966) and its sequel &quot;Los Canallas&quot; (also 1966), Mil gets to fight a rather ordinary gang of thugs and a crooked fight promoter who are bullying the locals in some backwater burg in Mexico. Mil&#x27;s second film &quot;Los Canallas&quot; and all of them thereafter were shot in Color.

Federico Curiel directed Mil Máscaras&#x27; next two films in 1968, both of which feature American horror star John Carradine as a bad guy. Mil&#x27;s missions were becoming a bit more meaningful by this time. In &quot;Enigma of Death&quot;, Mil faces off against Carradine who plays the leader of an underground Nazi organization (who disguises himself as a circus clown!), while in &quot;Las Vampiras&quot;, Mil goes up against a secret cult of female vampires led by a very manic Carradine.

In 1970, Curiel directed Mil Máscaras in two of his team-up movies. &quot;The Mummies of Guanajuato&quot; teamed Mil up with both Blue Demon and El Santo in what became the highest-grossing Mexican wrestler film of all time, pitting the three enmascarados against a group of re-animated mummies.
&quot;The Champions of Justice&quot; (also 1970) saw Mil Máscaras in action with fellow wrestlers Blue Demon, Tinieblas, El Medico Asesino and La Sombra Vengadora (who all joined as sort of a super-team to fight monsters, mad scientists, criminals, evil dwarves or whatever else crossed their paths.) The producers employed a gaggle of masked midget wrestlers in a number of their luchador films in the 70s.

Over the next few years, a number of other team-up movies were made, most co-starring Mil Máscaras, who by this time was becoming the &quot;King of the Team-up Movies&quot;. &quot;Champions of Justice Return&quot; (1972) was very similar to the first Champions film, only with El Fantasma Blanco sitting in for El Medico Asesino, El Rayo de Jalisco replacing Tinieblas, and El Avispon Escarlata replacing La Sombra Vengadora. (Mil didn&#x27;t appear in the third and final &quot;Champions&quot; film because it would&#x27;ve involved traveling to a foreign country where it was filmed.)

However, in 1973, he teamed up again with Tinieblas and El Fantasma Blanco in two more films, &quot;Macabre Legends of the Colony&quot; and &quot;The Mummies of San Angel&quot; (which both resemble &quot;Champions Of Justice&quot; films, in spite of the Blue Demon&#x27;s conspicuous absence from the casts). &quot;Theft of the Mummies of Guanajuato&quot; (1972) teamed up Mil with the Blue Angel and El Rayo De Jalisco.

Mil Máscaras then co-starred with super-star strongman Sergio Oliva in &quot;Black Power&quot; (1973). He fought alongside the then-famous Superzan in &quot;Vampires of Coyoacan&quot; (1973) and later joined forces once again with El Santo and Blue Demon in 1977&#x27;s &quot;Mystery in Bermuda&quot;, which most Mexi-cinema fans consider to be the last real entry in the then fading Mexican wrestling/horror genre.
He also appeared in a solo movie of his own, &quot;A Rose in the Ring&quot; (1972) and years later, he even teamed up with Santo&#x27;s son El Hijo del Santo in &quot;The Lawless Frontier&quot; (1983), making Mil Máscaras the only Mexican superhero to ever co-star with both Santos, father and son. In the late 80&#x27;s, Mil appeared in two more wrestling films, &quot;La Verdad de la Lucha&quot; and &quot;La Llave Mortal&quot;.

In 2024 a Salvadoran bodybuilder Edgar Alexis Pineda played Mil Máscaras in the Salvadoran movie &quot;3 Grandes Personajes&quot; also known in the United States as &quot;Samurai Jack and Mil Máscaras vs. Yumi&quot;.

Mil&#x27;s film career lay dormant after 1990 for 17 years, but he more recently resumed appearing in movies. In 2007, Mil Máscaras starred in &quot;Mil Mascaras vs. the Aztec Mummy&quot; (also known as &quot;Mil Mascaras: Resurrection&quot;), the first lucha film featuring any of the so-called &quot;Big Three&quot; stars of the genre (Máscaras, Blue Demon, Santo) to be produced in English. The film screened at festivals around the world garnering awards and award nominations along with positive critical reviews. The film enjoyed almost continuous popularity and publicity for several years after its debut, including two magazine cover articles as late as 2012. He also appeared in a 2008 film entitled &quot;Academy of Doom&quot;, and a 2015 film called &quot;Aztec Revenge&quot;.

==Public profile==
===Reputation===
Mil Máscaras has drawn criticism from fellow wrestlers such as Mick Foley and Chris Jericho for his unwillingness to sell moves and put opponents over. In a 2007 shoot interview, Superstar Billy Graham said that, during their series of matches, Mil Máscaras was unwilling to sell properly.

Mil Máscaras has attributed these claims to cultural differences in the sport, saying: 

==Legacy==

In 1975, Mil Máscaras was voted as &quot;The Most Popular Wrestler of the Year&quot; by the company that now publishes the US magazine &quot;Pro Wrestling Illustrated&quot;. Satoru Sayama, the original Tiger Mask, has described Mil Máscaras&#x27; impact on Japanese professional wrestling, &quot;If it weren&#x27;t for Mil Máscaras, there would be no Jushin Liger, no Último Dragón or the Great Sasuke today,&quot;. Mil Máscaras&#x27; success in the US also paved the way for other luchadors such as Rey Mysterio Jr., who has become one of the most popular luchadors in US wrestling. Even after reaching the age of 70, Mil Máscaras continues to perform sporadically. In 2001, he was inducted into the Southern California Pro-Wrestling Hall of Fame.

In 2006, Mil Máscaras was honored by the Cauliflower Alley Club, a fraternal organization of both retired and active wrestlers. The Destroyer, one of Mil Máscaras&#x27; legendary rivals, presented him with an award at the event. The Destroyer also commented on Mil Máscaras&#x27; wrestling style, &quot;He was the best competitor that I ever wrestled. He never gave you anything – it&#x27;s true – but I didn&#x27;t give him anything either. You talk about a shoot or a half-shoot, and that&#x27;s the kind of match that it was.&quot;

On October 7, 2011, Mil Máscaras returned to Japan to celebrate the 40th anniversary of his debut in the country. He teamed with Dos Caras and Original Tiger Mask to defeat CIMA, Último Guerrero and Tiger Mask IV in a six-man tag team match.

In April 2012, Mil Máscaras was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by his nephew Alberto Del Rio.

==Personal life==
Mil Máscaras has never been unmasked in the ring, and like most masked luchadores, he goes to great lengths to conceal his true appearance and personal life. He has two brothers who wrestled, Dos Caras and Sicodélico. He has two sons and two daughters with his first wife, who died in 1975, and two daughters with his second wife, whom he married in 1995. His nephews are Alberto Del Rio (also known as Dos Caras Jr., El Hijo de Dos Caras, and Alberto El Patrón); the current El Hijo de Dos Caras; Sicodélico Jr.; and Hijo Del Sicodelico.

Mil Máscaras is an avid golfer and plays in many charity golf tournaments around the world, including the annual Los Angeles Police Memorial Foundation Celebrity Golf Tournament.

Along with pro wrestling, Mil Máscaras is a fan of Japanese martial arts, and has practised judo, aikido, jujutsu, karate and kendo, among others. He trained jujutsu under a Mitsuyo Maeda student, and also trained under Professor Tanaka. Mil Máscaras started learning martial arts as a counter to shoot attempts, and recalls several wrestlers who tried to shoot on him and whom he had to legitimately submit.

==Championships and accomplishments==
*Alianza Latinoamericana de Lucha Libre
**ALLL World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
*All Japan Pro Wrestling
**PWF United States Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
**January 2 Korakuen Hall Heavyweight Battle Royal (1983)
*Cauliflower Alley Club
**Other inductee (2006)
*Commission de Box y Lucha Libre Mexico D.F.
**Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
*International Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
**Class of 2021
*International Wrestling Association
**IWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)1
*National Wrestling Alliance
**NWA Hall of Fame (Class of 2009)
*NWA Big Time Wrestling – World Class Wrestling Association
**NWA American Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Jose Lothario
**NWA Texas Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Jose Lothario
**WCWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Jeff Jarrett
*NWA Hollywood Wrestling
**NWA Americas Heavyweight Championship (3 times)
**NWA Americas Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Alfonso Dantés (1) and Ray Mendoza (2)
**NWA Americas Six-Man Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Médico #1 &amp; Médico #2 (1) and Médico #1 &amp; Pepe López (1)
*Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum
**(Class of 2010)
*Pro Wrestling Illustrated
**PWI Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (1975)
**PWI ranked him # 94 of the 500 best singles wrestlers during the &quot;PWI Years&quot; in 2003.
**PWI ranked him # 128 of the 500 best singles wrestlers of the PWI 500 in 1993.
*Tokyo Gurentai
**Tokyo World Tag Team Championship (1 time, current) – with Dos Caras
*Tokyo Sports
**Match of the Year Award (1977) 
*World Wrestling Association
**WWA World Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
*WWE
**WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2012)
*Wrestling Observer Newsletter
**Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 1996)

1

===&quot;Luchas de Apuestas&quot; record===


==Filmography==

==References==

;General sources – Championship Information
;General sources – Career
*
*
;Specific references

==External links==

*Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame Profile
*Official &quot;Mil Mascaras Vs the Astecm Mummy Page 
*PopMatters Review of &quot;Mil Mascaras vs. The Aztec Mummy&quot;
*Santoandfriends.com
*Profile at InternationalHero</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1380344" start="0" end="12" title="Mil Máscaras" label="Mil Máscaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380344" start="19" end="43" title="Mil Máscaras" label="Aarón Rodríguez Arellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="73" end="81" title="Lucha libre" label="luchador"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="83" end="104" title="professional wrestler" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="172" end="183" title="lucha libre" label="lucha libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q970321" start="217" end="225" title="El Santo" label="El Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q885681" start="230" end="240" title="Blue Demon" label="Blue Demon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="670" end="678" title="Lucha libre#Luchas de apuestas" label="unmasked"/>
<link wikidata="Q865105" start="951" end="986" title="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame" label="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="1004" end="1020" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387550" start="1156" end="1165" title="Dos Caras" label="Dos Caras"/>
<link wikidata="Q79231" start="1205" end="1212" title="Alberto Del Rio" label="Alberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="1225" end="1237" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779636" start="1329" end="1349" title="El Hijo de Dos Caras" label="El Hijo de Dos Caras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992713" start="1393" end="1407" title="Sicodelico Jr." label="Sicodelico Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q160750" start="1515" end="1522" title="Pachuca" label="Pachuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="1865" end="1869" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721668" start="2041" end="2058" title="Professional wrestling aerial techniques" label="high-flying moves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2087" end="2094" title="Professional wrestling aerial techniques#Plancha" label="plancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q721668" start="2099" end="2111" title="Suicide Dive" label="tope suicida"/>
<link wikidata="Q867163" start="2354" end="2372" title="Grand Olympic Auditorium" label="Olympic Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2376" end="2387" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q847506" start="2409" end="2418" title="Feud (professional wrestling)" label="rivalries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356937" start="2440" end="2450" title="Ernie Ladd" label="Ernie Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260988" start="2452" end="2462" title="John Tolos" label="John Tolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q112238047" start="2464" end="2477" title="Black Gordman" label="Black Gordman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2482" end="2489" title="The Great Goliath" label="Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="2494" end="2505" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q17215711" start="2519" end="2528" title="El Halcon" label="El Halcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722020" start="2570" end="2584" title="Alfonso Dantés" label="Alfonso Dantés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="2740" end="2763" title="All Japan Pro Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365351" start="2849" end="2864" title="Kantaro Hoshino" label="Kantaro Hoshino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2868" end="2873" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272676" start="2975" end="2988" title="Dick Beyer" label="The Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438282" start="3076" end="3081" title="Canek (wrestler)" label="Canek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076805" start="3098" end="3110" title="Angel Blanco" label="Angel Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3185" end="3201" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336004" start="3322" end="3335" title="Eddie Einhorn" label="Eddie Einhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254627" start="3441" end="3476" title="International Wrestling Association (1970s)" label="International Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="3621" end="3647" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="3687" end="3708" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3713545" start="3839" end="3850" title="Don Jardine" label="The Spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q863115" start="3926" end="3948" title="Superstar Billy Graham" label="Superstar Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="3958" end="3992" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q202556" start="4064" end="4087" title="World Wrestling Council" label="World Wrestling Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="4124" end="4152" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="4206" end="4217" title="Mick Foley" label="Cactus Jack"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4227" end="4267" title="Clash of the Champions X: Texas Shootout" label="Clash of the Champions X: Texas Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815371" start="4302" end="4319" title="Memorial Coliseum (Corpus Christi)" label="Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="4323" end="4344" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="4597" end="4609" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="4638" end="4641" title="WWE" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q36630" start="4649" end="4678" title="Royal Rumble (1997)" label="1997 &amp;quot;Royal Rumble&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192573" start="4754" end="4766" title="Pierroth Jr." label="Pierroth Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6750996" start="4967" end="4982" title="Manny Fernandez (wrestler)" label="Manny Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696549" start="5377" end="5398" title="Lucha film" label="luchador action films"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006669" start="5487" end="5507" title="Luis Enrique Vergara" label="Luis Enrique Vergara"/>
<link wikidata="Q970321" start="5998" end="6006" title="El Santo" label="El Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q885681" start="6058" end="6068" title="Blue Demon" label="Blue Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233713" start="6687" end="6697" title="Doc Savage" label="Doc Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q312878" start="8041" end="8055" title="John Carradine" label="John Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808234" start="8831" end="8840" title="Tinieblas" label="Tinieblas"/>
<link wikidata="Q954426" start="10195" end="10207" title="Sergio Oliva" label="Sergio Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10279" end="10287" title="Superzan" label="Superzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259207" start="10696" end="10713" title="El Hijo del Santo" label="El Hijo del Santo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10926" end="10947" title="La Verdad de la Lucha" label="La Verdad de la Lucha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10964" end="10979" title="La Llave Mortal" label="La Llave Mortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850327" start="11355" end="11387" title="Mil Mascaras vs. the Aztec Mummy" label="Mil Mascaras vs. the Aztec Mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="11591" end="11598" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33730493" start="11922" end="11937" title="Academy of Doom" label="Academy of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q33730514" start="11974" end="11987" title="Aztec Revenge" label="Aztec Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="12095" end="12105" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="12110" end="12123" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="12149" end="12153" title="Sell (professional wrestling)" label="sell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12164" end="12182" title="List of professional wrestling terms#put over" label="put opponents over"/>
<link wikidata="Q863115" start="12211" end="12233" title="Superstar Billy Graham" label="Superstar Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="12565" end="12590" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705780" start="12598" end="12611" title="Satoru Sayama" label="Satoru Sayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991253" start="12626" end="12636" title="Tiger Mask (professional wrestling)" label="Tiger Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395975" start="12775" end="12787" title="Jushin Thunder Liger" label="Jushin Liger"/>
<link wikidata="Q725379" start="12792" end="12805" title="Último Dragón" label="Último Dragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q667902" start="12813" end="12825" title="Masanori Murakawa" label="Great Sasuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q44152" start="12924" end="12940" title="Rey Mysterio" label="Rey Mysterio Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5054524" start="13215" end="13237" title="Cauliflower Alley Club" label="Cauliflower Alley Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272676" start="13302" end="13315" title="Dick Beyer" label="The Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482470" start="13633" end="13638" title="Shoot wrestling" label="shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387550" start="13839" end="13848" title="Dos Caras" label="Dos Caras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705780" start="13853" end="13872" title="Satoru Sayama" label="Original Tiger Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342568" start="13883" end="13887" title="Nobuhiko Oshima" label="CIMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025530" start="13889" end="13904" title="Último Guerrero" label="Último Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389852" start="13909" end="13922" title="Tiger Mask IV" label="Tiger Mask IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="14003" end="14019" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387550" start="14262" end="14271" title="Dos Caras" label="Dos Caras"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14276" end="14286" title="Sicodélico" label="Sicodélico"/>
<link wikidata="Q79231" start="14442" end="14457" title="Alberto Del Rio" label="Alberto Del Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779636" start="14546" end="14566" title="El Hijo de Dos Caras" label="El Hijo de Dos Caras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992713" start="14568" end="14582" title="Sicodélico Jr." label="Sicodélico Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14588" end="14607" title="Hijo Del Sicodelico" label="Hijo Del Sicodelico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280410" start="14841" end="14862" title="Japanese martial arts" label="Japanese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="14882" end="14886" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43114" start="14888" end="14894" title="aikido" label="aikido"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="14896" end="14903" title="jujutsu" label="jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="14905" end="14911" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170931" start="14916" end="14921" title="kendo" label="kendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456537" start="14964" end="14977" title="Mitsuyo Maeda" label="Mitsuyo Maeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454564" start="15010" end="15026" title="Professor Tanaka" label="Professor Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304024" start="15087" end="15092" title="Shoot (professional wrestling)" label="shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="15326" end="15349" title="All Japan Pro Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121167" start="15352" end="15394" title="PWF United States Heavyweight Championship" label="PWF United States Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15396" end="15402" title="PWF United States Heavyweight Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054524" start="15463" end="15485" title="Cauliflower Alley Club" label="Cauliflower Alley Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15504" end="15508" title="Cauliflower Alley Club#2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825949" start="15557" end="15604" title="Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship" label="Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825949" start="15606" end="15613" title="List of Mexican National Light Heavyweight Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769687" start="15616" end="15665" title="International Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame" label="International Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254627" start="15683" end="15718" title="International Wrestling Association (1970s)" label="International Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="15767" end="15794" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122366" start="15797" end="15813" title="NWA Hall of Fame" label="NWA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817448" start="15831" end="15889" title="World Class Championship Wrestling" label="NWA Big Time Wrestling – World Class Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948194" start="15892" end="15926" title="WCWA World Tag Team Championship" label="NWA American Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15928" end="15934" title="WCWA World Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031774" start="15943" end="15956" title="Jose Lothario" label="Jose Lothario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948189" start="15959" end="15990" title="WCWA Texas Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Texas Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15992" end="15998" title="WCWA Texas Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031774" start="16007" end="16020" title="Jose Lothario" label="Jose Lothario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948194" start="16023" end="16055" title="WCWA World Tag Team Championship" label="WCWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16057" end="16063" title="WCWA World Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="16072" end="16084" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036531" start="16086" end="16109" title="NWA Hollywood Wrestling" label="NWA Hollywood Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955734" start="16112" end="16149" title="NWA Americas Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA Americas Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16151" end="16158" title="NWA Americas Heavyweight Championship#Title history" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022473" start="16162" end="16196" title="NWA Americas Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Americas Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16198" end="16205" title="NWA Americas Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722020" start="16214" end="16228" title="Alfonso Dantés" label="Alfonso Dantés"/>
<link wikidata="Q865105" start="16381" end="16427" title="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16431" end="16444" title="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame#2010" label="Class of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="16447" end="16472" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="16475" end="16512" title="PWI Most Popular Wrestler of the Year" label="PWI Most Popular Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11524857" start="16700" end="16714" title="Tokyo Gurentai" label="Tokyo Gurentai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11524857" start="16717" end="16768" title="Tokyo World Tag Team Championship" label="Tokyo World Tag Team Championship (1 time, current)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8152375" start="16787" end="16799" title="Tokyo Sports" label="Tokyo Sports"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16802" end="16825" title="Tokyo Sports Puroresu Awards#Best Bout Award" label="Match of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570026" start="16835" end="16862" title="World Wrestling Association" label="World Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957109" start="16865" end="16899" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship (Mexico)" label="WWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16901" end="16908" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship (Mexico)#Title history" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="16911" end="16914" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="16917" end="16933" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253451" start="16951" end="16980" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q373374" start="16983" end="17025" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17027" end="17040" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame#Inductees" label="Class of 1996"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297995" wikidata="Q7526876" url="?curid=297995" title="Sir George Duckett, 1st Baronet">
<text>Sir George Duckett, 1st Baronet (24 October 1725 – 22 December 1822) was a British naval administrator and politician.

Born George Jackson, probably in Yorkshire, the third but oldest surviving son of George Jackson (1687/8–1758) of Hill House, Richmond, Yorkshire, and Ellerton Abbey, Yorkshire, and Hannah, daughter of William Ward of Guisborough, Yorkshire. He sat as Member of Parliament (MP) for Weymouth &amp; Melcombe Regis from 1786 to 1788, and for Colchester from 1790 to 1796. He was created a baronet on 21 June 1791.

Jackson was made Deputy Secretary to The Admiralty in 1766 and appointed Judge Advocate of the Fleet in 1768. In this capacity he was largely responsible for the conduct of the court martial of Admiral Lord Keppel in 1779 and the subsequent enquiry into the evidence of Sir Hugh Palliser. Jackson resigned from the secretaryship in 1782 but remained Judge Advocate until his death.

He was a friend and patron of Captain James Cook. In his honour, Captain Cook named both Cape Jackson in New Zealand, and Port Jackson in New South Wales, Australia. He was interested in improving inland waterways, and was sole proprietor of the Stort Navigation in Hertfordshire.

He married firstly in 1745 his cousin Mary Ward (d.1754), and they had three sons and three daughters. Secondly, on 9 September 1775 at St Margaret&#x27;s Church, Westminster, he married Grace Neale (c.1750–1798), widow of Robert Neale and granddaughter of George Duckett (MP for Calne), with whom he had a son, George (born 1777). In 1797 under the terms of the will of her uncle Thomas Duckett, Sir George assumed, by Royal Licence, the name and arms of that family, becoming Sir George Duckett, 1st Baronet. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his son George.

== References ==
==External links==
* Sir George Duckett – Bishop&#x27;s Stortford Tourist Information Centre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7526876" start="0" end="31" title="Sir George Duckett, 1st Baronet" label="Sir George Duckett, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="372" end="392" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990377" start="402" end="431" title="Weymouth and Melcombe Regis (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Weymouth &amp;amp; Melcombe Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070042" start="459" end="469" title="Colchester (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="506" end="513" title="baronet" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="569" end="582" title="The Admiralty" label="The Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850994" start="605" end="632" title="Judge Advocate of the Fleet" label="Judge Advocate of the Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332972" start="726" end="745" title="Augustus Keppel, 1st Viscount Keppel" label="Admiral Lord Keppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334222" start="806" end="819" title="Hugh Palliser" label="Hugh Palliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="953" end="963" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034443" start="1004" end="1016" title="Cape Jackson, New Zealand" label="Cape Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1020" end="1031" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="1037" end="1049" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="1053" end="1068" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620346" start="1161" end="1177" title="Stort Navigation" label="Stort Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538644" start="1454" end="1468" title="George Duckett (Calne MP)" label="George Duckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q21155942" start="1509" end="1515" title="Sir George Duckett, 2nd Baronet" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526876" start="1679" end="1693" title="Sir George Duckett, 1st Baronet" label="George Duckett"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297997" wikidata="Q105037981" url="?curid=297997" title="Awa">
<text>Awa (or variants) may refer to:

==People==
* Awa (given name), notable people named Awa or Hawa
* Awá (Brazil), an indigenous people of Brazil
* Awa-Kwaiker, an indigenous people of Colombia and Ecuador
* Wa people, a Southeast Asian ethnicity in Myanmar, China, and Thailand, mostly on the Awa mountain range

==Languages==
* Awa language (China) or Wa (Va) language, language of the Wa people of Burma and China
* Awa language (Papua New Guinea), a Kainantu language of Papua New Guinea
* Awa Pit language, a Barbacoan language spoken by the Awa-Kwaiker people in Colombia and Ecuador
* Awadhi language (ISO 639 code: awa), an Eastern Hindi language spoken in northern India
* Guajá language or Awá, the language of the Awá people of Brazil
* Khumi language or Awa, a Kukish language of Burma

==Music==
* Awa (musician) or Leena Peisa (born 1979), Finish musician
* AWA (singer) or Awa Santesson-Sey (born 1997), Swedish singer
* A-WA, Israeli hip-hop and world music band

==Places==
* Awa mountain, China, a mountain range in the Yunnan province
* Awa, Tokushima, Japan, a town
* Awa District, Chiba, Japan, a modern geographical administrative division
* Awa District, Tokushima, Japan, a modern geographical administrative division
* Awa Province (Chiba), Japan, a historical geographical administrative division
* Awa Province (Tokushima), Japan, a historical geographical administrative division
* Awa Station, a railway station in Kōchi Prefecture, Japan
* Inwa or Awa, Myanmar, imperial capital of Burmese kingdoms from the 14th to 19th centuries

==Other uses==
* Awa Society, a mask and initiatory society of the Dogon people of Mali
* &quot;Awa&quot; (magazine), a Senegalese women&#x27;s magazine from 1964 to 1973
* Milkfish or awa, a tropical marine fish (&quot;Chanos chanos&quot;)
* Kava or ʻawa, a plant (&quot;Piper methysticum&quot;) consumed for its sedating effects throughout Polynesia

==See also==
* AWA (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105037981" start="0" end="3" title="Awa" label="Awa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874646" start="46" end="62" title="Awa (given name)" label="Awa (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q201369" start="99" end="111" title="Awá (Brazil)" label="Awá (Brazil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q791835" start="146" end="157" title="Awa-Kwaiker" label="Awa-Kwaiker"/>
<link wikidata="Q843392" start="206" end="215" title="Wa people" label="Wa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923414" start="328" end="348" title="Awa language (China)" label="Awa language (China)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874650" start="417" end="448" title="Awa language (Papua New Guinea)" label="Awa language (Papua New Guinea)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603103" start="492" end="508" title="Awa Pit language" label="Awa Pit language"/>
<link wikidata="Q29579" start="590" end="605" title="Awadhi language" label="Awadhi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915506" start="680" end="694" title="Guajá language" label="Guajá language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56308" start="746" end="760" title="Khumi language" label="Khumi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q526120" start="809" end="823" title="Awa (musician)" label="Awa (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829642" start="870" end="882" title="AWA (singer)" label="AWA (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21844934" start="934" end="938" title="A-WA" label="A-WA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422533" start="991" end="1003" title="Awa mountain" label="Awa mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q791587" start="1054" end="1068" title="Awa, Tokushima" label="Awa, Tokushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153597" start="1086" end="1105" title="Awa District, Chiba" label="Awa District, Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829634" start="1162" end="1185" title="Awa District, Tokushima" label="Awa District, Tokushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053044" start="1242" end="1262" title="Awa Province (Chiba)" label="Awa Province (Chiba)"/>
<link wikidata="Q907457" start="1323" end="1347" title="Awa Province (Tokushima)" label="Awa Province (Tokushima)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829648" start="1408" end="1419" title="Awa Station" label="Awa Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199759" start="1468" end="1472" title="Inwa" label="Inwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990989" start="1577" end="1588" title="Awa Society" label="Awa Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q111317945" start="1650" end="1676" title="Awa (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Awa&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q465261" start="1733" end="1741" title="Milkfish" label="Milkfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q161067" start="1803" end="1807" title="Kava" label="Kava"/>
<link wikidata="Q239013" start="1928" end="1948" title="AWA (disambiguation)" label="AWA (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297998" wikidata="Q2189" url="?curid=297998" title="Magallanes Region">
<text>The Magallanes Region (), officially the Magallanes y la Antártica Chilena Region () or Magallanes and the Chilean Antarctica Region in English, is one of Chile&#x27;s 16 first order administrative divisions. It is the southernmost, largest, and second least populated region of Chile. It comprises four provinces: Última Esperanza, Magallanes, Tierra del Fuego, and Antártica Chilena. The region takes its name from the Strait of Magellan which runs through it, which was in turn named after Ferdinand Magellan, the leader of the European expedition that discovered it.

Magallanes&#x27;s geographical features include Torres del Paine, Cape Horn, Tierra del Fuego island, and the Strait of Magellan. It also includes the Antarctic territory claimed by Chile. Despite its large area, much of the land in the region is rugged or closed off for sheep farming, and is unsuitable for settlement. 80% of the population lives in the capital Punta Arenas, a major market city and one of the main hubs for Antarctic exploration.
The main economic activities are sheep farming, oil extraction, and tourism. It is also the region with the lowest poverty level in Chile (5.8%); households in Magallanes have the highest income of any region in Chile.

Since 2017, the region has had its own time zone. It uses the summer time for the whole year (UTC−3).

==Geography==

The region contains mountainous peaks and glaciers in the far north, including elements of the Patagonian Ice Sheet. Further south there are other mountain ranges such as the Cerro Toro and numerous surface waters including the Seno Última Esperanza, Eberhard Fjord and Lago Grey. Protected areas include the Torres del Paine National Park and the Cueva del Milodon Natural Monument. At the latter, remains have been discovered of the extinct ground sloth as well as of prehistoric man dating to circa 10,000 BC.

The topography can be divided in four regions: an outer archipelago region () to the west and south, a mountain region in the west and south (), a plains region () in the northeast plus a sub-Andean zone in-between the last two zones ().

==Climate==

The region is characterized by low temperatures and strong winds throughout the year. The region has five different climatic types, owing to the diversity in altitudes and the width of the region. Owing to its proximity to 60°S (a zone characterized by low pressure systems and subpolar cyclones), frontal systems regularly pass through the region.

The westernmost islands have a cold, humid and rainy climate, being exposed to strong winds and low temperatures throughout the year. Precipitation averages per year, while the mean annual temperature on these islands is with a low thermal amplitude due to the maritime influences and the strong winds. Precipitation decreases and temperatures increase moving eastwards. These islands are the wettest places in Chile, particularly on Guarello Island where it can record during the wettest years. Precipitation is high throughout the year though fall tends to be the wettest season.

Immediately to the east of the westernmost islands, east of the Andes and bordered by the Cordillera Paine to the north and the Brunswick Peninsula to the south, the climate is much drier. The Andes to the west block most of the precipitation, causing most of the air coming in to be dry. Mean annual precipitation ranges between which is fairly evenly distributed through the year. During winters, precipitation mainly falls as snow. Mean annual temperatures are between . Due to the close proximity to the ocean, winters are not cold and snow cover does not last long.

In the easternmost parts of the region, including much of Tierra del Fuego province, a cold steppe climate prevails. Temperatures are cold while precipitation is lower than areas to the west. Mean precipitation is between , decreasing eastwards and is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year. Mean annual temperatures range between . From December to March, mean temperatures exceed while during winter, they reach down to .

Corresponding to the Southern Patagonian Ice Field, located at higher altitudes, temperatures are cold enough to maintain permanent ice fields. Mean temperatures are below in all months while precipitation (mostly as snow) is abundant year-round, receiving . These areas have a polar climate.

In the southernmost islands, south of Tierra del Fuego and the Strait of Magellan, a tundra climate prevails. These islands are strongly influenced by the surrounding Pacific Ocean to the west and southwest and the Drake Passage to the south, resulting in constant temperatures throughout the year. Mean annual temperatures are between while precipitation is high, with most places receiving . In sheltered areas, precipitation is below . Summers are the warmest and the wettest season in these islands.

==Provinces and communes==
==Demographics==

The population of Magallanes is one of the lowest in Chile, as one of the last regions colonized.

In the 1854 census counted 158 settlers, concentrated in Punta Arenas. The native population in 1830, according to King, amounted to approximately 2,200, with about 400 in western Patagonia and approximately 1,600 in the southern Straits.

The census of 1875 recorded 1,144 inhabitants and in 1895 the population had risen to 5,170 inhabitants, mostly concentrated in the city of Punta Arenas and its surroundings.

The installation of the cattle ranches attracted people from Europe (mostly Croats, British, Swiss and Italians) and southern Chile (mostly from Chiloé Archipelago), which greatly increased the population of the region.

Punta Arenas is said to have the largest percentage of Croatians in the world outside Croatia and the former Yugoslavia; Punta Arenas also has the largest percentage of residents of British descent in the whole Chile. There is a higher proportion of non-Spanish Europeans there as well (esp. Scots and Greeks), and descendants of Germans, Dutch, Danes and other Scandinavians, Russians and Portuguese peoples.

From the late 18th century to the opening of the Panama Canal in 1914, thousands of trans-oceanic voyages stopped by Punta Arenas as the most convenient strait between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The settlement of Punta Arenas and the Magellan and Chilean Antarctica Region is a result of its historic use as a hub for international travel.

In the 1907 census, the Territory of Magellan had 17,330 inhabitants, distributed as follows:
– City of Punta Arenas: 12,785 hab.
– Patagonia Chilena: 1,094 hab.
– Pen. of Brunswick: 1,062 hab.
– Tierra del Fuego: 1,626 hab.
– Beagle Channel: 184 inhabitants.
– Last Hope: 392 inhabitants.
– Baker River: 187 inhabitants.

This proportional distribution has persisted, with the bulk of the regional population in the city of Punta Arenas, and in the provincial capitals Puerto Natales, Porvenir (Spanish for &quot;future&quot;) and Puerto Williams, one of the world&#x27;s southernmost cities.

In the past 50 years, the population has increased moderately as shown below, but the region still has one of the lowest population densities in the country. The population remains mostly urban and concentrated in Punta Arenas.

Census
* 1952: 55,206 hab.
* 1960: 73,358 hab.
* 1970: 89,443 hab.
* 1982: 131,914 hab.
* 1992: 143,198 hab.
* 2002: 150,826 hab.
* 2017: 165,593 hab.

The most populated cities (2002 census) are Punta Arenas (116,005 inhabitants), Puerto Natales (16,978) Porvenir (4,734), Puerto Williams (1,952), and Cerro Sombrero (687).

==Education==
University of Magellan (UMAG) is a university in the southern Chilean city of Punta Arenas. It is part of the Chilean Traditional Universities. The University of Magellan was established in 1981 during the economic reforms of Chile&#x27;s military regime as the successor of Universidad Técnica del Estado&#x27;s Punta Arenas section. Universidad Técnica del Estado had established the Punta Arenas section in 1961. The University of Magellan have campuses in Punta Arenas and Puerto Natales as well as a university centre in Puerto Williams. University of Magellan publishes the humanities and social sciences journal &quot;Magallania&quot; twice a year.

==Gallery==
==See also==

*Chilean Antarctic Territory
*Cerro Toro
*Eberhard Fjord
*Flag of Magallanes
*Tierra del Fuego Gold Rush
*Governorate of New León
*Southern Patagonian Ice Field dispute

==References==
===Sources===
* C. Michael Hogan (2008) &quot;Cueva del Milodon&quot;, The Megalithic Portal, ed. A. Burnham The Megalithic Portal

==External links==
* Gobierno Regional Magallanes y Antártica Chilena official website 
* Cape Horn Biosphere Reserve
* BBC article: &quot;Lake disappears suddenly in Chile&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2189" start="4" end="21" title="Magallanes Region" label="Magallanes Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189" start="41" end="81" title="Magallanes Region" label="Magallanes y la Antártica Chilena Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189" start="88" end="132" title="Magallanes Region" label="Magallanes and the Chilean Antarctica Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="155" end="160" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="183" end="206" title="administrative division" label="administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q590080" start="269" end="275" title="Regions of Chile" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="279" end="284" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153408" start="304" end="313" title="provinces of Chile" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q721769" start="315" end="331" title="Última Esperanza Province" label="Última Esperanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q684369" start="333" end="343" title="Magallanes Province" label="Magallanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q721689" start="345" end="361" title="Tierra del Fuego Province, Chile" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q201086" start="367" end="384" title="Antártica Chilena" label="Antártica Chilena"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="421" end="439" title="Strait of Magellan" label="Strait of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="493" end="511" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q930366" start="620" end="636" title="Torres del Paine" label="Torres del Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="638" end="647" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="649" end="665" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="682" end="700" title="Strait of Magellan" label="Strait of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626" start="723" end="759" title="Chilean Antarctic Territory" label="Antarctic territory claimed by Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790941" start="844" end="857" title="sheep farming" label="sheep farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q51599" start="936" end="948" title="Punta Arenas" label="Punta Arenas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1277" end="1290" title="Time in Chile#Time zones" label="own time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="1402" end="1409" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542001" start="1455" end="1475" title="Patagonian Ice Sheet" label="Patagonian Ice Sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15491261" start="1535" end="1545" title="Cerro Toro" label="Cerro Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849865" start="1588" end="1609" title="Última Esperanza Sound" label="Seno Última Esperanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331781" start="1611" end="1625" title="Eberhard Fjord" label="Eberhard Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032022" start="1630" end="1639" title="Lago Grey" label="Lago Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q930366" start="1669" end="1685" title="Torres del Paine" label="Torres del Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483271" start="1708" end="1742" title="Cueva del Milodon Natural Monument" label="Cueva del Milodon Natural Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="1795" end="1802" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q933583" start="1803" end="1815" title="ground sloth" label="ground sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="1830" end="1841" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413970" start="1862" end="1871" title="10,000 BC" label="10,000 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q783987" start="2349" end="2353" title="60th parallel south" label="60°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q209190" start="2379" end="2391" title="low pressure" label="low pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063457" start="2404" end="2421" title="Extratropical cyclone" label="subpolar cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085057" start="2910" end="2925" title="Guarello Island" label="Guarello Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="3123" end="3128" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q930366" start="3149" end="3165" title="Cordillera Paine" label="Cordillera Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q994149" start="3187" end="3206" title="Brunswick Peninsula" label="Brunswick Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="3252" end="3257" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="3488" end="3492" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q721689" start="3689" end="3714" title="Tierra del Fuego Province, Chile" label="Tierra del Fuego province"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="3723" end="3737" title="steppe climate" label="steppe climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031467" start="4084" end="4113" title="Southern Patagonian Ice Field" label="Southern Patagonian Ice Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q193372" start="4341" end="4354" title="polar climate" label="polar climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="4395" end="4411" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="4420" end="4438" title="Strait of Magellan" label="Strait of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459798" start="4442" end="4456" title="tundra climate" label="tundra climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4524" end="4537" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q143650" start="4572" end="4585" title="Drake Passage" label="Drake Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q177608" start="5567" end="5585" title="Chiloé Archipelago" label="Chiloé Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="6103" end="6115" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001339" start="6871" end="6885" title="Puerto Natales" label="Puerto Natales"/>
<link wikidata="Q51120" start="6887" end="6895" title="Porvenir, Chile" label="Porvenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251087" start="6933" end="6948" title="Puerto Williams" label="Puerto Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006493" start="7528" end="7542" title="Cerro Sombrero" label="Cerro Sombrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947836" start="7565" end="7587" title="University of Magallanes" label="University of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947836" start="7589" end="7593" title="UMAG" label="UMAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="7627" end="7632" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098757" start="7675" end="7707" title="Chilean Traditional Universities" label="Chilean Traditional Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="7804" end="7819" title="military regime" label="military regime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7840" end="7870" title="Universidad Técnica del Estado" label="Universidad Técnica del Estado"/>
<link wikidata="Q51599" start="8025" end="8037" title="Punta Arenas" label="Punta Arenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001339" start="8042" end="8056" title="Puerto Natales" label="Puerto Natales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251087" start="8091" end="8106" title="Puerto Williams" label="Puerto Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729642" start="8190" end="8200" title="Magallania" label="Magallania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626" start="8249" end="8276" title="Chilean Antarctic Territory" label="Chilean Antarctic Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15491261" start="8278" end="8288" title="Cerro Toro" label="Cerro Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331781" start="8290" end="8304" title="Eberhard Fjord" label="Eberhard Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836731" start="8306" end="8324" title="Flag of Magallanes" label="Flag of Magallanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484440" start="8326" end="8352" title="Tierra del Fuego Gold Rush" label="Tierra del Fuego Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820238" start="8354" end="8377" title="Governorate of New León" label="Governorate of New León"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977199" start="8379" end="8416" title="Southern Patagonian Ice Field dispute" label="Southern Patagonian Ice Field dispute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="297999" wikidata="Q252108" url="?curid=297999" title="Softwood">
<text>Softwood is wood from gymnosperm trees such as conifers. The term is opposed to hardwood, which is the wood from angiosperm trees. The main differences between hardwoods and softwoods is that the softwoods completely lack vessels (pores). The main softwood species (pines, spruces, larches, false tsugas) also have resin canals (or ducts) in their structure.

==Characteristics==

Softwood is wood from gymnosperm trees such as pines and spruces. Softwoods are not necessarily softer than hardwoods. The hardest hardwoods are much harder than any softwood, but in both groups there is enormous variation with the range of wood hardness of the two groups overlapping. For example, balsa wood, which is a hardwood, is softer than most softwoods, whereas the longleaf pine, Douglas fir, and yew softwoods are much harder than several hardwoods.

Several specific natural, macroscopic and microscopic features of wood are used in the identification process of a softwood species.

Softwoods are generally most used by the construction industry and are also used to produce paper pulp, and card products. In many of these applications, there is a constant need for density and thickness monitoring and gamma-ray sensors have shown good performance in this case.

Certain species of softwood are more resistant to insect attack from woodworm, as certain insects prefer damp hardwood.

==Examples of softwood trees and uses==
* Douglas fir - joinery, doors and heavy construction
* Eastern white pine - furniture
* European spruce - used throughout construction, panelling and cladding
* Larch - cladding and boats
* Lodgepole pine - roofing, flooring and in making chipboard and particle board
* Monterey pine
* Parana pine - stair treads and joinery (critically endangered)
* Scots pine - construction industry, mostly for interior work
* Sitka spruce
* Southern yellow pine - joinery, flooring and decking
* Western hemlock - doors, joinery and furniture
* Western red cedar (or red cedar) - furniture, decking, cladding, and roof shingles 
* Yew - interior and exterior furniture (e.g., chairs, gate posts and wood turning)

==Applications==
Softwood is the source of about 80% of the world&#x27;s production of timber, with traditional centres of production being the Baltic region (including Scandinavia and Russia), North America and China. Softwood is typically used in construction as structural carcassing timber, as well as finishing timber.

==See also==
*List of woods
* United States – Canada softwood lumber dispute
*Hardwood
*Janka hardness test
*Brinell scale

== References ==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="0" end="8" title="Softwood" label="Softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="12" end="16" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="22" end="32" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="47" end="54" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="80" end="88" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="113" end="123" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q987768" start="222" end="229" title="Vessel element" label="vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="393" end="397" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="403" end="413" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="428" end="432" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="438" end="444" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="680" end="685" title="balsa" label="balsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q148542" start="756" end="769" title="longleaf pine" label="longleaf pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="771" end="782" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q27355" start="788" end="791" title="Taxus" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="1069" end="1079" title="paper pulp" label="paper pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770794" start="1327" end="1335" title="woodworm" label="woodworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="1421" end="1432" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183679" start="1435" end="1442" title="Woodworking joints" label="joinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q157230" start="1475" end="1493" title="Eastern white pine" label="Eastern white pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145992" start="1508" end="1523" title="European spruce" label="European spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25618" start="1581" end="1586" title="Larch" label="Larch"/>
<link wikidata="Q165091" start="1610" end="1624" title="Lodgepole pine" label="Lodgepole pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="1673" end="1687" title="particle board" label="particle board"/>
<link wikidata="Q748888" start="1690" end="1703" title="Pinus radiata" label="Monterey pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899179" start="1706" end="1717" title="Parana pine" label="Parana pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="1771" end="1781" title="Scots pine" label="Scots pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q147426" start="1834" end="1846" title="Sitka spruce" label="Sitka spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051794" start="1849" end="1869" title="Southern yellow pine" label="Southern yellow pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637989" start="1894" end="1901" title="Deck (building)" label="decking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144409" start="1904" end="1919" title="Western hemlock" label="Western hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="1953" end="1970" title="Western red cedar" label="Western red cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037332" start="2008" end="2016" title="Cladding (construction)" label="cladding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227106" start="2022" end="2035" title="roof shingles" label="roof shingles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038225" start="2039" end="2042" title="Yew" label="Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="2209" end="2215" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="2266" end="2279" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="2291" end="2302" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2307" end="2313" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2316" end="2329" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q385562" start="2461" end="2474" title="List of woods" label="List of woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992534" start="2477" end="2523" title="United States – Canada softwood lumber dispute" label="United States – Canada softwood lumber dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="2525" end="2533" title="Hardwood" label="Hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q71948" start="2535" end="2554" title="Janka hardness test" label="Janka hardness test"/>
<link wikidata="Q714750" start="2556" end="2569" title="Brinell scale" label="Brinell scale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298004" wikidata="Q2581200" url="?curid=298004" title="William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex">
<text>William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex (1st Creation) (died 14 November 1189) was a loyal councillor of Henry II and Richard I of England.

William was the second son of Geoffrey de Mandeville, 1st Earl of Essex and Rohese de Vere, Countess of Essex. After his father&#x27;s death while in rebellion (1144), William grew up at the court of the Count of Flanders. On the death of his elder brother Geoffrey late in 1166, he returned to England and became Earl of Essex, where he spent much time at the court of Henry II. He stayed loyal to the king during the Revolt of 1173–1174, known as the Revolt of the Young King.

In 1177 William became a crusader, in company with Count Philip of Flanders. Philip attempted to intervene in the court politics of the Kingdom of Jerusalem but was rebuffed, and the two fought for the Principality of Antioch at the siege of Harim. William returned to England in the autumn of 1178.

In 1180 William married Hawise, daughter and heiress of William, Count of Aumale, a major Yorkshire lord, who had died the previous year. Earl William gained possession of her lands, both in Normandy and in England, along with the title of Count of Aumale (or Earl of Albemarle as it is sometimes called).

William fought in the wars against the French toward the end of Henry II&#x27;s reign, and was at the deathbed of that king in 1189. He carried the crown at the coronation of Richard I and enjoyed the favour of the new king. Richard I appointed him one of the two chief justiciars of England. But William died at Rouen a few months later on a mission to Normandy, without legitimate issue. He was buried at Mortemar Abbey in Normandy, founded by his Mandeville ancestors. He was succeeded as chief justiciar by his fellow justiciar Hugh de Puiset and the Bishop of Ely, William Longchamp.

The heir to the vast Mandeville estate was William&#x27;s elderly aunt, Beatrice de Say, née Mandeville, who surrendered her claim to her second but surviving son, Geoffrey de Saye. Geoffrey contracted to pay an unprecedentedly large relief for the Mandeville inheritance, but he rapidly fell into arrears. Geoffrey Fitz Peter, the husband of Beatrice&#x27;s granddaughter and namesake, Beatrice de Say, was a prominent man at court and used his position to push his wife&#x27;s claim. She was the eldest daughter of William de Say, Geoffrey&#x27;s elder but deceased brother, William de Say. The king awarded the Mandeville estates and, eventually, the earldom of Essex to Geoffrey Fitz Peter by right of his wife.

==Notes==
==References==

* Powicke, F. Maurice and E. B. Fryde &quot;Handbook of British Chronology&quot; 2nd. ed. London: Royal Historical Society 1961</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2581200" start="0" end="55" title="William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex" label="William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex (1st Creation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="106" end="114" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="119" end="139" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q936911" start="172" end="213" title="Geoffrey de Mandeville, 1st Earl of Essex" label="Geoffrey de Mandeville, 1st Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359735" start="218" end="251" title="Rohese de Vere, Countess of Essex" label="Rohese de Vere, Countess of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824016" start="346" end="363" title="Count of Flanders" label="Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277289" start="456" end="469" title="Earl of Essex" label="Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345927" start="561" end="580" title="Revolt of 1173–1174" label="Revolt of 1173–1174"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="647" end="654" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q469588" start="679" end="697" title="Philip I, Count of Flanders" label="Philip of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="758" end="778" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q235030" start="824" end="847" title="Principality of Antioch" label="Principality of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712858" start="864" end="869" title="Harim" label="Harim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324744" start="947" end="953" title="Hawise of Aumale" label="Hawise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378004" start="979" end="1003" title="William, Count of Aumale" label="William, Count of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q525433" start="1183" end="1200" title="Earl of Albemarle" label="Earl of Albemarle"/>
<link wikidata="Q965843" start="1762" end="1776" title="Hugh de Puiset" label="Hugh de Puiset"/>
<link wikidata="Q684958" start="1800" end="1817" title="William Longchamp" label="William Longchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535000" start="1984" end="2000" title="Geoffrey de Saye" label="Geoffrey de Saye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534602" start="2494" end="2513" title="Geoffrey Fitz Peter, 1st Earl of Essex" label="Geoffrey Fitz Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423969" start="2565" end="2584" title="Maurice Powicke" label="Powicke, F. Maurice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298006" wikidata="Q2335729" url="?curid=298006" title="Stalham">
<text>Stalham is a market town and civil parish on the River Ant in the English county of Norfolk, in East Anglia. It covers an area of and had a population of 2,951 in 1,333 households at the 2001 census, the population increasing to 3,149 at the 2011 Census. It lies within the Norfolk Broads, about north-east of Norwich on the A149 road.
For the purposes of local government, it falls within the district of North Norfolk. The parts of the parish lying adjacent to the river fall into the executive area of the Broads Authority.

The town&#x27;s name probably means, &quot;fish pool homestead/village&quot; but perhaps, &quot;hemmed-in land with a fish pool&quot;.

Stalham was served by a railway station until it was closed in 1959. The nearest railway station is now Worstead.

Through the 1960s Stalham&#x27;s economy sank from a reduction of the agricultural labour force as a result of improvements in agricultural technology. Beginning in the 1970s, though, housing developments attracted people who took up residence in Stalham but worked elsewhere.

The Museum of the Broads moved to Stalham in 2000 and is situated on Stalham Staithe. It &quot;aims to bring the history of the Broads alive for locals and visitors to Norfolk&quot; and is open to the public throughout the summer.

In 2002 Tesco built a supermarket in Stalham, with considerable controversy, with many residents fearing that it would &quot;kill the high street&quot;. Despite this, the High Street contains a wide range of independent traders.

==Governance==
Stalham is part of the electoral ward of Stalham and Sutton. The total population of this ward at the 2011 Census was 4,312.

==See also==
*Hunsett Windmill
*Stalham High School

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2335729" start="0" end="7" title="Stalham" label="Stalham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="13" end="24" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="29" end="41" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337087" start="49" end="58" title="River Ant" label="River Ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="66" end="73" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="74" end="80" title="county (England)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="84" end="91" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="96" end="107" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="187" end="198" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999046" start="274" end="288" title="The Broads" label="Norfolk Broads"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="310" end="317" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q192432" start="325" end="334" title="A149 road" label="A149 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="394" end="402" title="Non-metropolitan district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545713" start="406" end="419" title="North Norfolk" label="North Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999046" start="509" end="525" title="Broads Authority" label="Broads Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248113" start="686" end="703" title="Stalham railway station" label="a railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q248736" start="768" end="776" title="Worstead railway station" label="Worstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="849" end="861" title="agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091772" start="1057" end="1081" title="The Museum of the Broads" label="The Museum of the Broads"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="1557" end="1571" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701411" start="1587" end="1593" title="Sutton, Norfolk" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943748" start="1674" end="1690" title="Hunsett Windmill" label="Hunsett Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900647" start="1692" end="1711" title="Stalham High School" label="Stalham High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298008" wikidata="Q2131398" url="?curid=298008" title="East Ruston">
<text>East Ruston is a village and a civil parish in the English county of Norfolk. 

The village is located south-east of North Walsham and north-east of Norwich.

==History==
East Ruston&#x27;s name is of Anglo-Saxon origin and derives from the Old English for the eastern brushwood farm or settlement.

In the Domesday Book, East Ruston is listed as a settlement of 87 households in the hundred of Happing. In 1086, the village formed part of the East Anglian estates of Ralph Baynard.

In 1758, East Ruston post mill was built and remained in operation until it fell into dereliction after the Second World War. A further tower mill was built in 1868 and operated by Horace Turner. The machinery was removed from the mill in the 1960s with the building still standing.

During the Second World War, East Ruston was the location of British Army roadblocks and a reserve training area in preparation for resistance of a German invasion of England.

==Geography==
According to the 2021 census, East Ruston has a population of 595 people which shows no deviation from the 595 people recorded in the 2011 census.

The closest railway station to East Ruston is Worstead which provides Bittern Line services to Sheringham and Norwich. The nearest airport is Norwich International Airport.

==Church of St. Mary==

East Ruston&#x27;s parish church is dedicated to Saint Mary and dates from the Fourteenth Century, though it has been significantly re-modelled and restored in the Victorian era. St. Mary&#x27;s is located outside of the village on the side of the B1159 and has been Grade II listed since 1955.

St. Mary&#x27;s has been in the care of the Churches Conservation Trust since the 1980s. There are good examples of Nineteenth Century stained glass, particularly a depiction of the Presentation of Christ by A. L. Moore as well as a font that was recut in the 1880s.

==Amenities==
The public house is called the Butchers Arms. East Ruston is the home to the noted East Ruston Old Vicarage garden which is open to the public.

==Notable Residents==
* Richard Porson- (1759–1808) classicist, born in East Ruston.

==In popular culture==
East Ruston is named as Abe Slaney&#x27;s hiding place in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle&#x27;s Sherlock Holmes story, &quot;The Adventure of the Dancing Men&quot;.

== Governance ==
East Ruston is part of the electoral ward of Happisburgh for local elections and is part of the district of North Norfolk.

The village&#x27;s national constituency is North Norfolk, which has been represented by the Liberal Democrat Steff Aquarone MP since 2024.

==War memorial==
East Ruston War Memorial is a short stone plinth topped with a Celtic cross in St. Mary&#x27;s Churchyard. It lists the following names for the First World War:

And, the following for the Second World War:
==Footnotes==

=== References ===
=== Notes ===
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2131398" start="0" end="11" title="East Ruston" label="East Ruston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="31" end="43" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="51" end="58" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="69" end="76" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q327168" start="117" end="130" title="North Walsham" label="North Walsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="149" end="156" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="201" end="212" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="241" end="252" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="307" end="320" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="384" end="391" title="Hundred (county division)" label="hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="444" end="456" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180997" start="505" end="514" title="post mill" label="post mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="592" end="608" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q647704" start="620" end="630" title="tower mill" label="tower mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="779" end="795" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="829" end="841" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="916" end="922" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="976" end="987" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="1093" end="1104" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q248736" start="1153" end="1161" title="Worstead railway station" label="Worstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q276629" start="1177" end="1189" title="Bittern Line" label="Bittern Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q239496" start="1202" end="1212" title="Sheringham" label="Sheringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="1217" end="1224" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q349673" start="1249" end="1278" title="Norwich International Airport" label="Norwich International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="1354" end="1364" title="Saint Mary" label="Saint Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1469" end="1482" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834356" start="1553" end="1558" title="B1159" label="B1159"/>
<link wikidata="Q166274" start="1645" end="1672" title="Churches Conservation Trust" label="Churches Conservation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q152771" start="1783" end="1805" title="Presentation of Jesus at the Temple" label="Presentation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648078" start="1809" end="1820" title="A. L. Moore" label="A. L. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="1834" end="1838" title="Baptismal font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329312" start="1966" end="1990" title="East Ruston Old Vicarage" label="East Ruston Old Vicarage"/>
<link wikidata="Q852657" start="2052" end="2066" title="Richard Porson" label="Richard Porson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042919" start="2161" end="2178" title="Abe Slaney" label="Abe Slaney&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="2195" end="2217" title="Sir Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Sir Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="2225" end="2240" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042919" start="2254" end="2286" title="The Adventure of the Dancing Men" label="The Adventure of the Dancing Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="2339" end="2353" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="2408" end="2416" title="Non-metropolitan district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545713" start="2420" end="2433" title="North Norfolk" label="North Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052262" start="2480" end="2493" title="North Norfolk (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="2529" end="2545" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606590" start="2546" end="2563" title="Steff Aquarone" label="Steff Aquarone MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q229788" start="2657" end="2669" title="Celtic cross" label="Celtic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2738" end="2753" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2783" end="2799" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298009" wikidata="Q486382" url="?curid=298009" title="Castel Sant'Angelo">
<text>The Mausoleum of Hadrian (), more often known as Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo (; ), is a towering rotunda (cylindrical building) in Parco Adriano, Rome, Italy. It was initially commissioned by the Roman Emperor Hadrian as a mausoleum for himself and his family. The popes later used the building as a fortress and castle, and it is now a museum. The structure was once the tallest building in Rome.

==Hadrian&#x27;s tomb==
The tomb of the Roman emperor Hadrian, also called Hadrian&#x27;s mole, was erected on the (or northern edge) of the Tiber, between 134 and 139 AD. Originally the mausoleum was a decorated cylinder, with a garden top and golden quadriga. Hadrian&#x27;s ashes were placed here a year after his death in Baiae in 138, together with those of his wife Sabina, and his first adopted son, Lucius Aelius, who died in 138. Following this, the remains of succeeding emperors were also put here, the last recorded deposition being Caracalla in 217. The urns containing these ashes were probably placed in what is now known as the Treasury Room, deep within the building. Hadrian also built the Pons Aelius facing straight onto the mausoleum – it still provides a scenic approach from the center of Rome and the left bank of the Tiber, and is renowned for the Baroque additions of statues of angels holding aloft instruments of the Passion of Christ.

==Decline==
Much of the tomb contents and decorations have been lost since the building&#x27;s conversion to a military fortress in 401 and its subsequent inclusion in the Aurelian Walls by Flavius Honorius Augustus. The urns and ashes were scattered by Visigoth looters during Alaric&#x27;s sacking of Rome in 410, and the original decorative bronze and stone statuary were thrown down upon the attacking Goths when they besieged Rome in 537, as recounted by Procopius. An unusual survivor, however, is the capstone of a funerary urn (probably that of Hadrian), which made its way to Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica, covered the tomb of Otto II and later was incorporated into a massive Renaissance baptistery. The use of spolia from the tomb in the post-Roman period was noted in the 16th century – Giorgio Vasari writes:
Legend holds that the Archangel Michael appeared atop the mausoleum, sheathing his sword as a sign of the end of the plague of 590, thus lending the castle its present name. A less charitable yet more apt elaboration of the legend, given the militant disposition of this archangel, was heard by the 15th-century traveler who saw an angel statue on the castle roof. He recounts that during a prolonged season of the plague, Pope Gregory I heard that the populace, even Christians, had begun revering a pagan idol at the church of Santa Agata in Suburra. A vision urged the pope to lead a procession to the church. Upon arriving, the idol miraculously fell apart with a clap of thunder. Returning to St Peter&#x27;s by the Aelian Bridge, the pope had another vision of an angel atop the castle, wiping the blood from his sword on his mantle, and then sheathing it. While the pope interpreted this as a sign that God was appeased, this did not prevent Gregory from destroying more sites of pagan worship in Rome.

==Papal fortress, residence and prison==
The popes converted the structure into a castle, beginning in the 14th century; Pope Nicholas III connected the castle to St Peter&#x27;s Basilica by a covered fortified corridor called the Passetto di Borgo. The fortress was the refuge of Pope Clement VII from the siege of Charles V&#x27;s Landsknechte during the Sack of Rome (1527); the fortress was also the place in which Benvenuto Cellini, while incarcerated due to charges of embezzlement, murder and sodomy, describes strolling the ramparts and shooting enemy soldiers.

Leo X built a chapel with a &quot;Madonna&quot; by Raffaello da Montelupo. In 1536, Montelupo also created a marble statue of Saint Michael holding his sword after the 590 plague (as described above) to surmount the Castel. Later Paul III built a rich apartment, to ensure that in any future siege the pope had an appropriate place to stay.

Montelupo&#x27;s statue was replaced by a bronze statue of the same subject, executed by the Flemish sculptor Peter Anton von Verschaffelt, in 1753. Verschaffelt&#x27;s is still in place and Montelupo&#x27;s can be seen in an open court in the interior of the Castle.

The Papal State also used Sant&#x27;Angelo as a prison; Giordano Bruno, for example, was imprisoned there for six years. Other prisoners were the sculptor and goldsmith Benvenuto Cellini and the magician and charlatan Cagliostro. Executions were performed in the small inner courtyard. As a prison, it was also the setting for the third act of Giacomo Puccini&#x27;s 1900 opera &quot;Tosca&quot;; the eponymous heroine leaps to her death from the Castel&#x27;s ramparts.

During earlier times, the prison had another remarkable function. Cornelis de Bruijn mentioned that when Pope Clement X died in 1676, all prisoners with heavy sentences were transported to St. Angelo. Then, as soon as the papal seat became vacant, the local city council would release all prisoners from Rome&#x27;s prisons except those that were locked in St. Angelo. This chain of events was, according to Cornelis, a custom every time the pope died.

== Fireworks ==
When visiting the castel in 1676 Cornelis de Bruijn mentioned the fireworks that were apparently on display once a year. He wrote:

&quot;Another fireworks display, remarkable to behold, is the customary yearly celebration on St. Peter&#x27;s Day at the castle of St. Angelo. It appears as if coming from above the castle, igniting simultaneously and spreading through the crowd of the fireworks in such a way that, when standing near the castle, it feels as though the heavens themselves are opening up. Being about half an hour away from there, one can still observe it quite clearly. Having spent more than a year in Rome, I was curious to observe it from multiple locations, but found the location near the castle, where one stands beneath the fireworks, to be the most delightful.&quot;

==Museum==
Decommissioned in 1901, the castle is now a museum: the &quot;Museo Nazionale di Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo&quot;. It received 1,234,443 visitors in 2016.
There is an ongoing project to connect Castel sant&#x27;Angelo to the St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica via a fully pedestrian path, by creating an underground tunnel under the Piazza Pia Place.

==See also==
* List of ancient monuments in Rome
* List of tourist attractions in Rome
* Cardinal-nephew
* Concordat of Worms
* List of castles in Italy
* Sistine Chapel ceiling
* Stand of the Swiss Guard
* Via della Conciliazione

== Bibliography ==

==References==
== External links ==
* Site describing arrangement of the original mausoleum.
* &quot;Mausoleum of Hadrian&quot;, part of the &quot;Encyclopædia Romana&quot; by James Grout
* Platner and Ashby entry on the tomb on Lacus Curtius site
* Roman Bookshelf – Views of Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo from the 19° Century
* Hadrian&#x27;s tomb Model of how the tomb might have appeared in antiquity
* Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo: History Of Torture, Ghosts And Mystery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="4" end="24" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Mausoleum of Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="49" end="72" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q623525" start="93" end="100" title="rotunda (architecture)" label="rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136481" start="127" end="140" title="Parco Adriano" label="Parco Adriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="192" end="205" title="Roman Emperor" label="Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="206" end="213" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="219" end="228" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="449" end="456" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="536" end="541" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q155987" start="647" end="655" title="quadriga" label="quadriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q290097" start="721" end="726" title="Baiae" label="Baiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q232716" start="767" end="773" title="Vibia Sabina" label="Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q455034" start="802" end="815" title="Lucius Aelius" label="Lucius Aelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="940" end="949" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q870476" start="1103" end="1114" title="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Pons Aelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="1268" end="1275" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="1340" end="1357" title="Passion of Christ" label="Passion of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="1480" end="1488" title="fortification" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q625149" start="1532" end="1546" title="Aurelian Walls" label="Aurelian Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="1550" end="1575" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Flavius Honorius Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="1614" end="1622" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q102371" start="1638" end="1644" title="Alaric I" label="Alaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463845" start="1652" end="1667" title="Sack of Rome (410)" label="sacking of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="1766" end="1771" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="1820" end="1829" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q810126" start="1945" end="1972" title="Old Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q150512" start="1994" end="2001" title="Otto II" label="Otto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2044" end="2055" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q210077" start="2056" end="2066" title="baptistery" label="baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="Q972534" start="2079" end="2085" title="spolia" label="spolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="2157" end="2171" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="2202" end="2219" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Archangel Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="2603" end="2617" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Pope Gregory I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270759" start="2709" end="2731" title="Santa Agata in Suburra" label="Santa Agata in Suburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q870476" start="2901" end="2914" title="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Aelian Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170859" start="3312" end="3329" title="Pope Nicholas III" label="Pope Nicholas III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="3354" end="3378" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329589" start="3422" end="3439" title="Passetto di Borgo" label="Passetto di Borgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="3472" end="3488" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Pope Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="3507" end="3516" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q156733" start="3524" end="3535" title="Landsknecht" label="Landsknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="3548" end="3567" title="Sack of Rome (1527)" label="Sack of Rome (1527)"/>
<link wikidata="Q190116" start="3610" end="3627" title="Benvenuto Cellini" label="Benvenuto Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="3762" end="3767" title="Pope Leo X" label="Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370859" start="3813" end="3835" title="Raffaello da Montelupo" label="Raffaello da Montelupo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="3888" end="3901" title="Saint Michael" label="Saint Michael"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3955" end="3960" title="#Destruction" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="3992" end="4000" title="Pope Paul III" label="Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q567395" start="4214" end="4242" title="Peter Anton von Verschaffelt" label="Peter Anton von Verschaffelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="4377" end="4388" title="Papal State" label="Papal State"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="4429" end="4443" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q190116" start="4542" end="4559" title="Benvenuto Cellini" label="Benvenuto Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q312332" start="4591" end="4601" title="Cagliostro" label="Cagliostro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311" start="4717" end="4732" title="Giacomo Puccini" label="Giacomo Puccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q192941" start="4757" end="4762" title="Tosca" label="Tosca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535359" start="4911" end="4929" title="Cornelis de Bruijn" label="Cornelis de Bruijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q155956" start="4950" end="4964" title="Pope Clement X" label="Pope Clement X"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="5287" end="5291" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535359" start="5348" end="5366" title="Cornelis de Bruijn" label="Cornelis de Bruijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q153043" start="5541" end="5561" title="Feast of Saints Peter and Paul" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135556" start="6474" end="6507" title="List of ancient monuments in Rome" label="List of ancient monuments in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643512" start="6510" end="6545" title="List of tourist attractions in Rome" label="List of tourist attractions in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q890269" start="6548" end="6563" title="Cardinal-nephew" label="Cardinal-nephew"/>
<link wikidata="Q154439" start="6566" end="6584" title="Concordat of Worms" label="Concordat of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11899" start="6587" end="6611" title="List of castles in Italy" label="List of castles in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844675" start="6614" end="6636" title="Sistine Chapel ceiling" label="Sistine Chapel ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="6639" end="6663" title="Stand of the Swiss Guard" label="Stand of the Swiss Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140395" start="6666" end="6689" title="Via della Conciliazione" label="Via della Conciliazione"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298010" wikidata="Q1141973" url="?curid=298010" title="Revolutionary United Front">
<text>The Revolutionary United Front (RUF) was a rebel group that fought a failed eleven-year war in Sierra Leone, beginning in 1991 and ending in 2002. It later transformed into a political party, which still exists today. The three most senior surviving leaders, Issa Sesay, Morris Kallon, and Augustine Gbao, were convicted in February 2009 of war crimes and crimes against humanity.

== Creation ==
The RUF initially coalesced as a group of Sierra Leoneans who led elements of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia across the Liberian border. Their goal was to replicate Charles Taylor&#x27;s earlier success in toppling the Liberian government.

The RUF was created by Foday Sankoh, of Temne background, and some allies, Abu Kanu, Rashid Mansaray, with substantial assistance from Charles Taylor of Liberia. Initially, the RUF was popular with Sierra Leoneans, many of whom resented a Freetown elite seen as corrupt and looked forward to promised free education and health care and equitable sharing of diamond revenues. However, the RUF developed a reputation internationally for its terrible cruelty towards the civilian population during its decade-long struggle, especially its practice of hacking off limbs to intimidate and spread terror among the population, and its widespread use of child soldiers.

When it was first formed, the RUF put forward the slogan, &quot;No More Slaves, No More Masters. Power and Wealth to the People.&quot;
While its goal was clearly to change the government of Sierra Leone, the RUF gave little indication of what sort of government would replace it. The group did not advocate Marxism or any similar leftist ideology, nor did it advocate extreme nationalism or fascism. It also did not claim to be a force fighting for a certain ethnic group or region.
At one point, during ongoing peace negotiations in 1995, RUF published a pamphlet entitled &quot;Footpaths to Democracy: Toward a New Sierra Leone&quot;, which contained some rhetorical references to social justice and pan-Africanism.

== Coup ==
Foday Sankoh did not stand by his earlier promises of equitably sharing diamond revenues and used these funds to buy arms for himself.
With a significant area of the diamond mines under the control of the rebel party, the RUF became singularly focused on protecting its resource base.

Sierra Leone&#x27;s economy collapsed. Ordinary citizens became trapped between the cruelty of RUF troops and starvation. After a coup by the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC) in 1997, the RUF and AFRC created a joint junta to control the country before being evicted from the capital by the intervention of a Nigerian-led West African force that reinstated President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. The war is estimated to have cost the lives of about 200,000 people.

== Child soldiers ==
Child soldiers were heavily recruited in the Sierra Leone Civil War; a total of 11,000 are thought to have participated in the conflict. Most were used for attacks on villages as well as guard duty for diamond fields and weapons stockpiles. The RUF made extensive use of child soldiers.

Thousands of abducted boys and girls were forced to serve as soldiers or as prostitutes,
and those chosen to be fighters were sometimes forced to murder their parents.
Guerrillas frequently carved the initials &quot;RUF&quot; on their chests, and officers reportedly rubbed cocaine into open cuts on their troops to make them maniacal and fearless. Before some battles and raids, the children would be given mixtures of cocaine and gunpowder. The gunpowder mixture was called &quot;Brown-brown&quot; and it allowed the cocaine to flow more freely through the blood stream.

For entertainment, some soldiers would bet on the sex of an unborn baby and then slice open a woman&#x27;s womb to determine the winner. The RUF abducted children aged 7 to 12, but were known to take children as young as 5 year olds. The children were notoriously known by captains and civilians for their unquestionable obedience and enormous cruelty.

== Atrocities ==
In response to the immediate execution of rebels by government forces, the RUF instituted a policy of cutting off the hands of captured soldiers with the intent of sending the message: &quot;You don&#x27;t hold your weapon against your brother.&quot; Brandishing machetes, RUF rebels amputated the hands, arms, and legs of tens of thousands of Sierra Leoneans. The RUF indicated that the reason for these actions was that amputees could no longer mine diamonds, which might be used to support government troops.

The election slogan at that time was the people &quot;had power in their hands&quot;, so the RUF would hack off hands to prevent people from voting. RUF members are also alleged to have practised cannibalism. Refugee camps were set up for amputees, supported by the government and other relief agencies.

==Foreign pressure and intervention==
In March 1997, Sankoh fled to Nigeria, where he was put under house arrest, and then imprisoned. During Sankoh&#x27;s incarceration, which ended in 1999, Sam Bockarie filled in as director of RUF military operations. In 1999, after enormous pressure by the United States, the United Kingdom, the UN, and various other countries, Sankoh was forced into signing the Lomé Peace Accord on 7 July 1999.

Sankoh was then allowed to return under the conditions of the agreement. However fighting again broke out, and the UN sent peacekeeping troops in hopes of integrating the RUF into a new national army. This intervention failed as well, and by 2000 they held 500 UN peacekeepers hostage until their release was negotiated by Taylor. The UK, Guinea, India, Bangladesh, Pakistan and various other nations, sent in professional forces in 2001. The RUF was noted to be weakened, especially decreasing resources, and hence had to suffer several crushing defeats at the hands of the British special forces; which eventually led to the end of the revolution, hence the end of the civil war in Sierra Leone. Sankoh was later captured by a mob and handed to the British Army in Sierra Leone. He was indicted for multiple war crimes by a UN-backed special court. In 2003 Sankoh died in prison before the trial took place.

Four years later, during the sessions of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, prosecutors claimed that Charles Taylor had actively participated in directing the RUF&#x27;s strategy from Liberia; among the allegations was that he had arranged to transport RUF commanders to Monrovia to meet with them personally.

== Political party ==
After peace was established, RUF was transformed into a political party: the Revolutionary United Front Party. In the May 10, 2002 general election the party won 2.2% of popular votes and no seats. Its candidate at the presidential elections, Alimamy Pallo Bangura, received 1.7% of the vote. The party received its highest voting in Kailahun, 7.8% in the parliamentary election. It has since drifted into near-irrelevance, only maintaining a small voter base of former rebel fighters.

== Electoral history ==
=== Presidential elections ===
=== Parliamentary elections ===
== Cultural references ==

=== Television ===
* &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot; episode &quot;Blood Money&quot; was centered around the strife in Sierra Leone and the traffic in conflict diamonds
* Walker, Texas Ranger had an episode entitled &quot;Blood Diamonds&quot; based in part on the RUF which brought to light some of their atrocities as well as the black market trade of blood diamonds for illegal arms.

=== Film ===
* &quot;Cry Freetown&quot; is a 2000 documentary film directed by Sorious Samura. It is an account of the victims of the Sierra Leone Civil War and depicts the most brutal period with the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels capturing the capital city (January 1999).
* In the 2005 movie &quot;Lord of War&quot;, the protagonist played by Nicolas Cage sells weapons to the RUF.
* RUF was featured significantly in the 2006 movie &quot;Blood Diamond&quot; starring Leonardo DiCaprio. In this film, RUF is used largely to create the social climate in which the film is set, and the (fictional) depicted commanders of the group are the main antagonists and villains of the story.
* The 2010 film &quot;Predators&quot; is about a group of the most dangerous people on Earth who are taken to an alien planet to be hunted; one of them is a member of RUF named Mombasa, portrayed by Mahershala Ali. 
* The 2012 documentary &quot;Life does not lose its value&quot; focuses on the reintegration of former child soldiers, after they have lived years in the forest with the RUF rebels.

=== Books ===

* The RUF&#x27;s activities also formed the central focus of the autobiographical book &quot;A Long Way Gone: Memoirs of a Boy Soldier&quot; by Ishmael Beah which was published in 2007.

===Music===

* Kanye West released a song called &quot;Diamonds from Sierra Leone&quot; in his album &quot;Late Registration&quot;, West later remixed the song alongside Jay-Z.

==See also==
* Sobel (Sierra Leone)

== References ==
== External links ==
* RUF manifesto — &quot;Footpaths to Democracy&quot;
* The Empire in Africa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1141973" start="4" end="30" title="Revolutionary United Front" label="Revolutionary United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141973" start="32" end="35" title="Revolutionary United Front" label="RUF"/>
<link wikidata="Q795269" start="76" end="91" title="Sierra Leone Civil War" label="eleven-year war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="95" end="107" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="175" end="190" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173235" start="259" end="269" title="Issa Sesay" label="Issa Sesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141973" start="271" end="284" title="Morris Kallon" label="Morris Kallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821176" start="290" end="304" title="Augustine Gbao" label="Augustine Gbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="341" end="351" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="356" end="379" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576536" start="479" end="514" title="National Patriotic Front of Liberia" label="National Patriotic Front of Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q443070" start="670" end="682" title="Foday Sankoh" label="Foday Sankoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q748316" start="687" end="692" title="Temne people" label="Temne"/>
<link wikidata="Q49090" start="782" end="796" title="Charles G. Taylor" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="800" end="807" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="886" end="894" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="1617" end="1624" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="1640" end="1647" title="leftist" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="1686" end="1697" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="1701" end="1708" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="2012" end="2026" title="pan-Africanism" label="pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793014" start="2468" end="2502" title="Armed Forces Revolutionary Council" label="Armed Forces Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="2644" end="2651" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="2657" end="2668" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q336297" start="2702" end="2720" title="Ahmad Tejan Kabbah" label="Ahmad Tejan Kabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q795269" start="2858" end="2880" title="Sierra Leone Civil War" label="Sierra Leone Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="3015" end="3022" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q843926" start="3084" end="3098" title="Military use of children" label="child soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="3375" end="3382" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975989" start="3583" end="3594" title="Brown-brown" label="Brown-brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q326154" start="5056" end="5068" title="Sam Bockarie" label="Sam Bockarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5159" end="5172" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5178" end="5192" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="5198" end="5200" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q728770" start="5266" end="5283" title="Lomé Peace Accord" label="Lomé Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="5416" end="5418" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="5640" end="5646" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5648" end="5653" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="5655" end="5665" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="5667" end="5675" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6127" end="6129" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q568879" start="6257" end="6287" title="Special Court for Sierra Leone" label="Special Court for Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="6484" end="6492" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="6602" end="6617" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116750" start="6677" end="6693" title="elections in Sierra Leone" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726654" start="6789" end="6810" title="Alimamy Pallo Bangura" label="Alimamy Pallo Bangura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721432" start="6880" end="6888" title="Kailahun" label="Kailahun"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="7174" end="7189" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q464026" start="7294" end="7311" title="conflict diamonds" label="conflict diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q426432" start="7314" end="7334" title="Walker, Texas Ranger" label="Walker, Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190392" start="7551" end="7563" title="Cry Freetown" label="Cry Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q753301" start="7575" end="7579" title="2000 in film" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="7580" end="7596" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q724103" start="7609" end="7623" title="Sorious Samura" label="Sorious Samura"/>
<link wikidata="Q795269" start="7664" end="7686" title="Sierra Leone Civil War" label="Sierra Leone Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q308681" start="7840" end="7851" title="Lord of War" label="Lord of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="7885" end="7897" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q74958" start="7981" end="7994" title="Blood Diamond (film)" label="Blood Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="8010" end="8027" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="8184" end="8194" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="8200" end="8207" title="villain" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q380667" start="8245" end="8254" title="Predators (film)" label="Predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q360531" start="8422" end="8436" title="Mahershala Ali" label="Mahershala Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734246" start="8468" end="8496" title="Life does not lose its value" label="Life does not lose its value"/>
<link wikidata="Q843926" start="8542" end="8556" title="Military use of children" label="child soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8730" end="8771" title="A Long Way Gone: Memoirs of a Boy Soldier" label="A Long Way Gone: Memoirs of a Boy Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074614" start="8781" end="8793" title="Ishmael Beah" label="Ishmael Beah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="8839" end="8849" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446549" start="8879" end="8905" title="Diamonds from Sierra Leone" label="Diamonds from Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130097" start="8931" end="8948" title="Late Registration" label="Late Registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="8994" end="8999" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549924" start="9017" end="9037" title="Sobel (Sierra Leone)" label="Sobel (Sierra Leone)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298011" wikidata="Q2992534" url="?curid=298011" title="Canada–United States softwood lumber dispute">
<text>The Canada–U.S. softwood lumber dispute is one of the largest and most enduring trade disputes between both nations. This conflict arose in 1982 and its effects are still seen today. British Columbia, the major Canadian exporter of softwood lumber to the United States, was most affected, reporting losses of 9,494 direct and indirect jobs between 2004 and 2009.

The heart of the dispute is the claim that the Canadian lumber industry is unfairly subsidized by federal and provincial governments, as most timber in Canada is owned by the provincial governments. The prices charged to harvest the timber (stumpage fee) are set administratively, rather than through the competitive marketplace, the norm in the United States. In the United States, softwood lumber lots are privately owned, and the owners form an effective political lobby. The United States claims that the Canadian arrangement constitutes an unfair subsidy, and is thus subject to U.S. trade remedy laws, where foreign trade benefiting from subsidies can be subject to a countervailing duty tariff, to offset the subsidy and bring the price of the commodity back up to market rates.

The Canadian government and lumber industry dispute this assertion, based on a number of factors, including that Canadian timber is provided to such a wide range of industries, and that lack of specificity makes it ineligible to be considered a subsidy under U.S. law. Under U.S. trade remedy law, a countervailable subsidy must be specific to a particular industry. This requirement precludes imposition of countervailing duties on government programs, such as roads, that are meant to benefit a broad array of interests. Since 1982, there have been four major iterations of the dispute.

== Importance of lumber to Canada&#x27;s economy ==
The softwood lumber industry is vital to the Canadian economy and has employed thousands of people. The forest industry has contributed to direct jobs for about 232,700 individuals. Indirectly, 289,000 people have been hired to work in other sectors that depend on Canada&#x27;s forests. They include engineering, transportation, and construction. Such benefit from this industry can be seen in the nation&#x27;s GDP, which added $21.2 billion in 2014. That accounted for around 1.3% of real GDP. Canada has the biggest trade surplus in relation to forest products ($21.7 billion in 2015). As the largest market, the U.S. is heavily dependent on Canada&#x27;s lumber. The needs of the US outweigh the domestic supply. Canada has also been expanding rapidly into the Asian market, with China being the second-largest importer. The U.S. accounted for 69% of Canada&#x27;s softwood lumber exports in 2015. This is an increased share of Canadian softwood lumber exports, which reached its lowest level in 2011, accounting for only 54%. China in that same year accounted for 21%.

==Softwood Lumber Agreement==
In April 2006, the United States and Canada announced that they had reached a tentative settlement to end the dispute. The Softwood Lumber Agreement (SLA), which this became known as, went into full effect in October 2006. The conditions stated that the period for this agreement would last anywhere between seven and nine years. Both countries, in 2012, approved a two-year extension. Under the preliminary terms, the United States would lift countervailing and anti-dumping duties provided lumber prices continue to stay above a certain range. Below the specified range, a mixed export tax and quota regime would be implemented on imports of Canadian lumber. On Canada&#x27;s part, the nation agreed to enforce regulations, such as in the form of taxes on lumber exports headed to the U.S. The provincial governments of Canada, specifically, were encouraged to make changes to their pricing systems. Such changes would allow for a non-subsidizing system. As a part of the deal, more than $5 billion in duty deposits collected would be returned. The SLA establishes a dispute settlement mechanism based around the London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA), a nongovernmental institution. Either country may initiate dispute settlement of matters arising under the SLA or implementation thereof. Hearings are to be open to the public, as are pleadings and other documents. The agreement states that hearings are to be held in either the United States or Canada (the venue is selected by the arbitration tribunal). The SLA also provides that decisions of an arbitration panel are binding on the two parties.

==Lumber I==
The beginnings of the softwood lumber dispute, commonly referred to as Lumber I, were in 1982, when the U.S. lumber industry petitioned the U.S. Department of Commerce (DoC) to impose a countervailing duty. Ultimately, the DoC found that Canada&#x27;s stumpage system was not specific to any single industry and thus not countervailable. While the DoC made this claim, the United States International Trade Commission (USITC) believed that these Canadian imports did in fact hinder U.S. producers. The U.S. lumber industry chose not to appeal.

==Lumber II==

The second phase, Lumber II, began in 1986, when a U.S. lumber industry group, the U.S. Coalition for Fair Lumber Imports, petitioned the Department of Commerce. The USITC once again arrived at the conclusion that Canada&#x27;s exports unfairly impacted American producers. This time, the DoC did find Canadian forest programs to be countervailable and set a preliminary duty of 15%. Before the subsidy was imposed, the United States and Canada agreed to a Memorandum of Understanding that created a phased tariff. One of the terms of the MOU was that Canada levy an export tax on lumber traveling to the United States. Provinces that were affected had the chance to reduce this tax, if they performed any action meant to counterbalance their subsidies. British Columbia had the tax removed in 1987 while Quebec had it partly lifted in 1988.

==Lumber III==

Lumber III started in 1991 when Canada informed the United States it was withdrawing from the Memorandum of Understanding. In response, the Department of Commerce initiated a countervailing duty investigation, resulting in the DoC imposing countervailing duties. The Department of Commerce issued a final determination in May 1992, setting a countervailing duty rate of 6.51 percent.

This time, the Department of Commerce&#x27;s determination was reviewed by a binational panel organized under the Canada–U.S. Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA), the predecessor to the North American Free Trade Agreement. Prior to the signing of NAFTA, the DoC decision would have been reviewed by the United States Court of International Trade, but under CUSFTA, Canada had the option to have it reviewed by a binational panel, and they selected that option. The panel of three Canadians and two Americans found that the DoC&#x27;s determination could not be supported by substantial evidence; which was a controversial decision, because the vote was along national lines, and the majority decision was based on the concept that U.S. law required the Department of Commerce to not only establish the existence of a subsidy, but also prove that the subsidy benefited the Canadian lumber industry. The U.S. Congress subsequently amended the law to explicitly state there was no &quot;effects test&quot;. Additionally, the United States claimed that two of the Canadian panelists had conflicts of interests, and brought it before an extraordinary challenge committee. Again, this committee split along national lines.

In 1996, the United States and Canada reached a five-year trade agreement, &quot;The Softwood Lumber Agreement&quot;, officially ending Lumber III. Under its terms, Canadian lumber exports to the United States were limited to 14.7 billion board feet (34.7 million cubic meters) per year. However, when the agreement expired on April 2, 2001, the two countries were unable to reach consensus on a replacement agreement.

==Lumber IV==
Three days after the Softwood Lumber Agreements expired, the U.S. lumber industry petitioned the Department of Commerce to impose countervailing duties. In addition, the U.S. industry for the first time brought an anti-dumping claim, arguing Canadian lumber companies were also engaged in unfair price discrimination. On April 25, 2002, U.S. DoC announced it had determined subsidy and anti-dumping rates, of 18.79% and an 8.43% respectively, to give a combined rate of 27.22%, although specific companies were charged varying rates. By February 26, 2003, 15,000 workers had been laid off, primarily in British Columbia, as a result of the duties imposed by the United States.

On May 27, the World Trade Organization issued a non-binding ruling in Canada&#x27;s favor with regard to U.S. anti-dumping duties. The decision was appealed to a legally binding NAFTA panel. On August 13, the panel ruled that while the Canadian lumber industry could be considered subsidized, the DoC had improperly calculated duties based on U.S. stumpage prices: there was no &quot;world market price&quot; for timber, as the DoC had asserted, and it was therefore improper for DoC to calculate duties based on U.S. timber prices rather than Canadian market conditions. It accordingly ordered DoC to reassess its method of calculating duties.

Two weeks later, a WTO panel similarly concluded that the U.S. had imposed improperly high duties on Canadian lumber. The panel agreed with the DoC&#x27;s contention that provincial stumpage fees did provide a &quot;financial benefit&quot; to Canadian producers, but ruled that this benefit did not rise to the level that would constitute a subsidy, and could not justify the U.S. duties.

On January 19, 2004, the WTO Appellate Body issued a final ruling with respect to the countervailing duty determination largely in Canada&#x27;s favor (WTO Dispute 257). On August 11 of that same year, the Appellate Body issued a final ruling with respect to U.S. anti-dumping duties (WTO Dispute 264). In the meantime, because of an adverse WTO decision, the USITC reopened the administrative record, pursuant to a special provision in U.S. law, and issued a new affirmative threat of injury determination in December 2004. This new determination allowed the countervailing and anti-dumping duty tariffs to remain in place.

Between June 7, 2004, and October 5, 2005, DoC submitted five revised estimates of justifiable duties to the NAFTA panel, each successively lower than the last, the last being 1.21%, but each time the NAFTA panel found errors with each one and ordered it to recalculate.

On April 15, 2005, the Canadian Minister of Trade, Jim Peterson, announced that the federal government would provide Canadian softwood lumber associations with $20 million in compensation for their legal expenses stemming from the dispute with the United States. That same year, another NAFTA Chapter 19 panel reviewed a determination made by the USITC that the U.S. lumber industry was under a threat of injury due to Canadian imports. Since the United States ceded jurisdiction to the World Trade Organization, it was necessary for the U.S. government to establish that a domestic industry was suffering injury, or faced a threat of injury, before countervailing duties can be imposed. The NAFTA panel found the USITC&#x27;s determination invalid. In addition, the panel made the controversial decision to deny the USITC to reopen the administrative record, ordering the USITC to issue a negative determination based on the existing record. Unlike the panel during the Lumber III stage, this panel&#x27;s decision was unanimous. However, the U.S. government challenged its decision before an extraordinary challenge committee, which, on August 10, 2005, issued a unanimous decision against the United States, finding that the NAFTA panel&#x27;s determination was not sufficiently invalid to require &quot;vacatur&quot; or remand, under the standards of NAFTA.

On August 15, 2005, the United States said it would not abide by the NAFTA decision, because the Section 129 determination superseded the decision which was reviewed by the NAFTA panel. Two weeks later, on August 30, the WTO, which had previously ruled against the ITC, this time upheld their new Section 129 &quot;threat of injury&quot; ruling. In September 2005, a U.S. lumber industry associate filed suit in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, challenging the constitutionality of the NAFTA Chapter 19 dispute settlement system. On November 24, 2005, the U.S. Commerce Department announced it would comply with a separate NAFTA panel&#x27;s order to cut a 16 percent duty on Canadian softwood lumber imports for now. The following month, the DoC announced recalculated countervailing and anti-dumping duties on softwood, totaling 10.8 percent.

In March 2006, a NAFTA panel ruled in Canada&#x27;s favor, finding that the subsidy to the Canadian lumber industry was de minimis, i.e., a subsidy of less than one percent. Under U.S. trade remedy law, countervailing duty tariffs are not imposed for de minimis subsidies. A tentative deal was reached in July 2006, in which Canada got $4 billion of the $5.3 billion it lost because of the penalties with no additional tariffs to be imposed. After initial opposition from several large Canadian lumber concerns, the Harper government, without specifying how many companies endorsed it, was confident that there would be enough support to culminate the deal. In August 2006, Prime Minister Stephen Harper brought the new deal to Parliament for discussion and a possible confidence vote. If the House of Commons had voted against the deal, it would have automatically forced a general election and annulled the deal. The Conservatives were in favor of the deal, while the New Democratic Party and the Liberal Party were against, leaving the Bloc Québécois as the deciding party.

On September 7, Bloc Québécois Leader Gilles Duceppe endorsed the softwood lumber deal, effectively neutralizing any chance of an election coming out of a non-confidence vote. Five days later, Canadian International Trade Minister David Emerson, along with U.S. counterpart Susan Schwab, officially signed the deal in Ottawa. Despite supporters&#x27; claims that it was the best deal possible, Elliott Feldman, an international and economic law specialist from the firm Baker &amp; Hostetler in Washington, D.C. and a former director of the Canadian–American Business Council, criticized the deal as &quot;one-sided&quot; and a &quot;bad deal for Canada&quot;. On September 19, 2006, the deal passed its first reading in the Canadian House of Commons with a 172–116 majority. On September 27, the Canadian Press reported that Canada did not meet an October 1 deadline imposed by itself to implement the agreement. Withdrawal of some of the 30 issues regarding the deal was the main reason for the delay on complying to the deal.

On March 30, 2007, the United States requested formal consultations with Canada to resolve concerns regarding Canada&#x27;s lack of implementation of the export measures. The following month, on April 19, formal consultations took place between the two governments On August 7, the United States, pursuant to a settlement mechanism established in the 2006 Softwood Lumber Agreement (SLA), initiated arbitration in the London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA, a private body). The official request for arbitration took place on August 13. Canada responded to this request for arbitration on September 12. The next year, on January 18, the U.S. government filed a second arbitration request, this one focused on the provincial implementation programs of Ontario and Québec. Canada responded on February 18, 2008. On March 4, the LCIA ruled (in the first arbitration) that Canada was in violation of the 2006 SLA in its eastern provinces, but not in its western provinces. The panel had been made up of a Belgian arbitrator nominated by Canada, a British arbitrator named by the United States, and a panel president from Germany. On February 26, 2009, the LCIA announced its ruling in the second arbitration case: Canada was in breach of the softwood lumber agreement as a result of its failure to properly calculate quotas from January to June in 2007. The arbitration body ordered that sawmills in the provinces of Ontario, Quebec, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan pay an additional ten percent export charge (up to $68.26 million). The tribunal imposed a 30-day deadline to rectify the breach.

==Post agreement==
The Softwood Lumber Agreement expired on October 12, 2015. Canadian producers of softwood lumber now have unfettered access to the US softwood lumber market.

There are several impediments that have kept Canada and the US from negotiating a new agreement to replace the SLA. One key factor is that Canada held a federal election campaign through the late summer and fall of 2015, and any decisions of considerable magnitude had to wait until after the election. Given the acrimonious history of the US–Canada lumber trade prior to the SLA, the negotiation process will likely be lengthy.

Some in Western Canada have expressed a desire to renew the SLA as it currently stands, while other are demanding revisions. Some officials in Quebec believe that the province has made the necessary changes to their forestry practices to make them exempt from any future agreement, much the same as the Maritime provinces. And some producers in Saskatchewan have expressed a desire to switch to the Option A system used in BC and Alberta, which assesses a larger tax but has no quota restrictions.

Canadian ownership of US sawmills continues to climb with the count now reaching 40 mills, up from just two a decade earlier. West Fraser now owns more sawmills in the US South (16) than in Canada (13), Canfor Corp owns 11 sawmills in the South, one less than its Canadian total. Interfor owns 13 sawmills in the US – nine in the South and four in the Northwest. It owns five sawmills in Canada. The growing trend of Canadian ownership of US mills is driven by the potential for a lumber trade conflict, by timber availability and lower labour costs in the US. Amid the Mountain Pine Beetle infestation in Western Canada, these firms&#x27; ability to grow is severely diminished without looking outside of Canada.

Major industry organizations in the United States, on the other hand, do not want to renew the contract. Executive director of the U.S. Lumber Coalition Zoltan Van Heyningen has expressed his disapproval for the ongoing format of the agreement. One of the reasons for this is changing timber costs, which the U.S. believes has not been incorporated in B.C. lumber costs. The US Lumber Coalition is emphatic that, should negotiations fail, its legal standing to petition the US Commerce Department to file a new case is secure.

In early March 2016, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and U.S. President Obama instructed their respective cabinet members responsible for international trade to explore all options for resolving the trade dispute. Canada&#x27;s international trade minister, Chrystia Freeland, said that &quot;what we have committed to is to make significant, meaningful progress towards a deal—to have the structure, the key elements there a 100 days from now&quot;.

On 12 October 2016, a one-year moratorium on trade actions since the expiration of the deal ended. As of November 2016, Freeland had formally met with U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman twelve times in the past year. During these talks, Canada sent ten proposals and papers to the United States, which sent four to Canada.

In November 2016, CNN obtained a leaked memo from the Donald Trump transition team showing that Trump was being advised to include the softwood lumber dispute during any renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement and to get more favourable terms for the United States.

On April 24, 2017, U.S. Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross said his agency will impose new anti-subsidy tariffs averaging 20 percent on Canadian softwood lumber imports, a move that escalates a long-running trade dispute between the two countries. A Commerce Department fact sheet on the pending announcement seen by Reuters shows that West Fraser Mills will pay the highest duties at 24.12 percent, followed by Canfor Corp at 20.26 percent. Resolute FP Canada Ltd will pay a 12.82 percent duty, while Tolko Marketing and Sales and Tolko Industries will pay a 19.50 percent duty and J. D. Irving Ltd, will pay 3.02 percent. All other Canadian producers face a 19.88 percent duty, according to the document.

On April 25, 2017, the Trump administration announced plans to impose duties of up to 24% on most Canadian lumber, charging that lumber companies are subsidized by the government. The duties are on the five firms: West Fraser Mills, Tolko Marketing and Sales, J. D. Irving, Canfor Corporation, and Resolute FP Canada. West Fraser Mills will pay the highest duty of 24%.

The preliminary determination directs U.S. Customs and Border Protection to require cash deposits for the duties on all new imports as well as softwood products imported over the past 90 days. To remain in effect, however, the duties need to be finalized by Commerce and then confirmed by the U.S. International Trade Commission after an investigation that includes testimony from both sides. In response, the Canadian federal government indicated that it was exploring the possibility of banning United States coal from being exported through Canadian ports and imposing a retaliatory tariff on lumber exports from Oregon. By November 2017, the U.S. International Trade Commission decided to levy heavy countervailing and anti-dumping duties on lumber imports, citing that the U.S. industry has been harmed by unfair practices.

The decision was unanimous for the four-member trade panel, which ruled on the petition filed by the U.S. Lumber Coalition. Canada immediately lodged a legal challenge to the decision under NAFTA&#x27;s Chapter 19 dispute settlement mechanism, with an official statement declaring that it was &quot;unfair, unwarranted, and troubling.&quot; Canada has previously won several NAFTA challenges involving softwood issues in the past. In March 2018, Canada escalated the dispute to the WTO, asking the international trade body to set up an adjudication panel to judge its dispute with the United States. Canadian representatives argued that talks with the U.S. have failed.

On April 1, 2019, the U.S. Department of Commerce initiated the First Administrative Review (AR1) of antidumping duty and countervailing duty investigations of imports of certain softwood lumber products from Canada. The Department of Commerce its preliminary determination for the First Administrative Review on February 7, 2020. The preliminary determination included an assessment rate to be applied to exports during the period of review (April 28, 2017 through December 31, 2018) and a new cash deposit rate to be applied to new shipments upon completion of the review. The rates will only be applicable to companies covered by the First Administrative Review.

On January 2, 2020, the U.S. Department of Commerce announced the Second Administrative Review (AR2) of antidumping duty and countervailing duty investigations of imports of certain softwood lumber products from Canada. The Second Administrative Review was initiated on March 10, 2020. An administrative review will be conducted each year, unless the case is settled, to recalculate the countervailing and antidumping duty rates for shipments during the period of review and to establish a new cash deposit rate for future shipments. A company will be subject to the review if there has been a specific request for a review of that company filed by interested parties with the Department of Commerce.

On August 24, 2020, the WTO issued its report, which the U.S. subsequently appealed on September 28. However, there was no one at the WTO to appeal to, since the U.S. had blocked appellate vacancies.

On March 4, 2021, the U.S. Department of Commerce announced the notice of initiation of its Third Administrative Review (AR3) of the softwood lumber countervailing and anti-dumping duty orders.

On 9 November 2021, the US implemented a double tariff on Canadian softwood, which in turn increased lumber prices in the US even further. As a result, the shortage and higher prices for lumber in 2021/2022 have increased inflationary pressures for American consumers.

On August 19, 2024, the US raised tariff rates on imports of Canadian softwood lumber products from 8.05% to 14.54%.

==See also==
* Economy of Canada
* Economy of the United States
* Byrd Amendment

==References==
==External links==
*Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada - Softwood Lumber
**Frequently Asked Questions on the Softwood Lumber Agreement (Canada)
*United States Trade Representative (USTR) - Softwood Lumber
*Text of Softwood Lumber Agreement (SLA), 2006 (USTR)
**Amendments to Softwood Lumber Agreement (USTR)
*SLA Texts and US-Canada Dispute related documents (Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2992534" start="4" end="39" title="Canada–United States softwood lumber dispute" label="Canada–U.S. softwood lumber dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="183" end="199" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="211" end="219" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="232" end="240" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="241" end="247" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="255" end="268" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="448" end="458" title="subsidy" label="subsidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088188" start="474" end="496" title="Canadian federalism" label="provincial governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628689" start="605" end="613" title="stumpage" label="stumpage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663608" start="822" end="837" title="lobbying in the United States" label="political lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177050" start="1038" end="1064" title="countervailing duties" label="countervailing duty tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q840925" start="1838" end="1854" title="economy of Canada" label="Canadian economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591809" start="4014" end="4055" title="London Court of International Arbitration" label="London Court of International Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="4667" end="4694" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="U.S. Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q839560" start="4900" end="4944" title="United States International Trade Commission" label="United States International Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863129" start="5170" end="5208" title="U.S. Coalition for Fair Lumber Imports" label="U.S. Coalition for Fair Lumber Imports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="5544" end="5571" title="Memorandum of understanding" label="Memorandum of Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665587" start="6445" end="6477" title="Canada–US Free Trade Agreement" label="Canada–U.S. Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="6511" end="6546" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889681" start="6628" end="6670" title="United States Court of International Trade" label="United States Court of International Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q974493" start="7782" end="7792" title="board feet" label="board feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q467064" start="8196" end="8203" title="Dumping (pricing policy)" label="dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="8351" end="8358" title="subsidy" label="subsidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="8670" end="8694" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781004" start="9721" end="9735" title="Appellate Body" label="Appellate Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q748607" start="10622" end="10639" title="Minister of International Trade (Canada)" label="Minister of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178916" start="10641" end="10653" title="Jim Peterson" label="Jim Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="11077" end="11101" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="12369" end="12427" title="U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q287088" start="12950" end="12960" title="de minimis" label="de minimis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="13519" end="13533" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="13558" end="13568" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="13599" end="13614" title="confidence vote" label="confidence vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="13623" end="13639" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="13800" end="13820" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="13829" end="13842" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="13869" end="13883" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q205319" start="13946" end="13960" title="Gilles Duceppe" label="Gilles Duceppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q338628" start="14139" end="14152" title="David Emerson" label="David Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q441879" start="14182" end="14194" title="Susan Schwab" label="Susan Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14302" end="14317" title="Elliott Feldman" label="Elliott Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849104" start="14378" end="14399" title="Baker &amp;amp; Hostetler" label="Baker &amp;amp; Hostetler"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="14403" end="14419" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14449" end="14483" title="Canadian–American Business Council" label="Canadian–American Business Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="14612" end="14625" title="first reading" label="first reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410130" start="14705" end="14719" title="Canadian Press" label="Canadian Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591809" start="15356" end="15397" title="London Court of International Arbitration" label="London Court of International Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="16331" end="16338" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586271" start="16852" end="16932" title="2015 Canadian federal election" label="Canada held a federal election campaign through the late summer and fall of 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="18906" end="18929" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Canadian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="18930" end="18944" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492815" start="19150" end="19167" title="Chrystia Freeland" label="Chrystia Freeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574977" start="19495" end="19520" title="Office of the United States Trade Representative" label="U.S. Trade Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830434" start="19521" end="19535" title="Michael Froman" label="Michael Froman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="19692" end="19695" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204549" start="19728" end="19756" title="First presidential transition of Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump transition team"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="19866" end="19901" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="21650" end="21656" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177050" start="21738" end="21752" title="Countervailing duties" label="countervailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="23928" end="23931" title="WTO" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q840925" start="24703" end="24720" title="Economy of Canada" label="Economy of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="24723" end="24751" title="Economy of the United States" label="Economy of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018564" start="24754" end="24768" title="Byrd Amendment" label="Byrd Amendment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298016" wikidata="Q2025508" url="?curid=298016" title="Patronus">
<text>Patronus may refer to:
* The &quot;patronus&quot; (Latin) or patron in ancient Roman society; see Patronage in ancient Rome
* The apparition produced by the Patronus Charm in &quot;Harry Potter&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56881933" start="98" end="123" title="Patronage in ancient Rome" label="Patronage in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410773" start="157" end="171" title="Patronus Charm" label="Patronus Charm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298020" wikidata="Q355035" url="?curid=298020" title="Sant'Angelo">
<text>Sant&#x27;Angelo (Italian &quot;lit.&quot; &#x27;holy angel&#x27;) is an Italian name for the Archangel Michael.

It may also refer to:

==Religion==
*&quot;Sant&#x27;Angelo&quot;, the Italian name for Saint Angelus of Jerusalem
* Roman Catholic Diocese of Santo Ângelo, a Roman Catholic Diocese of Brazil

==Localities==

===Brazil===
*Santo Ângelo, a city in Rio Grande do Sul state
*Santo Ângelo (micro-region), a micro-region in Rio Grande do Sul state

===Italy===
;Municipalities (&quot;comuni&quot;)
*Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo, in the province of Rieti
*Città Sant&#x27;Angelo, in the province of Pescara 
*Monte Sant&#x27;Angelo, in the province of Foggia 
*Mosciano Sant&#x27;Angelo, in the province of Teramo 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo a Cupolo, in the province of Benevento 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo a Fasanella, in the province of Salerno 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo a Scala, in the province of Avellino 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo all&#x27;Esca, in the province of Avellino 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo d&#x27;Alife, in the province of Caserta 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi, in the province of Avellino 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo del Pesco, in the province of Isernia 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo di Brolo, in the province of Messina 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo di Piove di Sacco, in the province of Padua
*Sant&#x27;Angelo Le Fratte, in the province of Potenza 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo in Lizzola, in the province of Pesaro and Urbino 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo in Pontano, in the province of Macerata 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo in Vado, in the province of Pesaro e Urbino 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo Limosano, in the province of Campobasso 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo Lodigiano, in the province of Lodi 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo Lomellina, in the province of Pavia 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo Muxaro, in the province of Agrigento 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo Romano, in the province of Rome 
*Valle dell&#x27;Angelo, in the province of Salerno 
*Villa Sant&#x27;Angelo, in the province of L&#x27;Aquila

;Buildings, districts and roads of Rome
* Borgo Sant&#x27;Angelo, a road in the Roman &quot;rione&quot; of Borgo
* Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo, a castle in Rome
* Sant&#x27;Angelo (rione of Rome), a &quot;rione&quot; of the City of Rome
* Teatro San Angelo, a theatre in Venice, which ran from 1677 until 1803

; Civil parishes (&quot;frazioni&quot;)
*Sant&#x27;Angelo, Campania, in the municipality of Campagna in the Province of Salerno
*Sant&#x27;Angelo, Emilia-Romagna, in the municipality of Gatteo in the Province of Forli-Cesena
*Sant&#x27;Angelo, Rieti, in the municipality of Amatrice in the Province of Rieti, Lazio
*Sant&#x27;Angelo a Lecore, in the municipalities of Campi Bisenzio (FI) and Signa (FI) 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo di Roccalvecce, in the municipality of Viterbo 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo in Formis, in the municipality of Capua (CE) 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo in Macerata, in the municipality of Mercato San Severino (SA) 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo in Theodice, in the municipality of Cassino (FR) 
*Sant&#x27;Angelo in Trigillo, in the municipality of Leonessa (RI)

; Mountains, lakes and islands
*Sant&#x27;Angelo della Polvere, an island of Venetian Lagoon

===Greece===
* Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo, the Venetian name for Angelokastro (Corfu) castle

==See also==
*Santangelo (disambiguation)
*Angelo (disambiguation)
*Angel (disambiguation)
*San Angelo, Texas, city in the United States</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355035" start="0" end="16" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="94" end="111" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Archangel Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q537686" start="202" end="228" title="Saint Angelus of Jerusalem" label="Saint Angelus of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q522841" start="231" end="269" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Santo Ângelo" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Santo Ângelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q824031" start="337" end="349" title="Santo Ângelo" label="Santo Ângelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q586517" start="386" end="413" title="Santo Ângelo (micro-region)" label="Santo Ângelo (micro-region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223509" start="508" end="531" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo (RI)" label="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51356" start="559" end="581" title="Città Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Città Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51935" start="612" end="634" title="Monte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Monte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51456" start="664" end="689" title="Mosciano Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Mosciano Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55977" start="719" end="744" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo a Cupolo" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo a Cupolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81605" start="777" end="805" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo a Fasanella" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo a Fasanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q55100" start="836" end="860" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo a Scala" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo a Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q55101" start="892" end="922" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo all&amp;#x27;Esca" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo all&amp;#x27;Esca"/>
<link wikidata="Q58890" start="954" end="983" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo d&amp;#x27;Alife" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo d&amp;#x27;Alife"/>
<link wikidata="Q55103" start="1014" end="1043" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo dei Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q279612" start="1075" end="1101" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo del Pesco" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo del Pesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q491715" start="1132" end="1157" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo di Brolo" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo di Brolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34535" start="1188" end="1222" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo di Piove di Sacco" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo di Piove di Sacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q52668" start="1250" end="1276" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Le Fratte" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Le Fratte"/>
<link wikidata="Q207583" start="1307" end="1334" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Lizzola" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Lizzola"/>
<link wikidata="Q94959" start="1375" end="1402" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Pontano" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Pontano"/>
<link wikidata="Q493800" start="1434" end="1458" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Vado" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Vado"/>
<link wikidata="Q278199" start="1497" end="1522" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Limosano" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Limosano"/>
<link wikidata="Q42220" start="1556" end="1582" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Lodigiano" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Lodigiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q39707" start="1610" end="1636" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Lomellina" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Lomellina"/>
<link wikidata="Q432678" start="1665" end="1688" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Muxaro" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Muxaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q243408" start="1721" end="1744" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Romano" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q81782" start="1772" end="1794" title="Valle dell&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Valle dell&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q50166" start="1825" end="1847" title="Villa Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Villa Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1925" end="1947" title="Borgo Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Borgo Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229454" start="1975" end="1980" title="Rioni of Rome" label="rione"/>
<link wikidata="Q893556" start="1990" end="1995" title="Borgo (rione of Rome)" label="Borgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="1998" end="2021" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223892" start="2042" end="2074" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo (rione of Rome)" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo (rione of Rome)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110282" start="2118" end="2135" title="Teatro San Angelo" label="Teatro San Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2231" end="2257" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo, Campania" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo, Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q80734" start="2282" end="2290" title="Campagna" label="Campagna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2319" end="2351" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo, Emilia-Romagna" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo, Emilia-Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q99943" start="2376" end="2382" title="Gatteo" label="Gatteo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2416" end="2439" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo, Rieti" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo, Rieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q223427" start="2464" end="2472" title="Amatrice" label="Amatrice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2506" end="2531" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo a Lecore" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo a Lecore"/>
<link wikidata="Q82636" start="2558" end="2572" title="Campi Bisenzio" label="Campi Bisenzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q82869" start="2582" end="2587" title="Signa" label="Signa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2595" end="2626" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo di Roccalvecce" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo di Roccalvecce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13395" start="2651" end="2658" title="Viterbo" label="Viterbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603264" start="2661" end="2687" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Formis" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Formis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81049" start="2725" end="2753" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Macerata" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Macerata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2806" end="2834" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Theodice" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Theodice"/>
<link wikidata="Q116592" start="2859" end="2866" title="Cassino" label="Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2874" end="2902" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Trigillo" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo in Trigillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q224172" start="2927" end="2935" title="Leonessa" label="Leonessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581264" start="2974" end="3004" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo della Polvere" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo della Polvere"/>
<link wikidata="Q536865" start="3098" end="3118" title="Angelokastro (Corfu)" label="Angelokastro (Corfu)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420068" start="3141" end="3168" title="Santangelo (disambiguation)" label="Santangelo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q530072" start="3170" end="3193" title="Angelo (disambiguation)" label="Angelo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217855" start="3195" end="3217" title="Angel (disambiguation)" label="Angel (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q925598" start="3219" end="3236" title="San Angelo, Texas" label="San Angelo, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="298021" wikidata="Q553907" url="?curid=298021" title="Old Goa">
<text>Old Goa (Konkani: ; ) is a historical site and city situated on the southern banks of the River Mandovi, within the Tiswadi &quot;taluka&quot; (&quot;Ilhas&quot;) of North Goa district, in the Indian state of Goa.

The city was established by the Bijapur Sultanate in the 15th century AD. After the Portuguese conquest of Goa, it served as capital of Portuguese Indian possessions, such as Mumbai/Bombay (&quot;Bom Bahia&quot;) territory and the state of Kochi/Cochin (&quot;Cochim&quot;), until its abandonment in the 18th century AD due to a plague. Under Portuguese rule, it is said to have been a city of nearly 200,000 people, from whence the spice trade was carried out across the Portuguese East Indies. The deserted city, containing churches and convents of outstanding architectural and religious importance, has been declared a World Heritage Site by the UNESCO. Old Goa is approximately east of the current state capital of Panjim ().

==Etymology==

The name &quot;Old Goa&quot; was first used in the 1960s in the address of the Romi Konkani monthly magazine, dedicated to spread the devotion of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, &quot;Dor Mhoineachi Rotti&quot;, which was shifted to the Basilica of Bom Jesus in 1964. Postal letters were returned to the sender, as the name &quot;Old Goa&quot; was unknown then, according to then- and long-time editor of the monthly, the great Goan historian late Father Moreno de Souza, S.J.

The village panchayat uses the name Sé-Old Goa, while the lndia Post and the Archaeological Survey of India use the name Velha Goa.

The place is popularly called &quot;Saibachem Gõy&quot; (referring to Saint Francis Xavier as &quot;Saib&quot;, i.e., Master), &quot;Pornnem Gõy&quot;, &quot;Adlem Gõy&quot;, or simply just &quot;Gõy&quot; in Konkani.

Velha Goa should not be confused with Goa Velha lying a few miles away. The names &quot;Vhoddlem Gõy&quot; and &quot;Thorlem Gõy&quot; (&quot;Big Goa&quot;) refer to Goa Velha; while &quot;Gõy&quot;, besides referring to Velha Goa (&quot;Old Goa&quot;), also generally refers to the entire Goa state.

==History==
The city was founded in the 15th century as a port on the banks of the Mandovi river by the rulers of the Bijapur Sultanate. It was built to replace Govapuri, which lay a few kilometres to the south and had been used as a port by the Kadamba and Vijayanagar kings. Old Goa was the second capital after Bijapur of the rule of Adil Shahi Dynasty. It was surrounded by a moat and contained the shah&#x27;s palace, mosques, and temples. The city was captured by the Portuguese and was under Portuguese rule from 1510 as the administrative seat of Portuguese India.

The viceroy&#x27;s residence was transferred in 1759 to the future capital, Panjim (a village about 9 kilometres to its west). Few remnants, if any, of the pre-Portuguese period remain at Old Goa.

During the mid-16th century, the Portuguese colony of Goa, especially Velha Goa, was the center of Christianisation in the East. The city was evangelized by all religious orders, since all of them had their headquarters there. The population was roughly 200,000 by 1543. Malaria and cholera epidemics ravaged the city in the 17th century and it was largely abandoned, only having a remaining population of 1,500 in 1775. It was then that the viceroy moved to Panjim. It continued to be the &quot;de jure&quot; capital of Goa until 1843, when the capital was shifted to Panjim (Ponnjê in Konkani, Nova Goa in Portuguese and Panaji in Hindi). The abandoned city came to be known as &quot;Velha Goa&quot; (in Portuguese, &#x27;Old Goa&#x27;), to distinguish it from the new capital Nova Goa (Panjim) and probably also Goa Velha (also meaning &quot;Old Goa&quot;), which was the Portuguese name for the town on the old site of Govapuri.

Velha Goa was incorporated into the Republic of India after its annexation in 1961, with the rest of Goa. It retains its religious significance in modern-day Goa, notably in its relations with Roman Catholicism. The Archbishop of Goa and Daman holds title as the Patriarch of the East Indies. Unlike the patriarchs and the major archbishops of the Eastern Catholic Churches, the Patriarch of the East Indies only enjoys honorary title and is fully subject to the Pope. He has a place in the Latin Church similar to the Patriarchs of Venice and Lisbon. This title was conferred upon the Archbishop of Goa as part of a settlement between the Holy See and the Portuguese government concerning the link between religious and political aspects of its territories.

==Churches of Old Goa==
Old Goa contains churches including the Se Cathedral (the seat of the Archbishop of Goa), the Church and Convent of St. Francis of Assisi, the Chapel of Our Lady of the Mount, the Church of St. Caetano and, notably, the Basilica of Bom Jesus which contains the relics of Saint Francis Xavier, who is celebrated every year on 3 December with novenas beginning on 24 November.
==Gallery==
==Location==
==See also==
*Church of St. Anne, Talaulim
*Fort Bassein
*Goa
*Damaon
*Velhas Conquistas
*Portuguese India
*Cumbarjua
==Notes==
==References==
*
==External links==
*History of Old Goa (archived)
*Old Goa – India tourism</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q553907" start="0" end="7" title="Old Goa" label="Old Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429503" start="9" end="16" title="Konkani in the Roman script" label="Konkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081138" start="27" end="42" title="historical site" label="historical site"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="47" end="51" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587169" start="90" end="103" title="River Mandovi" label="River Mandovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291873" start="116" end="123" title="Tiswadi" label="Tiswadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108234" start="166" end="184" title="North Goa district" label="North Goa district"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="200" end="205" title="States and territories of India" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="209" end="212" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83821" start="247" end="264" title="Bijapur Sultanate" label="Bijapur Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357384" start="299" end="325" title="Portuguese conquest of Goa" label="Portuguese conquest of Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="351" end="367" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775344" start="411" end="420" title="Bom Bahia" label="Bom Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="475" end="481" title="Cochin State" label="Cochim"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="544" end="550" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="648" end="659" title="spice trade" label="spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="687" end="709" title="Portuguese East Indies" label="Portuguese East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="838" end="857" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="865" end="871" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q214681" start="935" end="941" title="Panjim" label="Panjim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429503" start="1041" end="1053" title="Romi Konkani" label="Romi Konkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q408284" start="1112" end="1133" title="Sacred Heart of Jesus" label="Sacred Heart of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974081" start="1141" end="1161" title="Dor Mhoineachi Rotti" label="Dor Mhoineachi Rotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q391123" start="1194" end="1215" title="Basilica of Bom Jesus" label="Basilica of Bom Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911403" start="1412" end="1427" title="Moreno de Souza" label="Moreno de Souza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1493" end="1503" title="lndia Post" label="lndia Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q632235" start="1512" end="1542" title="Archaeological Survey of India" label="Archaeological Survey of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="1644" end="1658" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707675" start="1825" end="1834" title="Goa Velha" label="Goa Velha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="2077" end="2080" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587169" start="2172" end="2179" title="Mandovi" label="Mandovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83821" start="2207" end="2224" title="Bijapur Sultanate" label="Bijapur Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479952" start="2335" end="2342" title="Kadamba Dynasty" label="Kadamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="2347" end="2358" title="Vijayanagara Empire" label="Vijayanagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83821" start="2403" end="2410" title="Bijapur Sultanate" label="Bijapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q83821" start="2426" end="2444" title="Adil Shahi Dynasty" label="Adil Shahi Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="2492" end="2496" title="shah" label="shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="2512" end="2519" title="mosques" label="mosques"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="2525" end="2532" title="temples" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357384" start="2547" end="2573" title="Conquest of Goa (1510)" label="captured by the Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="2588" end="2598" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="2644" end="2660" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q214681" start="2739" end="2745" title="Panjim" label="Panjim"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="2960" end="2976" title="Christianisation" label="Christianisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214681" start="3650" end="3656" title="Panaji" label="Panjim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707675" start="3676" end="3685" title="Goa Velha" label="Goa Velha"/>
<link wikidata="Q626191" start="3859" end="3877" title="Annexation of Goa" label="annexation in 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q59960564" start="4058" end="4086" title="Patriarch of the East Indies" label="Patriarch of the East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="4099" end="4108" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q964186" start="4118" end="4134" title="major archbishop" label="major archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="4143" end="4168" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="4258" end="4262" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="4286" end="4298" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q59781902" start="4314" end="4334" title="Patriarch of Venice" label="Patriarchs of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q50226179" start="4339" end="4345" title="Patriarch of Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="4435" end="4443" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="4452" end="4462" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942482" start="4619" end="4631" title="Se Cathedral" label="Se Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q423755" start="4649" end="4666" title="Archbishop of Goa" label="Archbishop of Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117224" start="4673" end="4716" title="Church and Convent of St. Francis of Assisi" label="Church and Convent of St. Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28041245" start="4722" end="4753" title="Chapel of Our Lady of the Mount" label="Chapel of Our Lady of the Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q391123" start="4799" end="4820" title="Basilica of Bom Jesus" label="Basilica of Bom Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="4850" end="4870" title="Saint Francis Xavier" label="Saint Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117203" start="4993" end="5021" title="Church of St. Anne, Talaulim" label="Church of St. Anne, Talaulim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230299" start="5023" end="5035" title="Fort Bassein" label="Fort Bassein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="5037" end="5040" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158197" start="5042" end="5048" title="Daman District, India" label="Damaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634811" start="5050" end="5067" title="Velhas Conquistas" label="Velhas Conquistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="5069" end="5085" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193800" start="5087" end="5096" title="Cumbarjua" label="Cumbarjua"/>
</links>
</doc>
