<doc id="294594" wikidata="Q1189518" url="?curid=294594" title="Middle kingdoms of India">
<text>The middle kingdoms of India were the political entities in the Indian subcontinent from 230 BCE to 1206 CE. The period begins after the decline of the Maurya Empire and the corresponding rise of the Satavahana dynasty, starting with Simuka, from 230 BCE. The &quot;middle&quot; period lasted for almost 1436 years and ended in 1206 CE, with the rise of the Delhi Sultanate, founded in 1206, and the end of the Later Cholas (Rajendra Chola III, who died in 1279 CE).

This period encompasses two eras: &quot;Classical India&quot;, from the Maurya Empire up until the end of the Gupta Empire in 500 CE, and &quot;early Medieval India&quot; from 500 CE onwards. It also encompasses the era of classical Hinduism, which is dated from 200 BCE to 1100 CE. From 1 CE until 1000 CE, India&#x27;s economy is estimated to have been the largest in the world, having between one-third and one-quarter of the world&#x27;s wealth. This period was followed by the late Medieval period in the 13th century.

==The Northwest==
During the 2nd century BCE, the Maurya Empire became a collage of regional powers with overlapping boundaries. The whole northwest attracted a series of invaders between 200 BCE and 300 CE. The Puranas speak of many of these tribes as foreigners and impure barbarians (Mlecchas). First the Satavahana dynasty and then the Gupta Empire, both successor states to the Maurya Empire, attempt to contain the expansions of the successive before eventually crumbling internally due to the pressure exerted by these wars.

The invading tribes were influenced by Buddhism which continued to flourish under the patronage of both invaders and the Satavahanas and Guptas and provides a cultural bridge between the two cultures. Over time, the invaders became &quot;Indianized&quot; as they influenced society and philosophy across the Gangetic plains and were conversely influenced by it. This period is marked by both intellectual and artistic achievements inspired by cultural diffusion and syncretism as the new kingdoms straddle the Silk Road.

===The Indo-Greeks===
The Indo-Greek Kingdom covered various parts of the Northwestern South Asia during the last two centuries BCE, and was ruled by more than 30 Hellenistic kings, often in conflict with each other.

The kingdom was founded when Demetrius I of Bactria invaded the Hindu Kush early in the 2nd century BCE. The Greeks in India were eventually divided from the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom centered in Bactria (now the border between Afghanistan and Uzbekistan).

The expression &quot;Indo-Greek Kingdom&quot; loosely describes a number of various dynastic polities. There were numerous cities, such as Taxila, Pushkalavati and Sagala in Pakistan&#x27;s Punjab. These cities would house a number of dynasties in their times, and based on Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Geography&quot; and the nomenclature of later kings, a certain Theophila in the south was also probably a satrapal or royal seat at some point.

Euthydemus I was, according to Polybius a Magnesian Greek. His son, Demetrius, founder of the Indo-Greek kingdom, was therefore of Greek descent from his father at minimum. A marriage treaty was arranged for Demetrius with a daughter of Antiochus III the Great, who had partial Persian descent. The ethnicity of later Indo-Greek rulers is less clear. For example, Artemidoros Aniketos (80 BCE) may have been of Indo-Scythian descent. Intermarriage also occurred, as exemplified by Alexander the Great, who married Roxana of Bactria, or Seleucus I Nicator, who married Apama of Sogdia.

During the two centuries of their rule, the Indo-Greek kings combined the Greek and Indian languages and symbols, as seen on their coins, and blended Greek, Hindu and Buddhist religious practices, as seen in the archaeological remains of their cities and in the indications of their support of Buddhism, pointing to a rich fusion of Indian and Hellenistic influences. The diffusion of Indo-Greek culture had consequences which are still felt today, particularly through the influence of Greco-Buddhist art. The Indo-Greeks ultimately disappeared as a political entity around 10 CE following the invasions of the Indo-Scythians, although pockets of Greek populations probably remained for several centuries longer under the subsequent rule of the Indo-Parthians and Kushan Empire.

===The Yavanas===

The Yavana or Yona people, literally &quot;Ionian&quot; and meaning &quot;Western foreigner&quot;, were described as living beyond Gandhara. Yavanas, Sakas, the Pahlavas and Hunas were sometimes described as &quot;mleccha&quot;s, &quot;foreigners&quot;. Kambojas and the inhabitants of Madra, the Kekeya Kingdom, the Indus River region and Gandhara were sometimes also classified as &quot;mleccha&quot;s. This name was used to indicate their cultural differences with the culture of the Kuru Kingdom and Panchala.

===The Indo-Scythian Sakas===

The Indo-Scythians are a branch of the Sakas who migrated from southern Siberia into Bactria, Sogdia, Arachosia, Gandhara, Kashmir, Punjab, and into parts of Western and Central India, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Rajasthan, from the middle of the 2nd century BCE to the 4th century CE. The first Saka king in India was Maues or Moga who established Saka power in Gandhara and gradually extended supremacy over north-western India. Indo-Scythian rule in India ended with the last of the Western Satraps, Rudrasimha III, in 395 CE.

The invasion of India by Scythian tribes from Central Asia, often referred to as the &quot;Indo-Scythian invasion&quot;, played a significant part in the history of India as well as nearby countries. In fact, the Indo-Scythian war is just one chapter in the events triggered by the nomadic flight of Central Asians from conflict with Chinese tribes which had lasting effects on Bactria, Kabul, Parthia and India as well as far off Rome in the west. The Scythian groups that invaded India and set up various kingdoms, included, besides the Sakas, other allied tribes, such as the Medes, Scythians,Massagetae, Getae, Parama Kambojas, Avars, Bahlikas, Rishikas and Paradas.

===The Indo-Parthians===

The Indo-Parthian Kingdom was founded by Gondophares around 20 BCE. The kingdom lasted only briefly until its conquest by the Kushan Empire in the late 1st century CE and was a loose framework where many smaller dynasts maintained their independence.

===The Pahlavas===

The Pahlavas are a people mentioned in ancient Indian texts like the &quot;Manusmṛti&quot;, various Puranas, the &quot;Ramayana&quot;, the &quot;Mahabharata&quot;, and the &quot;Brhatsamhita&quot;. In some texts the Pahlavas are synonymous with the Pallava dynasty of South India. While the &quot;Vayu Purana&quot; distinguishes between &quot;Pahlava&quot; and &quot;Pahnava&quot;, the &quot;Vamana Purana&quot; and &quot;Matsya Purana&quot; refer to both as &quot;Pallava&quot;. The &quot;Brahmanda Purana&quot; and &quot;Markendeya Purana&quot; refer to both as &quot;Pahlava&quot; or &quot;Pallava&quot;. The &quot;Bhishama Parava&quot; of the Mahabharata does not distinguish between the Pahlavas and Pallavas. The Pahlavas are said to be same as the Parasikas, a Saka group. According to P. Carnegy, the Pahlava are probably those people who spoke Paluvi or Pehlvi, the Parthian language. Buhler similarly suggests Pahlava is an Indic form of &quot;Parthava&quot; meaning &quot;Parthian&quot;. In a 4th-century BCE, the &quot;Vartika&quot; of Kātyāyana mentions the &quot;Sakah-Parthavah&quot;, demonstrating an awareness of these Saka-Parthians, probably by way of commerce.

===The Western Satraps===
The Western Satraps (35–405 CE) were Saka rulers of the western and central part of India (Saurashtra and Malwa: modern Gujarat, southern Sindh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh states). Their state, or at least part of it, was called &quot;Ariaca&quot; according to the &quot;Periplus of the Erythraean Sea&quot;. They were successors to the Indo-Scythians and were contemporaneous with the Kushan Empire, which ruled the northern part of the Indian subcontinent and were possibly their overlords, and the Satavahana dynasty of Andhra who ruled in Central India. They are called &quot;Western&quot; in contrast to the &quot;Northern&quot; Indo-Scythian satraps who ruled in the area of Mathura, such as Rajuvula, and his successors under the Kushans, the &quot;Great Satrap&quot; Kharapallana and the &quot;Satrap&quot; Vanaspara. Although they called themselves &quot;Satraps&quot; on their coins, leading to their modern designation of &quot;Western Satraps&quot;, Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Geography&quot; still called them &quot;Indo-Scythians&quot;. Altogether, there were 27 independent Western Satrap rulers during a period of about 350 years.

===The Kushans===

The Kushan Empire (c. 1st–3rd centuries) originally formed in Bactria on either side of the middle course of the Amu Darya in what is now northern Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan; during the 1st century CE, they expanded their territory to include the Punjab and much of the Ganges basin, conquering a number of kingdoms across the northern part of the Indian subcontinent in the process. The Kushans conquered the central section of the main Silk Road and, therefore, had control of the overland trade between India, and China to the east, and the Roman Empire and Persia to the west.

Emperor Kanishka was a great patron of Buddhism; however, as Kushans expanded southward toward the Indian subcontinent the deities of their later coinage came to reflect its new Hindu majority.

===The Indo-Sasanians===

The rise of new Persian power, the Sasanian Empire, saw them exert their influence into the Indus region and conquer lands from the Kushan Empire, setting up the Indo-Sasanians around 240 CE. They were to maintain their influence in the region until they were overthrown by the Rashidun Caliphate. Afterwards, they were displaced in 410 CE by the invasions of the Hephthalite Empire.

===The Hephthalite Hunas===

The Hephthalite Empire was another Central Asian nomadic group to invade. They are also linked to the Yuezhi who had founded the Kushan Empire. From their capital in Bamyan (present-day Afghanistan) they extended their rule across the Indus and North India, thereby causing the collapse of the Gupta Empire. They were eventually defeated by the Sasanian Empire allied with Turkic peoples.

===The Rais===

The Rai dynasty of Sindh were patrons of Buddhism even though they also established a huge temple of Shiva in Sukkur close to their capital, Aror.

===The Gandharan kingdom===

Gandhāra was an ancient region in the Kabul, Peshawar, Swat, and Taxila areas of what are now northwestern Pakistan and eastern Afghanistan. It was one of 16 Mahajanapada of ancient India.

===The Karkotas===
The Karkota Empire was established around 625 CE. During the eighth century they consolidated their rule over Kashmir. The most illustrious ruler of the dynasty was Lalitaditya Muktapida. According to Kalhana&#x27;s &quot;Rajatarangini&quot;, he defeated the Tibetans and Yashovarman of Kanyakubja, and subsequently conquered eastern kingdoms of Magadha, Kamarupa, Gauda, and Kaḷinga. Kalhana also states that he extended his influence of Malwa and Gujarat and defeated Arabs at Sindh. According to historians, Kalhana highly exaggerated the conquests of Lalitaditya.

===The Kabul Shahis===

The Kabul Shahi dynasties ruled portions of the Kabul valley and Gandhara from the decline of the Kushan Empire in the 3rd century to the early 9th century. The kingdom was known as the Kabul Shahan or Ratbelshahan from 565 CE–670 CE, when the capitals were located in Kapisa and Kabul, and later Udabhandapura, also known as Hund, for its new capital. In ancient time, the title Shahi appears to be a quite popular royal title in Afghanistan and the northwestern areas of the Indian subcontinent. Variants were used much more priorly in the Near East, but as well later on by the Sakas, Kushans Hunas, Bactrians, by the rulers of Kapisa/Kabul and Gilgit. In Persian form, the title appears as &quot;Kshathiya, Kshathiya Kshathiyanam&quot;, Shao of the Kushanas and the &quot;Ssaha&quot; of Mihirakula (Huna chief). The Kushanas are stated to have adopted the title &quot;Shah-in-shahi&quot; (&quot;Shaonano shao&quot;) in imitation of Achaemenid practice. The Shahis are generally split up into two eras—the Buddhist Shahis and the Hindu Shahis, with the change-over thought to have occurred sometime around 870 CE.

==The Gangetic Plains and Deccan==
Following the demise of the Mauryan Empire, the Satavahanas rose as the successor state to check and contend with the influx of the Central Asian tribes from the Northwest. The Satavahanas straddling the Deccan plateau also provided a link for transmission of Buddhism and contact between the Northern Gangetic plains and the Southern regions even as the Upanishads were gaining ground. Eventually weakened both by contention with the northwestern invaders and internal strife they broke up and gave rise to several nations around Deccan and central India regions even as the Gupta Empire arose in the Indo-Gangetic Plain and ushered in a &quot;Golden Age&quot; and rebirth of empire as decentralized local administrative model and the spread of Indian culture until collapse under the Huna invasions. After the fall of Gupta Empire the Gangetic region broke up into several states temporarily reunited under Harsha then giving rise to the Rajput dynasties. In the Deccan, the Chalukyas arose forming a formidable nation marking the migration of the centers of cultural and military power long held in the Indo-Gangetic Plain to the new nations forming in the southern regions of India.

===The Satavahana Empire===

The Sātavāhana dynasty began as feudatories to the Maurya Empire but declared independence with its decline. They were the first Indic rulers to issue coins struck with their rulers embossed and are known for their patronage of Buddhism, resulting in Buddhist monuments from the Ellora Caves to Amaravathi village, Guntur district. They formed a cultural bridge and played a vital role in trade and the transfer of ideas and culture to and from the Gangetic plains to the southern tip of India.

The Sātavāhanas had to compete with the Shunga Empire and then the Kanva dynasty of Magadha to establish their rule. Later they had to contend in protecting their domain from the incursions of Sakas, Yonas and the Pahlavas. In particular their struggles with the Western Satraps weakened them and the empire split into smaller states.

===The Mahameghavahana dynasty===
The Mahameghavahanas (c. 250s BCE – 400s CE) was an ancient ruling dynasty of Kaḷinga after the decline of the Mauryan Empire. The third ruler of the dynasty, Khārabēḷa, conquered much of India in a series of campaigns at the beginning of the common era. Kaḷingan military might was reinstated by Khārabēḷa: under Khārabēḷa&#x27;s generalship, the Kaḷinga state had a formidable maritime reach with trade routes linking it to the then-Simhala (Sri Lanka), Burma (Myanmar), Siam (Thailand), Vietnam, Kamboja (Cambodia), Borneo, Bali, Samudra (Sumatra) and Jabadwipa (Java). Khārabēḷa led many successful campaigns against the states of Magadha, Anga, the Satavahanas and the South Indian regions ruled by the Pandyan dynasty (modern Andhra Pradesh) and expanded Kaḷinga as far as the Ganges and the Kaveri.

The Kharavelan state had a formidable maritime empire with trading routes linking it to Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, Borneo, Bali, Sumatra and Java. Colonists from Kaḷinga settled in Sri Lanka, Burma, as well as the Maldives and Maritime Southeast Asia. Even today Indians are referred to as Keling in Malaysia because of this.

Although religiously tolerant, Khārabēḷa patronised Jainism, and was responsible for the propagation of Jainism in the Indian subcontinent but his importance is neglected in many accounts of Indian history. The main source of information about Khārabeḷa is his famous seventeen line rock-cut Hātigumphā inscription in the Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves near Bhubaneswar, Odisha. According to the Hathigumpha inscription, he attacked Rajagriha in Magadha, thus inducing the Indo-Greek king Demetrius I of Bactria to retreat to Mathura.

===The Bharshiva dynasty===

Before the rise of the Guptas, Bharshiva Kings ruled most of the Indo-Gangetic plains. They perform ten Ashvamedha sacrifices on the banks of Ganga River. Samudragupta mention Naga rulers in his Allahabad pillar.

===The Vakatakas===
The Vakataka Empire was the contemporaries of the Gupta Empire and the successor state of the Satavahanas they formed the southern boundaries of the north and ruled over today&#x27;s modern-day states of Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra during the 3rd and 5th centuries. The rock-cut Buddhist viharas and chaityas of Ajanta Caves (a UNESCO World Heritage Site), built under the patronage of the Vakataka rulers. They were eventually overrun by the Chalukyas.

===The Guptas===
The Classical Age refers to the period when much of the Indian Subcontinent was reunited under the Gupta Empire (ca. 320 CE–600 CE). This period is called the Golden Age of India and was marked by extensive achievements in science, technology, engineering, art, dialectic, literature, logic, mathematics, astronomy, religion and philosophy that crystallized the elements of what is generally known as Hindu culture. The decimal numeral system, including the concept of zero, was invented in India during this period. The peace and prosperity created under Guptas leadership enabled the pursuit of scientific and artistic endeavors in India.

The high points of this cultural creativity is seen in Gupta architecture, sculpture and painting. The Gupta period produced scholars such as Kalidasa, Aryabhata, Varahamihira, Vishnu Sharma, and Vatsyayana who made advances in a variety of academic fields. Science and political administration advanced during the Gupta era. Trade ties made the region an important cultural center and set the region up as a base that would influence nearby kingdoms and regions in Burma, Sri Lanka, and both maritime and mainland Southeast Asia.

The Guptas performed Vedic sacrifices to legitimize their rule, but they also patronized Buddhism, which continued to provide an alternative to Brahmanical orthodoxy. The military exploits of the first three rulers - Chandragupta I (ca. 319–335), Samudragupta (ca. 335–376), and Chandragupta II (ca. 376–415) —brought much of India under their leadership. They successfully resisted the north-western kingdoms until the arrival of the Hunas who established themselves in Afghanistan by the first half of the 5th century, with their capital at Bamiyan. Nevertheless, much of the Deccan and southern India were largely unaffected by this state of flux in the north.

===The Harsha Vardhana===

After the collapse of the Gupta Empire, the gangetic plains fractured into numerous small nations. Harsha of Kannauj was able to briefly bind them together under his rulership as the Empire of Harsha. Only a defeat at the hands of the Chalukyas (Pulakeshin II) prevented him from expanding his reign south of the Narmada River. This unity did not last long beyond his reign and his empire fractured soon after his death in 647 AD.

===Later Guptas===

The Later Gupta dynasty, also known as the Later Guptas of Magadha, were the rulers of the Magadha region and partly of Malwa from the 6th and 8th centuries CE. The Later Guptas emerged after the disintegration of the Imperial Guptas as the rulers of Magadha and Malwa however, there is no evidence to connect the two dynasties and the Later Guptas may have adopted the -gupta suffix to link themselves the Imperial Guptas.

===The Gurjaras===

Present day Rajasthan was Gurjara area for centuries with capital at Bhilmal (Bhinmal or Srimal), situated nearly 50 miles to the north west of Mount Abu. The Pratihara of Bhinmal moved to Kannuaj on the Ganges at the beginning of the 9th century and transferred their capital to Kannuaj and founded an empire which at its peak was bounded on the east by Bihar, on the west by the &quot;lost river&quot;, the Hakra, and the Arabian Sea, on the North By the Himalaya and Sutlaj, and on the South by the Jumna and Narmada. The region round Broach, which was offshoot of this kingdom, was also ruled by the Gurjaras of Nandipuri and Gurjaras of Lata.

===The Vishnukundinas===

The Vishnukundina Empire was an Indian dynasty that ruled over the Deccan, Odisha and parts of South India during the 5th and 6th centuries carving land out from the Vakataka Empire. The Vishnukundin reign came to an end with the conquest of the eastern Deccan by the Chalukya, Pulakeshin II. Pulakeshin appointed his brother Kubja Vishnuvardhana as Viceroy to rule over the conquered lands. Eventually Vishnuvardhana declared his independence and started the Eastern Chalukya dynasty.

===The Maitrakas===

The Maitraka Empire ruled Gujarat in western India from the c. 475 to 767 CE. The founder of the dynasty, &quot;Senapati&quot; (general) Bhatarka, was a military governor of Saurashtra peninsula under Gupta Empire, who had established himself as the independent ruler of Gujarat approximately in the last quarter of the 5th century. The first two Maitraka rulers Bhatarka and Dharasena I used only the title of &quot;Senapati&quot; (general). The third ruler Dronasimha declared himself as the &quot;Maharaja&quot;. King Guhasena stopped using the term &quot;Paramabhattaraka Padanudhyata&quot; along his name like his predecessors, which denotes the cessation of displaying of the nominal allegiance to the Gupta overlords. He was succeeded by his son Dharasena II, who used the title of &quot;Mahadhiraja&quot;. His son, the next ruler Siladitya I, Dharmaditya was described by Hiuen Tsang as a &quot;monarch of great administrative ability and of rare kindness and compassion&quot;. Siladitya I was succeeded by his younger brother Kharagraha I. Virdi copperplate grant (616 CE) of Kharagraha I proves that his territories included Ujjain.

===The Gurjara Pratiharas===

The Gurjara Pratihara Empire (Hindi: गुर्जर प्रतिहार) formed an Indian dynasty that ruled much of Northern India from the 6th to the 11th centuries. At its peak of prosperity and power (c. 836–910 CE), it rivaled the Gupta Empire in the extent of its territory.

Pointing out the importance of the Gurjara Pratihara empire in the history of India Dr. R. C. Majumdar has observed,
&quot;the &quot;Gurjara Pratihara Empire&quot; which continued in full glory for nearly a century, was the last great empire in Northern India before the Muslim conquest.&quot; This honour is accorded to the empire of Harsha by many historians of repute but without any real justification, for the Pratihara empire was probably larger, certainly not less in extent rivalled the Gupta Empire and brought political unity and its attendant blessings upon a large part of Northern India. But its chief credit lies in its successful resistance to the foreign invasions from the west, from the days of Junaid. This was frankly recognised by the Arab writers themselves.

Historians of India, since the days of Eliphinstone, has wondered at slow progress of Muslim invaders in India compared to their rapid advance in other parts of the world. Arguments of doubtful validity have often been put forward to explain this unique phenomenon. Now there can be little doubt that it was the power of the Gurjara Pratihara army that effectively barred the progress of the Muslims beyond the confines of Sindh, their first conquest for nearly three hundred years. In the light of later events this might be regarded as the &quot;chief contribution of the Gurjara Pratiharas to the history of India&quot;.

===The Rajputs===

The Rajput were a Hindu clan who rose to power across a region stretching from the Gangetic plains to the Afghan mountains, and refer to the various dynasties of the many kingdoms in the region in the wake of the collapse of the Sassanid Empire and Gupta Empire and marks the transition of Buddhist ruling dynasties to Hindu ruling dynasties.

====Katoch Dynasty====

The Katoch were a Hindu Rajput clan of the Chandravanshi lineage; with recent research suggests that Katoch may be one of the oldest royal dynasties in the world.

====The Chauhans====
The Chauhan dynasty flourished from the 8th to 12th centuries CE. It was one of the three main Rajput dynasties of that era, the others being Pratiharas and Paramaras. Chauhan dynasties established themselves in several places in North India and in the state of Gujarat in Western India. They were also prominent at Sirohi in the southwest of Rajputana, and at Bundi and Kota in the east. Inscriptions also associate them with Sambhar, the salt lake area in the Amber (later Jaipur) district (the Sakhambari branch remained near lake Sambhar and married into the ruling Gurjara-Pratihara, who then ruled an empire in Northern India). Chauhans adopted a political policy that saw them indulge largely in campaigns against the Chalukyas and the invading Muslim hordes. In the 11th century, they founded the city of Ajayameru (Ajmer) in the southern part of their kingdom, and in the 12th century, the Chauhans captured Dhilika (the ancient name of Delhi) from the Tomaras and annexed some of their territory along the Yamuna River.

The Chauhan Kingdom became the leading state in Northern India under King Prithviraj III (1165–1192 CE), also known as Prithvi Raj Chauhan or Rai Pithora. Prithviraj III has become famous in folk tales and historical literature as the Chauhan king of Delhi who resisted and repelled the invasion by Mohammed of Ghor at the First Battle of Tarain in 1191. Armies from other Rajput kingdoms, including Mewar, assisted him. The Chauhan kingdom collapsed after Prithviraj and his armies faced defeat from Mohammed of Ghor in 1192 at the Second Battle of Tarain.

====The Kachwaha====

The Kachwaha originated as tributaries of the preceding powers of the region. Some scholars point out that it was only following the downfall, in the 8th–10th century, of Kannauj (the regional seat-of-power, following the break-up of Harsha&#x27;s empire), that the Kacchapaghata state emerged as a principal power in the Chambal valley of present-day Madhya Pradesh.

====The Paramaras====

The Paramara dynasty was a Rajput dynasty in early Medieval India who ruled over Malwa region in central India. This dynasty was founded by Upendra in c. 800 CE. The most significant ruler of this dynasty was Bhoja who was a philosopher king and polymath. The seat of the Paramara kingdom was &quot;Dhara Nagari&quot; (the present day Dhar city in Madhya Pradesh state).

====Chalukyas====
The Chaulukyas (also called Solankis) was another Rajput dynasty In Gujarat, Anhilwara (modern Siddhpur Patan) served as their capital. Gujarat was a major center of Indian Ocean trade, and Anhilwara was one of the largest cities in India, with population estimated at 100,000 in the year 1000. The Chaulukyas were patrons of the great seaside temple of Shiva at Somnath Patan in Kathiawar; Bhima Dev helped rebuild the temple after it was sacked by Mahmud of Ghazni in 1026. His son, Karna, conquered the Bhil king Ashapall or Ashaval, and after his victory established a city named Karnavati on the banks of the Sabarmati River, at the site of modern Ahmedabad.

====Tomaras of Delhi====

Tomaras of Delhi was a Rajput Clan during 9th to 12th century. The Tomaras of Delhi ruled parts of the present-day Delhi and Haryana. Much of the information about this dynasty comes from bardic legends of little historical value, and therefore, the reconstruction of their history is difficult. According to the bardic tradition, the dynasty&#x27;s founder Anangapal Tuar (that is Anangapala I Tomara) founded Delhi in 736 CE. However, the authenticity of this claim is doubtful. The bardic legends also state that the last Tomara king (also named Anangapal) passed on the throne of Delhi to his maternal grandson Prithviraj Chauhan. This claim is also inaccurate: historical evidence shows that Prithviraj inherited Delhi from his father Someshvara. According to the Bijolia inscription of Someshvara, his brother Vigraharaja IV had captured Dhillika (Delhi) and Ashika (Hansi); he probably defeated a Tomara ruler.

====Gahadavala dynasty====

The Gahadavala dynasty ruled parts of the present-day Indian states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, during the 11th and 12th centuries. Their capital was located at Varanasi in the Gangetic plains.

===Khayaravala dynasty===

The Khayaravala dynasty ruled parts of the present-day Indian states of Bihar and Jharkhand, during 11th and 12th centuries. Their capital was located at Khayaragarh in Shahabad district. Pratapdhavala and Shri Pratapa were king of the dynasty according to inscription of Rohtas.

===The Pratihars===
Pratihars ruled from Mandore, near present-day Jodhpur, they held the title of Rana before being defeated by Guhilots of Chittore.

===The Palas===
Pala Empire was a Buddhist dynasty that ruled from the north-eastern region of the Indian subcontinent. The name &quot;Pala&quot; (Modern &quot;pal&quot;) means &quot;protector&quot; and was used as an ending to the names of all Pala monarchs. The Palas were followers of the Mahayana and Tantric schools of Buddhism. Gopala was the first ruler from the dynasty. He came to power in 750 CE in Gaur by a democratic election. This event is recognized as one of the first democratic elections in South Asia since the time of the Mahā Janapadas. He reigned from 750 to 770 CE and consolidated his position by extending his control over all of Bengal. The Buddhist dynasty lasted for four centuries (750–1120 CE) and ushered in a period of stability and prosperity in Bengal. They created many temples and works of art as well as supported the Universities of Nalanda and Vikramashila. Somapura Mahavihara built by Dharmapala is the greatest Buddhist Vihara in the Indian Subcontinent.

The empire reached its peak under Dharmapala and Devapala. Dharmapala extended the empire into the northern parts of the Indian Subcontinent. This triggered once again the power struggle for the control of the subcontinent. Devapala, successor of Dharmapala, expanded the empire to cover much of South Asia and beyond. His empire stretched from Assam and Utkala in the east, Kamboja (modern-day Afghanistan) in the north-west and Deccan in the south. According to Pala copperplate inscription Devapala exterminated the Utkalas, conquered the Pragjyotisha (Assam), shattered the pride of the Huna, and humbled the lords of Gurjaras (the Gurjara-Pratiharas) and the Dravidas.

The death of Devapala ended the period of ascendancy of the Pala Empire and several independent dynasties and kingdoms emerged during this time. However, Mahipala I rejuvenated the reign of the Palas. He recovered control over all of Bengal and expanded the empire. He survived the invasions of Rajendra Chola and the Chalukyas. After Mahipala I the Pala dynasty again saw its decline until Ramapala, the last great ruler of the dynasty, managed to retrieve the position of the dynasty to some extent. He crushed the Varendra rebellion and extended his empire farther to Kamarupa, Odisha and Northern India.

The Pala Empire can be considered as the golden era of Bengal. Palas were responsible for the introduction of Mahayana Buddhism in Tibet, Bhutan and Myanmar. The Palas had extensive trade and influence in south-east Asia. This can be seen in the sculptures and architectural style of the Sailendra Empire (present-day Malaya, Java, Sumatra).

===Karnatas of Mithila===

In 1097 AD, the Karnat dynasty of Mithila emerged on the Bihar/Nepal border area and maintained capitals in Darbhanga and Simraongadh. The dynasty was established by Nanyadeva, a military commander of Karnataka-origin. Under this dynasty, the Maithili language started to develop with the first piece of Maithili literature, the Varna Ratnakara being produced in the 14th century by Jyotirishwar Thakur. The Karnats also carried out raids into Nepal. They fell in 1324 following the invasion of Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq.

===The Candras===

The Candra Dynasty who ruled over eastern Bengal and were contemporaries of the Palas.

===The Eastern Gangas===

The Eastern Ganga dynasty rulers reigned over Kaḷinga which consisted of the parts of the modern-day Indian states of Odisha, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh from the 11th century to the early 15th century. Their capital was known by the name Kalinganagar, which is the modern Srimukhalingam in Srikakulam District of Andhra Pradesh bordering Odisha. Today they are most remembered as the builders of the Konark Sun Temple a World Heritage Site at Konark, Odisha. It was built by King Narasimhadeva I (1238–1264 CE). During their reign (1078–1434 CE) a new style of temple architecture came into being, commonly called as Indo-Aryan architecture. This dynasty was founded by King Anantavarma Chodaganga Deva (1078–1147 CE). He was a religious person and a patron of art and literature. He is credited for having built the famous Jagannath Temple of Puri in Odisha.

King Anantavarman Chodagangadeva was succeeded by a long line of illustrious rulers such as Narasimhadeva I (1238–1264 CE). The rulers of Eastern Ganga dynasty not only defended their kingdom from the constant attacks of the Muslim rulers from both northern and southern India but were perhaps one of the few empires to have successfully invaded and defeated their Muslim adversaries. The Eastern Ganga King Narasimha Deva I invaded the Muslim kingdom of Bengal and handed a heavy defeat to the Sultan. This ensured that Sultanate never encroached upon the domains of the Ganga Emperors for nearly a century. His military exploits still survive today as folklore in Odisha. This kingdom prospered through trade and commerce and the wealth was mostly used in the construction of temples. The rule of the dynasty came to end under the reign of King Bhanudeva IV (1414–1434 CE), in the early 15th century.

===The Senas===

The Palas were followed by the Sena dynasty who brought Bengal under one ruler during the 12th century. Vijay Sen the second ruler of this dynasty defeated the last Pala emperor Madanapala and established his reign. Ballal Sena introduced Kulīna System in Bengal and made Nabadwip the capital. The fourth king of this dynasty Lakshman Sen expanded the empire beyond Bengal to Bihar, Assam, northern Odisha and probably to Varanasi. Lakshman was later defeated by the Muslims and fled to eastern Bengal where he ruled few more years. The Sena dynasty brought a revival of Hinduism and cultivated Sanskrit literature in India.

===The Varmans===
The Varman Dynasty (not to be confused with the Varman dynasty of Kamarupa) ruled over eastern Bengal and were contemporaries of the Senas.

==The Northeast==
===Kamarupa===

The Kāmarūpa, also called Pragjyotisha, was one of the historical kingdoms of Assam alongside Davaka, Davaka (Nowgong) and Kamarupa as separate and submissive friendly kingdoms. that existed from 350 to 1140 CE. Ruled by three dynasties from their capitals in present-day Guwahati, North Guwahati and Tezpur, it at its height covered the entire Brahmaputra Valley, North Bengal, Bhutan and parts of Bangladesh, and at times portions of West Bengal and Bihar.

====The Varmans====
The Varman dynasty (350–650 CE), the first historical rulers of Kamarupa; was established by Pushyavarman, a contemporary of Samudragupta. While Pushyavarman was the contemporary of the Gupta Emperor Samudra Gupta, Bhaskaravarman was the contemporary of Harshavardhana of Kanauj. This dynasty became vassals of the Gupta Empire, but as the power of the Guptas waned, Mahendravarman (470–494 CE) performed two Ashvamedha (horse sacrifices) and threw off the imperial yoke. The first of the three Kamarupa dynasties, the Varmans were followed by the Mlechchha and then the Pala dynasties.

====The Mlechchhas====
The Mlechchha dynasty succeeded the Varman dynasty and ruled to the end of the 10th century. They ruled from their capital in the vicinity of the Harrupeshwara (Tezpur). The rulers were aboriginals, with lineage from Narakasura. According to historical records, there were ten rulers in this dynasty. The Mlechchha dynasty in Kamarupa was followed by the Pala kings.
====The Palas====
The Pala dynasty of Kamarupa succeeded the Mlechchha dynasty, ruled from its capital at Durjaya (North Gauhati). Dynasty reigned till the end of the 12th century.

Brahma Pala (900–920 CE), was founder Pala dynasty (900–1100 CE) of Kamarupa. Dynasty ruled from its capital Durjaya, modern-day North Guwahati. The greatest of the Pala kings, Dharma Pala had his capital at Kamarupa Nagara, now identified with North Guwahati. Ratna Pala was another notable sovereign of this line. Records of his land-grants have been found at Bargaon and Sualkuchi, while a similar relic of Indra Pala, has been discovered at Guwahati. Pala dynasty come to end with Jaya Pala (1075–1100 CE).

=== Twipra ===

The Twipra Kingdom ruled ancient Tripura. Kingdom was established around the confluence of the Brahmaputra river with the Meghna and Surma rivers in today&#x27;s Central Bangladesh area. The capital was called Khorongma and was along the Meghna river in the Sylhet Division of present-day Bangladesh.

==Deccan plateau and the South==
In the first half of the millennium the South saw various small kingdoms rise and fall mostly independent to the turmoil in the Gangetic plains and the spread of the Buddhism and Jainism to the southern tip of India. 
From the mid-seventh to the mid-13th centuries, regionalism was the dominant theme of political and dynastic history of the Indian subcontinent. Three features commonly characterize the sociopolitical realities of this period.
* First, the spread of Brahmanical religions was a two-way process of Sanskritization of local cults and localization of Brahmanical social order.
* Second was the ascendancy of the Brahman priestly and landowning groups that later dominated regional institutions and political developments.
* Third, because of the seesawing of numerous dynasties that had a remarkable ability to survive perennial military attacks, regional kingdoms faced frequent defeats but seldom total annihilation.

Peninsular India was involved in an 8th-century tripartite power struggle among the Chalukyas (556–757 CE), the Pallavas (300–888 CE) of Kanchipuram, and the Pandyas. The Chalukya rulers were overthrown by their subordinates, the Rashtrakutas (753–973 CE). Although both the Pallava and Pandya kingdoms were enemies, the real struggle for political domination was between the Pallava and Chalukya realms.

The emergence of the Rashtrakutas heralded a new era in the history of South India. South Indian kingdoms had hitherto ruled areas only up to and south of the Narmada River. It was the Rashtrakutas who first forged north to the Gangetic plains and successfully contested their might against the Palas of Bengal and the Rajput Prathiharas of Gujarat.

Despite interregional conflicts, local autonomy was preserved to a far greater degree in the south where it had prevailed for centuries. The absence of a highly centralized government was associated with a corresponding local autonomy in the administration of villages and districts. Extensive and well-documented overland and maritime trade flourished with the Arabs on the west coast and with Southeast Asia. Trade facilitated cultural diffusion in Southeast Asia, where local elites selectively but willingly adopted Indian art, architecture, literature, and social customs.

The interdynastic rivalry and seasonal raids into each other&#x27;s territory notwithstanding, the rulers in the Deccan and South India patronized all three religions - Buddhism, Hinduism, and Jainism. The religions vied with each other for royal favor, expressed in land grants but more importantly in the creation of monumental temples, which remain architectural wonders. The cave temples of Elephanta Island (near Mumbai or Bombay, as it was known formerly), Ajanta, and Ellora (in Maharashtra), and structural temples of Pattadakal, Aihole, Badami in Karnataka and Mahaballipuram and Kanchipuram in Tamil Nadu are enduring legacies of otherwise warring regional rulers.

By the mid-7th century, Buddhism and Jainism began to decline as sectarian Hindu devotional cults of Shiva and Vishnu vigorously competed for popular support.

Although Sanskrit was the language of learning and theology in South India, as it was in the north, the growth of the bhakti (devotional) movements enhanced the crystallization of vernacular literature in Dravidian languages: Kannada and Tamil; they often borrowed themes and vocabulary from Sanskrit but preserved much local cultural lore. Examples of Tamil literature include two major poems, Cilappatikaram (The Jewelled Anklet) and Manimekalai (The Jewelled Belt); the body of devotional literature of Shaivism and Vaishnavism—Hindu devotional movements; and the reworking of the Ramayana by Kamban in the 12th century. A nationwide cultural synthesis had taken place with a minimum of common characteristics in the various regions of South Asia, but the process of cultural infusion and assimilation would continue to shape and influence India&#x27;s history through the centuries.

===The Sangam Era Kingdoms===
Farther south were three ancient Tamil states — Chera (on the west), Chola (on the east), and Pandya (in the south). They were involved in internecine warfare seeking regional supremacy. They are mentioned in Greek and Ashokan sources as important Indian kingdoms beyond the Mauryan Empire. A corpus of ancient Tamil literature, known as Sangam (academy) works, provides much useful information about life in these kingdoms in the era 300 BCE to 200 CE.

Tamil social order was based on different ecoregions. Segments of society were characterized by matriarchy and matrilineal succession—which survived well into the 19th century—cross-cousin marriage, and strong regional identity. Tribal chieftains emerged as &quot;kings&quot; just as people moved from pastoralism toward agriculture sustained by irrigation based on rivers by small-scale water tanks (as man-made ponds are called in India) and wells, as well as maritime trade with Rome and Southeast Asia.

Discoveries of Roman gold coins in various sites attest to extensive South Indian links with the outside world. As with Pataliputra in the northeast and Taxila in the northwest (in modern Pakistan), the city of Madurai, the capital of the Pandyan Kingdom (in modern Tamil Nadu), was the center of intellectual and literary activity. Poets and bards assembled there under royal patronage at successive concourses to composed anthologies of poems and expositions on Tamil grammar. By the end of the 1st century BCE, South Asia was crisscrossed by overland trade routes, which facilitated the movements of Buddhist and Jain missionaries and other travelers and opened the area to a synthesis of many cultures.

===The Cheras===

From early pre-historic times, Kerala and Tamil Nadu were the homes of the four Tamil-Malayalam states of the Chera, Chola, Pandya and Pallavas. The oldest extant literature, dated between 300 BCE and 600 CE mentions the exploits of the kings and the princes, and of the poets who extolled them. Cherans, who spoke Malayalam language ruled from the capitals of Kuttanad, Muziris, Karur, and traded extensively with West Asian kingdoms.

An unknown dynasty called Kalabhras invaded and displaced the three Tamil kingdoms between the 4th and the 7th centuries. This is referred to as the Dark Age in Tamil history. They were eventually expelled by the Pallavas and the Pandyas.

===The Kalabhras===

Little of their origins or the time during which they ruled is known beyond that they ruled over the entirety of the southern tip of India during the 3rd to the 6th century, overcoming the Sangam era kingdoms. The appear to be patrons of Jainism and Buddhism as the only source of information on them is the scattered mentions in the many Buddhist and Jain literature of the time. They were contemporaries of the Kadambas and the Western Ganga Dynasty. They were overcome by the rise of the Pallavas and the resurgence of the Pandyan Kingdom.

===The Kadambas===
The Kadamba Dynasty () (345–525 CE) was an ancient royal family of Karnataka that ruled from Banavasi in present-day Uttara Kannada district. The dynasty later continued to rule as a feudatory of larger Kannada empires, the Chalukya and the Rashtrakuta empires for over five hundred years during which time they branched into Goa and Hanagal. At the peak of their power under King Kakushtavarma, they ruled large parts of Karnataka. During the pre-Kadamba era the ruling families that controlled Karnataka, the Mauryas, Satavahanas and Chutus were not natives of the region and the nucleus of power resided outside present day Karnataka. The Kadambas were the first indigenous dynasty to use Kannada, the language of the soil at an administrative level. In the history of Karnataka, this era serves as a broad based historical starting point in the study of the development of region as an enduring geo-political entity and Kannada as an important regional language.

The dynasty was founded by Mayurasharma in 345 which at times showed the potential of developing into imperial proportions, an indication to which is provided by the titles and epithets assumed by its rulers. One of his successors, Kakusthavarma was a powerful ruler and even the kings of imperial Gupta Dynasty of northern India cultivated marital relationships with his family, giving a fair indication of the sovereign nature of their kingdom. Tiring of the endless battles and bloodshed, one of the later descendants, King Shivakoti adopted Jainism. The Kadambas were contemporaries of the Western Ganga Dynasty of Talakad and together they formed the earliest native kingdoms to rule the land with absolute autonomy.

===The Western Gangas===
The Western Ganga Dynasty (350–1000 CE) () was an important ruling dynasty of ancient Karnataka in India. They are known as Western Gangas to distinguish them from the Eastern Gangas, who in later centuries ruled over modern Odisha. The general belief is the Western Gangas began their rule during a time when multiple native clans asserted their freedom due to the weakening of the Pallava dynasty of South India, a geo-political event sometimes attributed to the southern conquests of Samudragupta. The Western Ganga sovereignty lasted from about 350 to 550 CE, initially ruling from Kolar and later moving their capital to Talakad on the banks of the Kaveri in modern Mysore district.

After the rise of the imperial Chalukya dynasty of Badami, the Gangas accepted Chalukya overlordship and fought for the cause of their overlords against the Pallavas of Kanchipuram. The Chalukyas were replaced by the Rashtrakutas of Manyakheta in 753 CE as the dominant power in the Deccan. After a century of struggle for autonomy, the Western Gangas finally accepted Rashtrakuta overlordship and successfully fought alongside them against their foes, the Chola dynasty of Tanjavur. In the late 10th century, north of Tungabhadra river, the Rashtrakutas were replaced by the emerging Western Chalukya Empire and the Chola Dynasty saw renewed power south of the Kaveri. The defeat of the Western Gangas by Cholas around 1000 resulted in the end of Ganga influence over the region.

Though territorially a small kingdom, the Western Ganga contribution to polity, culture and literature of the modern south Karnataka region is considered important. The Western Ganga kings showed benevolent tolerance to all faiths but are most famous for their patronage towards Jainism resulting in the construction of monuments in places such as Shravanabelagola and Kambadahalli. The kings of this dynasty encouraged the fine arts due to which literature in Kannada and Sanskrit flourished. Chavundaraya&#x27;s writing, &quot;Chavundaraya Purana&quot; of 978 CE, is an important work in Kannada prose. Many classics were written on subjects ranging from religious topics to elephant management.

===The Badami Chalukyas===
The Chalukya Empire, natives of the Aihole and Badami region in Karnataka, were at first a feudatory of the Kadambas.
Jayasimha and Ranaraga, ancestors of Pulakeshin I, were administrative officers in the Badami province under the Kadambas (Fleet in Kanarese Dynasties, p. 343), They encouraged the use of Kannada in addition to the Sanskrit language in their administration. In the middle of the 6th century the Chalukyas came into their own when Pulakeshin I made the hill fortress in Badami his center of power. During the rule of Pulakeshin II a south Indian empire sent expeditions to the north past the Tapti River and Narmada River for the first time and successfully defied Harshavardhana, the King of Northern India (&quot;Uttarapatheswara&quot;). The Aihole inscription of Pulakeshin II, written in classical Sanskrit language and old Kannada script dated 634, proclaims his victories against the Kingdoms of Kadambas, Western Gangas, Alupas of South Canara, Mauryas of Puri, Kingdom of Kosala, Malwa, Lata and Gurjaras of southern Rajasthan. The inscription describes how King Harsha of Kannauj lost his &quot;Harsha&quot; (joyful disposition) on seeing a large number of his war elephants die in battle against Pulakeshin II.
These victories earned him the title &quot;Dakshinapatha Prithviswamy&quot; (lord of the south). Pulakeshin II continued his conquests in the east where he conquered all kingdoms in his way and reached the Bay of Bengal in present-day Odisha. A Chalukya viceroyalty was set up in Gujarat and Vengi (coastal Andhra) and princes from the Badami family were dispatched to rule them. Having subdued the Pallavas of Kanchipuram, he accepted tributes from the Pandyas of Madurai, Chola dynasty and Cheras of the Kerala region. Pulakeshin II thus became the master of India, south of the Narmada River. Pulakeshin II is widely regarded as one of the great kings in Indian history. Hiuen-Tsiang, a Chinese traveller visited the court of Pulakeshin II at this time and Persian emperor Khosrau II exchanged ambassadors. However, the continuous wars with Pallavas took a turn for the worse in 642 when the Pallava king Narasimhavarman I avenged his father&#x27;s defeat, conquered and plundered the capital of Pulakeshin II who may have died in battle. A century later, Chalukya Vikramaditya II marched victoriously into Kanchipuram, the Pallava capital and occupied it on three occasions, the third time under the leadership of his son and crown prince Kirtivarman II. He thus avenged the earlier humiliation of the Chalukyas by the Pallavas and engraved a Kannada inscription on the victory pillar at the Kailasanatha Temple. He later overran the other traditional kingdoms of Tamil country, the Pandyas, Cholas and Keralas in addition to subduing a Kalabhra ruler.

The Kappe Arabhatta record from this period (700) in &quot;tripadi&quot; (three line) metre is considered the earliest available record in Kannada poetics. The most enduring legacy of the Chalukya dynasty is the architecture and art that they left behind. More than one hundred and fifty monuments attributed to them, built between 450 and 700, have survived in the Malaprabha basin in Karnataka, over 125 temples exist in Aihole alone. The constructions are centred in a relatively small area within the Chalukyan heartland. The structural temples at Pattadakal, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, the cave temples of Badami, the temples at Mahakuta and early experiments in temple building at Aihole are their most celebrated monuments. Two of the famous paintings at Ajanta cave no. 1, &quot;The Temptation of the Buddha&quot; and &quot;The Persian Embassy&quot; are also credited to them. Further, they influenced the architecture in far off places like Gujarat and Vengi as evidenced in the Nava Brahma temples at Alampur.

===The Pallavas===
The 7th century Tamil Nadu saw the rise of the Pallavas under Mahendravarman I and his son &quot;Mamalla&quot; Narasimhavarman I. The Pallavas were not a recognised political power before the 2nd century. It has been widely accepted by scholars that they were originally executive officers under the Satavahana Empire. After the fall of the Satavahanas, they began to get control over parts of Andhra and the Tamil country. Later they had marital ties with the Vishnukundina who ruled over the Deccan. It was around 550 AD under King Simhavishnu that the Pallavas emerged into prominence. They subjugated the Cholas and reigned as far south as the Kaveri River. Pallavas ruled a large portion of South India with Kanchipuram as their capital. Dravidian architecture reached its peak during the Pallava rule. Narasimhavarman II built the Shore Temple which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Many sources describe Bodhidharma, the founder of the Zen school of Buddhism in China, as a prince of the Pallava dynasty.

===The Eastern Chalukyas===

Eastern Chalukyas were a South Indian dynasty whose kingdom was located in the present day Andhra Pradesh. Their capital was Vengi and their dynasty lasted for around 500 years from the 7th century until c. 1130 CE when the Vengi kingdom merged with the Chola empire. The Vengi kingdom was continued to be ruled by Eastern Chalukyan kings under the protection of the Chola empire until 1189 CE, when the kingdom succumbed to the Hoysalas and the Yadavas. They had their capital originally at Vengi now (Pedavegi, Chinavegi and Denduluru) near Eluru of the West Godavari district end later changed to Rajamahendravaram (Rajamundry).

Eastern Chalukyas were closely related to the Chalukyas of Vatapi (Badami). Throughout their history they were the cause of many wars between the more powerful Cholas and Western Chalukyas over the control of the strategic Vengi country. The five centuries of the Eastern Chalukya rule of Vengi saw not only the consolidation of this region into a unified whole, but also saw the efflorescence of Telugu culture, literature, poetry and art during the later half of their rule. It can be said to be the golden period of Andhra history.

===The Pandyas===

Pallavas were replaced by the Pandyas in the 8th century. Their capital Madurai was in the deep south away from the coast. They had extensive trade links with the Southeast Asian maritime empires of Srivijaya and their successors. As well as contacts, even diplomatic, reaching as far as the Roman Empire. During the 13th century of the Christian era Marco Polo mentioned it as the richest empire in existence. Temples like Meenakshi Amman Temple at Madurai and Nellaiappar Temple at Tirunelveli are the best examples of Pandyan Temple architecture. The Pandyas excelled in both trade as well as literature and they controlled the pearl fisheries along the South Indian coast, between Sri Lanka and India, which produced some of the finest pearls in the known ancient world.

===The Rashtrakutas===


In the middle of the 8th century the Chalukya rule was ended by their feudatory, the Rashtrakuta family rulers of Berar (in present-day Amravati district of Maharashtra). Sensing an opportunity during a weak period in the Chalukya rule, Dantidurga trounced the great Chalukyan &quot;Karnatabala&quot; (power of Karnata). Having overthrown the Chalukyas, the Rashtrakutas made Manyakheta their capital (modern Malkhed in Kalaburagi district). Although the origins of the early Rashtrakuta ruling families in central India and the Deccan in the 6th and 7th centuries is controversial, during the eighth through the 10th centuries they emphasised the importance of the Kannada language in conjunction with Sanskrit in their administration. Rashtrakuta inscriptions are in Kannada and Sanskrit only. They encouraged literature in both languages and thus literature flowered under their rule.

The Rashtrakutas quickly became the most powerful Deccan empire, making their initial successful forays into the doab region of Ganges River and Jamuna River during the rule of Dhruva Dharavarsha. His victories were a &quot;digvijaya&quot; gaining only fame and booty in that region. The rule of his son Govinda III signaled a new era with Rashtrakuta victories against the Pala Dynasty of Bengal and Gurjara Pratihara of north western India resulting in the capture of Kannauj. The Rashtrakutas held Kannauj intermittently during a period of a tripartite struggle for the resources of the rich Gangetic plains. Because of Govinda III&#x27;s victories, historians have compared him to Alexander the Great and Pandava Arjuna of the Hindu epic Mahabharata.
The Sanjan inscription states the horses of Govinda III drank the icy water of the Himalayan stream and his war elephants tasted the sacred waters of the Ganges River. Amoghavarsha I, eulogised by contemporary Arab traveller Sulaiman as one among the four great emperors of the world, succeeded Govinda III to the throne and ruled during an important cultural period that produced landmark writings in Kannada and Sanskrit. The benevolent development of Jain religion was a hallmark of his rule. Because of his religious temperament, his interest in the arts and literature and his peace-loving nature, he has been compared to emperor Ashoka. The rule of Indra III in the 10th century enhanced the Rashtrakuta position as an imperial power as they conquered and held Kannauj again. Krishna III followed Indra III to the throne in 939. A patron of Kannada literature and a powerful warrior, his reign marked the submission of the Paramara of Ujjain in the north and Cholas in the south.

An Arabic writing &quot;Silsilatuttavarikh&quot; (851) called the Rashtrakutas one among the four principle empires of the world. &quot;Kitab-ul-Masalik-ul-Mumalik&quot; (912) called them the &quot;greatest kings of India&quot; and there were many other contemporaneous books written in their praise. The Rashtrakuta empire at its peak spread from Cape Comorin in the south to Kannauj in the north and from Banaras in the east to Broach (Bharuch) in the west.
While the Rashtrakutas built many fine monuments in the Deccan, the most extensive and sumptuous of their work is the monolithic Kailasanatha temple at Ellora, the temple being a splendid achievement. In Karnataka their most famous temples are the Kashivishvanatha temple and the Jain Narayana temple at Pattadakal. All of the monuments are designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites.

===The Western Chalukyas===
In the late 10th century, the Western Chalukyas, also known as the Kalyani Chalukyas or &#x27;Later&#x27; Chalukyas rose to power by overthrowing the Rashtrakutas under whom they had been serving as feudatories. Manyakheta was their capital early on before they moved it to Kalyani (modern Basavakalyan). Whether the kings of this empire belonged to the same family line as their namesakes, the Badami Chalukyas is still debated. Whatever the Western Chalukya origins, Kannada remained their language of administration and the Kannada and Sanskrit literature of their time was prolific. More inscriptions in Kannada are attributed to the Chalukya King Vikramaditya VI than to any other king prior to the 12th century, Tailapa II, a feudatory ruler from Tardavadi (modern Bijapur district), re-established the Chalukya rule by defeating the Rashtrakutas during the reign of Karka II. He timed his rebellion to coincide with the confusion caused by the invading Paramara of Central India to the Rashtrakutas capital in 973. Tailapa II was helped in this campaign by the Kadambas of Hanagal. This era produced prolonged warfare with the Chola dynasty of Tamilakam for control of the resources of the Godavari River–Krishna River doab region in Vengi. Someshvara I, a brave Chalukyan king, successfully curtailed the growth of the Chola Empire to the south of the Tungabhadra River region despite suffering some defeats while maintaining control over his feudatories in the Konkan, Gujarat, Malwa and Kaḷinga regions. For approximately 100 years, beginning in the early 11th century, the Cholas occupied large areas of South Karnataka region (Gangavadi). The Cholas occupied Gangavadi from 1004 to 1114.
In 1076 CE, the ascent of the most famous king of this Chalukya family, Vikramaditya VI, changed the balance of power in favour of the Chalukyas. His fifty-year reign was an important period in Karnataka&#x27;s history and is referred to as the &quot;Chalukya Vikrama era&quot;. His victories over the Cholas in the late 11th and early 12th centuries put an end to the Chola influence in the Vengi region permanently. Some of the well-known contemporaneous feudatory families of the Deccan under Chalukya control were the Hoysalas, the Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri, the Kakatiya dynasty and the Southern Kalachuri. At their peak, the Western Chalukyas ruled a vast empire stretching from the Narmada River in the north to the Kaveri River in the south. Vikramaditya VI is considered one of the most influential kings of Indian history. Poet Bilhana in his Sanskrit work wrote &quot;Rama Rajya&quot; regarding his rule; poet Vijnaneshwara called him &quot;A king like none other&quot;. Important architectural works were created by these Chalukyas, especially in the Tungabhadra river valley, that served as a conceptual link between the building idioms of the early Badami Chalukyas and the later Hoysalas. With the weakening of the Chalukyas in the decades following the death of Vikramaditya VI in 1126, the feudatories of the Chalukyas gained their independence.

The Kalachuris of Karnataka, whose ancestors were immigrants into the southern deccan from central India, had ruled as a feudatory from Mangalavada (modern Mangalavedhe in Maharashtra). Bijjala II, the most powerful ruler of this dynasty, was a commander (&quot;mahamandaleswar&quot;) during the reign of Chalukya Vikramaditya VI. Seizing an opportune moment in the waning power of the Chalukyas, Bijjala II declared independence in 1157 and annexed their capital Kalyani. His rule was cut short by his assassination in 1167 and the ensuing civil war caused by his sons fighting over the throne ended the dynasty as the last Chalukya scion regained control of Kalyani. This victory however, was short-lived as the Chalukyas were eventually driven out by the Seuna Yadavas.

===The Yadavas===

The Seuna, &quot;Sevuna&quot; or Yadava dynasty (Marathi: देवगिरीचे यादव, ) (c. 850–1334 CE) was an Indian dynasty, which at its peak ruled a kingdom stretching from the Tungabhadra to the Narmada rivers, including present-day Maharashtra, north Karnataka and parts of Madhya Pradesh, from its capital at Devagiri (present-day Daulatabad in Maharashtra). The Yadavas initially ruled as feudatories of the Western Chalukyas. Around the middle of the 12th century, they declared independence and established rule that reached its peak under Singhana II. The foundations of Marathi culture was laid by the Yadavas and the peculiarities of Maharashtra&#x27;s social life developed during their rule.

===The Kakatiyas===

The Kakatiya dynasty was a South Indian dynasty that ruled Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, India from 1083 to 1323 CE. They were one of the great Telugu kingdoms that lasted for centuries.

===The Kalachuris===
Kalachuri is the name used by two kingdoms who had a succession of dynasties from the 10th to 12th centuries, one ruling over areas in Central India (west Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan) and were called Chedi or &quot;Haihaya&quot; (&quot;Heyheya&quot;) (northern branch) and the other southern Kalachuri who ruled over parts of Karnataka. They are disparately placed in time and space. Apart from the dynastic name and perhaps a belief in common ancestry, there is little in known sources to connect them.

The earliest known Kalachuri family of Mahishmati (550–620 CE) ruled over northern Maharashtra, Malwa and western Deccan. Their capital was Mahismati situated in the Narmada river valley. There were three prominent members; Krishnaraja, Shankaragana and Buddharaja. They distributed coins and epigraphs around this area.

Kalachuris of Kalyani or the southern Kalachuris (1130–1184 CE) at their peak ruled parts of the Deccan extending over regions of present-day North Karnataka and parts of Maharashtra. This dynasty rose to power in the Deccan between 1156 and 1181 CE. They traced their origins to &quot;Krishna&quot; who was the conqueror of &quot;Kalinjar&quot; and Dahala in Madhya Pradesh. It is said that &quot;Bijjala&quot; a viceroy of this dynasty established the authority over Karnataka. He wrested power from the Chalukya king Taila III. Bijjala was succeeded by his sons Someshwara and Sangama but after 1181 CE, the Chalukyas gradually retrieved the territory. Their rule was a short and turbulent and yet very important from the socio-religious movement point of view; a new sect called the Lingayat or Virashaiva sect was founded during these times.

A unique and purely native form of Kannada literature-poetry called the &quot;Vachanas&quot; was also born during this time. The writers of &quot;Vachanas&quot; were called &quot;Vachanakaras&quot; (poets). Many other important works like Virupaksha Pandita&#x27;s &quot;Chennabasavapurana&quot;, Dharani Pandita&#x27;s &quot;Bijjalarayacharite&quot; and Chandrasagara Varni&#x27;s &quot;Bijjalarayapurana&quot; were also written.

Kalachuris of Tripuri (Chedi) ruled in central India with its base at the ancient city of Tripuri (Tewar); it originated in the 8th century, expanded significantly in the 11th century, and declined in the 12th–13th centuries.

===The Hoysalas===

The Hoysalas had become a powerful force even during their rule from Belur in the 11th century as a feudatory of the Chalukyas (in the south Karnataka region). In the early 12th century they successfully fought the Cholas in the south, convincingly defeating them in the battle of Talakad and moved their capital to nearby Halebidu. Historians refer to the founders of the dynasty as natives of Malnad Karnataka, based on the numerous inscriptions calling them &quot;Maleparolganda&quot; or &quot;Lord of the Male (hills) chiefs&quot; (&quot;Malepas&quot;). With the waning of the Western Chalukya power, the Hoysalas declared their independence in the late 12th century.

During this period of Hoysala control, distinctive Kannada literary metres such as &quot;Ragale&quot; (blank verse), &quot;Sangatya&quot; (meant to be sung to the accompaniment of a musical instrument), &quot;Shatpadi&quot; (seven line) etc. became widely accepted. The Hoysalas expanded the Vesara architecture stemming from the Chalukyas,culminating in the Hoysala architectural articulation and style as exemplified in the construction of the Chennakesava Temple at Belur and the Hoysaleswara temple at Halebidu. Both these temples were built in commemoration of the victories of the Hoysala Vishnuvardhana against the Cholas in 1116. Veera Ballala II, the most effective of the Hoysala rulers, defeated the aggressive Pandya when they invaded the Chola kingdom and assumed the titles &quot;Establisher of the Chola Kingdom&quot;
(&quot;Cholarajyapratishtacharya&quot;), &quot;Emperor of the south&quot; (&quot;Dakshina Chakravarthi&quot;) and &quot;Hoysala emperor&quot; (&quot;Hoysala Chakravarthi&quot;). The Hoysalas extended their foothold in areas known today as Tamil Nadu around 1225, making the city of Kannanur Kuppam near Srirangam a provincial capital. This gave them control over South Indian politics that began a period of Hoysala hegemony in the southern Deccan.

In the early 13th century, with the Hoysala power remaining unchallenged, the first of the Muslim incursions into South India began. After over two decades of waging war against a foreign power, the Hoysala ruler at the time, Veera Ballala III, died in the battle of Madurai in 1343. This resulted in the merger of the sovereign territories of the Hoysala empire with the areas administered by Harihara I, founder of the Vijayanagara Empire, located in the Tungabhadra region in present-day Karnataka. The new kingdom thrived for another two centuries with Vijayanagara as its capital.

===The Cholas===

By the 9th century, under Rajaraja Chola and his son Rajendra Chola, the Cholas rose as a notable power in south Asia. The Chola Empire stretched as far as Bengal. At its peak, the empire spanned almost 3,600,000 km2 (1,389,968 sq mi). Rajaraja Chola conquered all of peninsular South India and parts of the Sri Lanka. Rajendra Chola&#x27;s navies went even further, occupying coasts from Burma (now Myanmar) to Vietnam, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Sumatra, Java, Malaya in South East Asia and Pegu islands. He also Conquered the rest of the Sri Lanka.He defeated Mahipala, the king of the Bengal, and to commemorate his victory he built a new capital and named it Gangaikonda Cholapuram.

The Cholas excelled in building magnificent temples. Brihadeshwara Temple in Thanjavur is a classical example of the magnificent architecture of the Chola kingdom. Brihadshwara temple is an UNESCO Heritage Site under &quot;Great Living Chola Temples&quot;. Another example is the Chidambaram Temple in the heart of the temple town of Chidambaram.

==See also==
* History of India
* History of Hinduism
* History of Bengal
* History of Bihar
* Political history of medieval Karnataka

== Notes ==
== References ==
* – India

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* Agarwala, V. S. (1954). &quot;India as Known to Panini&quot;.
* Reissued 1985.
* 
* Cunningham, Alexander (1888) &quot;Coins of the Indo-Scythians, Sakas, and Kushans&quot;, Reprint: Indological Book House, Varanasi, India, 1971.
* 
* 
* Hill, John E. (2004). &quot;The Peoples of the West from the Weilüe&quot; 魏略 &quot;by Yu Huan&quot; 魚豢&quot;: A Third Century Chinese Account Composed between 239 and 265 CE.&quot; Draft annotated English translation.Weilue: The Peoples of the West 
* Hill, John E. (2009) &quot;Through the Jade Gate to Rome: A Study of the Silk Routes during the Later Han Dynasty, 1st to 2nd Centuries CE&quot;. BookSurge, Charleston, South Carolina. .
* – Republished in new edition by Jupiter Books, 2001. 
* 
* Latif, S. M. (1891) &quot;History of the Panjab&quot;, Reprinted by Progressive Books, Lahore, Pakistan, 1984.
* 
* 
* 
* – via Google Books
* 
==Further reading==
* Majumdar, R. C.; Pusalker, A. D.; &amp; Majumdar, A. K. (1988). &quot;The history and culture of the Indian people&quot;. Vol. 3. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1189518" start="4" end="28" title="Middle kingdoms of India" label="middle kingdoms of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="64" end="83" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="152" end="165" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="200" end="218" title="Satavahana dynasty" label="Satavahana dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568644" start="234" end="240" title="Simuka" label="Simuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="358" end="373" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="411" end="423" title="Later Cholas" label="Later Cholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285985" start="425" end="443" title="Rajendra Chola III" label="Rajendra Chola III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="578" end="590" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="701" end="709" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346404" start="776" end="796" title="Economic history of India" label="India&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057021" start="955" end="970" title="Medieval India" label="Medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="1043" end="1056" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="1205" end="1212" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424159" start="1280" end="1287" title="Mleccha" label="Mleccha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="1301" end="1319" title="Satavahana dynasty" label="Satavahana dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="1333" end="1345" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1565" end="1573" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="1992" end="2002" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="2036" end="2045" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="2074" end="2092" title="Indo-Greek Kingdom" label="Indo-Greek Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="2135" end="2145" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2211" end="2222" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q347916" start="2295" end="2317" title="Demetrius I of Bactria" label="Demetrius I of Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="2330" end="2340" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q488880" start="2424" end="2446" title="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom" label="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="2491" end="2502" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="2507" end="2517" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156093" start="2660" end="2666" title="Taxila" label="Taxila"/>
<link wikidata="Q625407" start="2668" end="2680" title="Pushkalavati" label="Pushkalavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069204" start="2685" end="2691" title="Sagala" label="Sagala"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="2711" end="2717" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2795" end="2802" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="2816" end="2825" title="Geography (Ptolemy)" label="Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387461" start="2879" end="2888" title="Theophilos (king)" label="Theophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q362604" start="2961" end="2973" title="Euthydemus I" label="Euthydemus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="2992" end="3000" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884468" start="3003" end="3018" title="Magnesia (regional unit)" label="Magnesian Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365" start="3198" end="3221" title="Antiochus III the Great" label="Antiochus III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="3239" end="3246" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q337819" start="3325" end="3345" title="Artemidoros Aniketos" label="Artemidoros Aniketos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="3442" end="3461" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q190055" start="3475" end="3481" title="Roxana" label="Roxana"/>
<link wikidata="Q184176" start="3497" end="3515" title="Seleucus I Nicator" label="Seleucus I Nicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q237626" start="3529" end="3534" title="Apama" label="Apama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="4034" end="4052" title="Greco-Buddhist art" label="Greco-Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="4312" end="4325" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="4390" end="4396" title="Ionians" label="Ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030946" start="4504" end="4516" title="the Pahlavas" label="the Pahlavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="4521" end="4526" title="Huna people" label="Hunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586782" start="4601" end="4609" title="Kambojas" label="Kambojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728457" start="4633" end="4638" title="Madra" label="Madra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385364" start="4644" end="4658" title="Kekeya Kingdom" label="Kekeya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="4664" end="4675" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068408" start="4834" end="4846" title="Kuru Kingdom" label="Kuru Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q558603" start="4851" end="4859" title="Panchala" label="Panchala"/>
<link wikidata="Q240123" start="4897" end="4911" title="Indo-Scythians" label="Indo-Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="4932" end="4936" title="Saka" label="Saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="4965" end="4972" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="4978" end="4985" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="4987" end="4993" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q624638" start="4995" end="5004" title="Arachosia" label="Arachosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="5006" end="5014" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="5016" end="5023" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="5025" end="5031" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="5078" end="5085" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="5087" end="5098" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="5103" end="5112" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="5172" end="5174" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911068" start="5209" end="5214" title="Maues" label="Maues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086608" start="5376" end="5391" title="Western Satraps" label="Western Satraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377529" start="5393" end="5407" title="Rudrasimha III" label="Rudrasimha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="5467" end="5479" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="5575" end="5591" title="history of India" label="history of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="5763" end="5768" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="5799" end="5806" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="5808" end="5813" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="5815" end="5822" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="5928" end="5936" title="monarchy" label="kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="5980" end="5985" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="6000" end="6005" title="Medes" label="Medes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="6007" end="6016" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q379821" start="6017" end="6027" title="Massagetae" label="Massagetae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19012" start="6029" end="6034" title="Getae" label="Getae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135103" start="6036" end="6051" title="Parama Kamboja kingdom" label="Parama Kambojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="6053" end="6058" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272177" start="6060" end="6068" title="Bahlikas" label="Bahlikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336054" start="6070" end="6078" title="Rishikas" label="Rishikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q56704734" start="6083" end="6090" title="Parada kingdom" label="Paradas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255614" start="6123" end="6144" title="Indo-Parthian Kingdom" label="Indo-Parthian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397542" start="6160" end="6171" title="Gondophares" label="Gondophares"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="6466" end="6475" title="Manusmṛti" label="Manusmṛti"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="6491" end="6498" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="6510" end="6518" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="6536" end="6547" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="6640" end="6655" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallava dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="6659" end="6670" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="7038" end="7049" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q25953" start="7266" end="7283" title="Parthian language" label="Parthian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196778" start="7439" end="7448" title="Kātyāyana" label="Kātyāyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086608" start="7603" end="7618" title="Western Satraps" label="Western Satraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069636" start="7690" end="7700" title="Saurashtra (region)" label="Saurashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="7705" end="7710" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="7719" end="7726" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="7737" end="7742" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="7744" end="7755" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="7757" end="7766" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="7771" end="7785" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790158" start="7849" end="7855" title="Ariaca" label="Ariaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q664162" start="7885" end="7915" title="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea" label="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647052" start="8137" end="8143" title="Andhra in Indian epic literature" label="Andhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="8295" end="8302" title="Mathura" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221830" start="8312" end="8320" title="Rajuvula" label="Rajuvula"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="8837" end="8844" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="8888" end="8897" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="9057" end="9063" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9304" end="9309" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="9331" end="9343" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="9348" end="9354" title="Sassanian Empire" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312544" start="9369" end="9385" title="Emperor Kanishka" label="Emperor Kanishka"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="9408" end="9416" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="9468" end="9487" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="9547" end="9552" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="9625" end="9640" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661685" start="9752" end="9766" title="Indo-Sasanians" label="Indo-Sasanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="9868" end="9886" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="9954" end="9972" title="Hephthalite Empire" label="Hephthalite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="10008" end="10026" title="Hephthalite Empire" label="Hephthalite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="10106" end="10112" title="Yuezhi" label="Yuezhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="10170" end="10176" title="Bamyan" label="Bamyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="10249" end="10260" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="10377" end="10391" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931424" start="10414" end="10425" title="Rai dynasty" label="Rai dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="10429" end="10434" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="10451" end="10459" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="10511" end="10516" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q868631" start="10520" end="10526" title="Sukkur" label="Sukkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795587" start="10551" end="10555" title="Aror" label="Aror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475472" start="10625" end="10630" title="Kabulistan" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595864" start="10632" end="10640" title="Peshawar Valley" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q389161" start="10642" end="10646" title="Swat District" label="Swat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156093" start="10652" end="10658" title="Taxila" label="Taxila"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="10694" end="10702" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="10715" end="10726" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="10745" end="10757" title="Mahajanapada" label="Mahajanapada"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="10761" end="10774" title="ancient India" label="ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q466433" start="10800" end="10814" title="Karkota Empire" label="Karkota Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q335276" start="10961" end="10982" title="Lalitaditya Muktapida" label="Lalitaditya Muktapida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761336" start="11018" end="11031" title="Rajatarangini" label="Rajatarangini"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671872" start="11068" end="11079" title="Yashovarman" label="Yashovarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="11083" end="11093" title="Kanyakubja" label="Kanyakubja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194765" start="11151" end="11159" title="Kamarupa" label="Kamarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035301" start="11161" end="11166" title="Gauḍa (region)" label="Gauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="11172" end="11179" title="Kalinga (historical kingdom)" label="Kaḷinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="11245" end="11252" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="11266" end="11271" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="11275" end="11280" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="11437" end="11442" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="11487" end="11500" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q173816" start="11658" end="11664" title="Kapisa Province" label="Kapisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695597" start="11686" end="11699" title="Hund, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Udabhandapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q609024" start="12037" end="12043" title="Gilgit" label="Gilgit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573564" start="12180" end="12190" title="Mihirakula" label="Mihirakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="12570" end="12584" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="12590" end="12600" title="Satavahana" label="Satavahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="12674" end="12687" title="Central Asian" label="Central Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="12746" end="12760" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="12802" end="12810" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="12844" end="12859" title="Indo-Gangetic plain" label="Gangetic plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="12897" end="12907" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="13118" end="13130" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="13144" end="13163" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="13328" end="13332" title="Huna people" label="Huna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="13362" end="13374" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q216895" start="13451" end="13457" title="Harsha" label="Harsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="13482" end="13488" title="Rajput" label="Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="13507" end="13513" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="13519" end="13527" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="13648" end="13667" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="13810" end="13823" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="13987" end="13995" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="14038" end="14050" title="Ellora Caves" label="Ellora Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087762" start="14054" end="14089" title="Amaravathi village, Guntur district" label="Amaravathi village, Guntur district"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="14295" end="14308" title="Shunga Empire" label="Shunga Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q784974" start="14322" end="14335" title="Kanva dynasty" label="Kanva dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="14339" end="14346" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="14448" end="14452" title="Saka" label="Saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="14455" end="14459" title="Yona" label="Yona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030946" start="14465" end="14477" title="the Pahlavas" label="the Pahlavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086608" start="14518" end="14533" title="Western Satraps" label="Western Satraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="14703" end="14710" title="Kalinga (historical kingdom)" label="Kaḷinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391280" start="14784" end="14793" title="Kharavela" label="Khārabēḷa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="14813" end="14818" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155818" start="15269" end="15273" title="Anga" label="Anga"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="15299" end="15310" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="15333" end="15348" title="Pandyan dynasty" label="Pandyan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="15357" end="15371" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="15408" end="15414" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q216239" start="15423" end="15429" title="Kaveri" label="Kaveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="15520" end="15529" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="15531" end="15536" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="15538" end="15546" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="15548" end="15555" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="15557" end="15565" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="15567" end="15573" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="15575" end="15579" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="15581" end="15588" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="15593" end="15597" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="15666" end="15674" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="15679" end="15702" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385618" start="15742" end="15748" title="Keling" label="Keling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="15831" end="15838" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="15898" end="15917" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151502" start="16071" end="16093" title="Hathigumpha inscription" label="Hātigumphā inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536413" start="16101" end="16131" title="Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q171771" start="16137" end="16148" title="Bhubaneswar" label="Bhubaneswar"/>
<link wikidata="Q863683" start="16212" end="16221" title="Rajgir" label="Rajagriha"/>
<link wikidata="Q347916" start="16268" end="16290" title="Demetrius I of Bactria" label="Demetrius I of Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="16305" end="16312" title="Mathura" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931811" start="16375" end="16390" title="Bharshiva Dynasty" label="Bharshiva Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="16409" end="16429" title="Indo-Gangetic plains" label="Indo-Gangetic plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q726486" start="16448" end="16458" title="Ashvamedha" label="Ashvamedha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133363" start="16499" end="16511" title="Samudragupta" label="Samudragupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="16628" end="16640" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="16672" end="16682" title="Satavahana" label="Satavahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="16782" end="16796" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="16801" end="16812" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="16893" end="16905" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="16909" end="16935" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="17024" end="17032" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="17109" end="17128" title="Indian Subcontinent" label="Indian Subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="17152" end="17164" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311209" start="17212" end="17231" title="Golden Age of India" label="Golden Age of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124036" start="17276" end="17295" title="Science and technology in ancient India" label="science, technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574008" start="17297" end="17308" title="List of Indian inventions and discoveries" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q831768" start="17310" end="17313" title="Indian art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17315" end="17324" title="dialectic#Indian continental debate: an intra- and inter-Dharmic dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q622237" start="17326" end="17336" title="Indian literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661527" start="17338" end="17343" title="Indian logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279571" start="17345" end="17356" title="Indian mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292962" start="17358" end="17367" title="Indian astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="17369" end="17377" title="Indian religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="17382" end="17392" title="Indian philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="17454" end="17467" title="Hindu culture" label="Hindu culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="17473" end="17495" title="Decimal" label="decimal numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="17522" end="17526" title="0 (number)" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011" start="17837" end="17845" title="Kalidasa" label="Kalidasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11359" start="17847" end="17856" title="Aryabhata" label="Aryabhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q858348" start="17858" end="17870" title="Varahamihira" label="Varahamihira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743748" start="17872" end="17885" title="Vishnu Sharma" label="Vishnu Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q380234" start="17891" end="17901" title="Vatsyayana" label="Vatsyayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="18161" end="18166" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="18168" end="18177" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="18188" end="18196" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="18201" end="18224" title="mainland Southeast Asia" label="mainland Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="18316" end="18324" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q849802" start="18444" end="18458" title="Chandragupta I" label="Chandragupta I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133363" start="18474" end="18486" title="Samudragupta" label="Samudragupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q844536" start="18506" end="18521" title="Chandragupta II" label="Chandragupta II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="18662" end="18667" title="Huna people" label="Hunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="18770" end="18777" title="Bamyan City" label="Bamiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="18805" end="18811" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="18945" end="18957" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q216895" start="19018" end="19024" title="Harsha" label="Harsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="19028" end="19035" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q216895" start="19102" end="19118" title="Empire of Harsha" label="Empire of Harsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="19154" end="19162" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q708370" start="19165" end="19178" title="Pulakeshin II" label="Pulakeshin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q234004" start="19232" end="19245" title="Narmada River" label="Narmada River"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="19462" end="19469" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="19491" end="19496" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="19589" end="19604" title="Gupta Empire" label="Imperial Guptas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="19828" end="19837" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q797437" start="19885" end="19892" title="Bhinmal" label="Bhilmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q695221" start="19960" end="19969" title="Mount Abu" label="Mount Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="20020" end="20026" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="20171" end="20176" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q798422" start="20221" end="20230" title="Ghaggar-Hakra River" label="the Hakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="20240" end="20251" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="20273" end="20281" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q171675" start="20286" end="20292" title="Sutlej River" label="Sutlaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="20318" end="20323" title="Yamuna River" label="Jumna"/>
<link wikidata="Q234004" start="20328" end="20335" title="Narmada River" label="Narmada"/>
<link wikidata="Q760153" start="20354" end="20360" title="Bharuch" label="Broach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207931" start="20420" end="20441" title="Gurjaras of Lata" label="Gurjaras of Nandipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207931" start="20446" end="20462" title="Gurjaras of Lata" label="Gurjaras of Lata"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="20558" end="20564" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="20566" end="20572" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="20586" end="20597" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501306" start="20657" end="20672" title="Vakataka" label="Vakataka Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="20759" end="20767" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q708370" start="20769" end="20782" title="Pulakeshin II" label="Pulakeshin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635454" start="20817" end="20837" title="Kubja Vishnuvardhana" label="Kubja Vishnuvardhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765117" start="20951" end="20967" title="Eastern Chalukya" label="Eastern Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="21025" end="21032" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069636" start="21173" end="21183" title="Saurashtra (region)" label="Saurashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="21184" end="21193" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="21200" end="21212" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="21879" end="21890" title="Xuanzang" label="Hiuen Tsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="22134" end="22140" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="22203" end="22208" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q853968" start="22271" end="22285" title="Hindustan" label="Northern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="22390" end="22402" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289394" start="22524" end="22538" title="R. C. Majumdar" label="R. C. Majumdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566899" start="22707" end="22722" title="Muslim conquest in the Indian subcontinent" label="Muslim conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q216895" start="22771" end="22777" title="Harsha" label="Harsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="22931" end="22943" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q56538835" start="23149" end="23155" title="Junaid" label="Junaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679219" start="23257" end="23269" title="Lord Elphinstone" label="Eliphinstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="23641" end="23646" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="23866" end="23872" title="Rajput" label="Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="24091" end="24106" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="24111" end="24123" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377765" start="24234" end="24240" title="Katoch" label="Katoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q251551" start="24273" end="24286" title="Chandravanshi" label="Chandravanshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324" start="24557" end="24567" title="Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty" label="Pratiharas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135130" start="24572" end="24581" title="Paramara dynasty" label="Paramaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="24645" end="24656" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="24677" end="24684" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151567" start="24688" end="24701" title="Western India" label="Western India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929733" start="24758" end="24767" title="Rajputana" label="Rajputana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124144" start="24877" end="24882" title="Kingdom of Amber" label="Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324" start="24985" end="25002" title="Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty" label="Gurjara-Pratihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="25032" end="25046" title="Northern India" label="Northern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q200049" start="25239" end="25244" title="Ajmer" label="Ajmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="25361" end="25366" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="25431" end="25443" title="Yamuna River" label="Yamuna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q558219" start="25520" end="25534" title="Prithviraj III" label="Prithviraj III"/>
<link wikidata="Q558219" start="25601" end="25615" title="Prithviraj III" label="Prithviraj III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="25697" end="25702" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647182" start="25745" end="25761" title="Mohammed of Ghor" label="Mohammed of Ghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089139" start="25769" end="25791" title="First Battle of Tarain" label="First Battle of Tarain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518229" start="25846" end="25851" title="Mewar" label="Mewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890128" start="25979" end="26002" title="Second Battle of Tarain" label="Second Battle of Tarain"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="26198" end="26205" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q216895" start="26261" end="26267" title="Harsha" label="Harsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060631" start="26349" end="26356" title="Chambal River" label="Chambal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="26379" end="26393" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="26446" end="26460" title="Rajput" label="Rajput dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057021" start="26470" end="26484" title="Medieval India" label="Medieval India"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="26500" end="26505" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630446" start="26628" end="26633" title="Bhoja" label="Bhoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088191" start="26644" end="26660" title="philosopher king" label="philosopher king"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="26665" end="26673" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q617987" start="26754" end="26758" title="Dhar" label="Dhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="26767" end="26781" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="26877" end="26884" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q579702" start="26886" end="26895" title="Anhilwara" label="Anhilwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q579702" start="26904" end="26918" title="Patan, Gujarat" label="Siddhpur Patan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="26945" end="26952" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="26975" end="26987" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="27163" end="27168" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143887" start="27172" end="27185" title="Somnath Patan" label="Somnath Patan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408929" start="27189" end="27198" title="Kathiawar" label="Kathiawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="27259" end="27275" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368442" start="27294" end="27299" title="Karna (Chaulukya dynasty)" label="Karna"/>
<link wikidata="Q854970" start="27315" end="27319" title="Bhil" label="Bhil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="27393" end="27402" title="Ahmedabad" label="Karnavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q630397" start="27423" end="27438" title="Sabarmati River" label="Sabarmati River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="27462" end="27471" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="27523" end="27534" title="Rajput" label="Rajput Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432642" start="27567" end="27583" title="Tomaras of Delhi" label="Tomaras of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="27615" end="27620" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="27625" end="27632" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q558219" start="28115" end="28133" title="Prithviraj Chauhan" label="Prithviraj Chauhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12458954" start="28240" end="28250" title="Someshvara (Chahamana dynasty)" label="Someshvara"/>
<link wikidata="Q757846" start="28269" end="28276" title="Bijolia" label="Bijolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25645331" start="28316" end="28330" title="Vigraharaja IV" label="Vigraharaja IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="28501" end="28514" title="Indian states" label="Indian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="28518" end="28531" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="28536" end="28541" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="28608" end="28616" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="28624" end="28639" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Gangetic plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="28724" end="28737" title="Indian states" label="Indian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="28741" end="28746" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="28751" end="28760" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461412" start="28838" end="28855" title="Shahabad district" label="Shahabad district"/>
<link wikidata="Q79399537" start="28857" end="28870" title="Pratapdhavala" label="Pratapdhavala"/>
<link wikidata="Q79401733" start="28875" end="28887" title="Shri Pratapa" label="Shri Pratapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946159" start="28941" end="28947" title="Rohtas Fort, India" label="Rohtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="29136" end="29144" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="29201" end="29220" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="29249" end="29255" title="Bengali language" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="29394" end="29402" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="29407" end="29414" title="Vajrayana" label="Tantric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352284" start="29436" end="29442" title="Gopala (Pala king)" label="Gopala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496277" start="29511" end="29515" title="Gaur, West Bengal" label="Gaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="29521" end="29540" title="democratic election" label="democratic election"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="29644" end="29658" title="Mahajanapadas" label="Mahā Janapadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="29757" end="29763" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="29769" end="29777" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="29778" end="29785" title="dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="29881" end="29887" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216243" start="29973" end="29980" title="Nalanda" label="Nalanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634624" start="29985" end="29997" title="Vikramashila" label="Vikramashila"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="29999" end="30018" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Somapura Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183804" start="30028" end="30038" title="Dharmapala of Bengal" label="Dharmapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="30055" end="30063" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q844619" start="30064" end="30070" title="Vihara" label="Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="30078" end="30097" title="Indian Subcontinent" label="Indian Subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183804" start="30134" end="30144" title="Dharmapala of Bengal" label="Dharmapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649142" start="30149" end="30157" title="Devapala (Pala dynasty)" label="Devapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="30221" end="30240" title="Indian Subcontinent" label="Indian Subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649142" start="30324" end="30332" title="Devapala (Pala dynasty)" label="Devapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="30445" end="30450" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765271" start="30455" end="30461" title="Utkala Kingdom" label="Utkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586782" start="30475" end="30482" title="Kamboja Kingdom" label="Kamboja"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="30495" end="30506" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="30530" end="30536" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="30691" end="30695" title="Huna people" label="Huna"/>
<link wikidata="Q24254221" start="30722" end="30730" title="Gurjaradesa" label="Gurjaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324" start="30736" end="30754" title="Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty" label="Gurjara-Pratiharas"/>
<link wikidata="Q69798" start="30764" end="30772" title="Dravidian people" label="Dravidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734077" start="30929" end="30937" title="Mahipala" label="Mahipala"/>
<link wikidata="Q211483" start="31070" end="31084" title="Rajendra Chola" label="Rajendra Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="31093" end="31102" title="Chalukyas" label="Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289004" start="31166" end="31174" title="Ramapala" label="Ramapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347092" start="31292" end="31300" title="Varendra" label="Varendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194765" start="31346" end="31354" title="Kamarupa" label="Kamarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="31494" end="31511" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="31515" end="31520" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="31522" end="31528" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="31533" end="31540" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="31589" end="31604" title="south-east Asia" label="south-east Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148477" start="31672" end="31688" title="Sailendra" label="Sailendra Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="31702" end="31708" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="31710" end="31714" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="31716" end="31723" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136189" start="31862" end="31871" title="Darbhanga" label="Darbhanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293405" start="31876" end="31887" title="Simraungadh (medieval city)" label="Simraongadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190359" start="31920" end="31929" title="Nanyadeva" label="Nanyadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q36109" start="31997" end="32005" title="Maithili language" label="Maithili"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354278" start="32083" end="32098" title="Varna Ratnakara" label="Varna Ratnakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="32198" end="32203" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391172" start="32249" end="32268" title="Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq" label="Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600457" start="32332" end="32338" title="Greater Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="32450" end="32457" title="Kalinga (historical kingdom)" label="Kaḷinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="32522" end="32528" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="32530" end="32541" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="32543" end="32552" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="32554" end="32566" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="32587" end="32601" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933458" start="32721" end="32735" title="Srimukhalingam" label="Srimukhalingam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="32762" end="32776" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="32787" end="32793" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q752091" start="32849" end="32866" title="Konark Sun Temple" label="Konark Sun Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="32869" end="32888" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q749189" start="32892" end="32898" title="Konark" label="Konark"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="32900" end="32906" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678260" start="33273" end="33289" title="Jagannath Temple (Puri)" label="Jagannath Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="33301" end="33307" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965420" start="33402" end="33417" title="Narasimhadeva I" label="Narasimhadeva I"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="33535" end="33541" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428714" start="34262" end="34274" title="Sena dynasty" label="Sena dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="34287" end="34293" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12452658" start="34335" end="34344" title="Vijay Sen" label="Vijay Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="34396" end="34408" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726443" start="34409" end="34419" title="Madanapala (Pala dynasty)" label="Madanapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q106982411" start="34447" end="34458" title="Ballal Sena" label="Ballal Sena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34470" end="34483" title="Kulīna System" label="Kulīna System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006330" start="34503" end="34511" title="Nabadwip" label="Nabadwip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502220" start="34557" end="34569" title="Lakshman Sen" label="Lakshman Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="34607" end="34612" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="34614" end="34619" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="34630" end="34636" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="34653" end="34661" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="34698" end="34704" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="34802" end="34810" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053936" start="34826" end="34845" title="Sanskrit literature" label="Sanskrit literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109008" start="34923" end="34937" title="Varman dynasty" label="Varman dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600457" start="34970" end="34976" title="Greater Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="35128" end="35133" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q107463253" start="35144" end="35150" title="Davaka" label="Davaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="35322" end="35330" title="Guwahati" label="Guwahati"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="35332" end="35346" title="North Guwahati" label="North Guwahati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021162" start="35351" end="35357" title="Tezpur" label="Tezpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955590" start="35395" end="35413" title="Brahmaputra Valley" label="Brahmaputra Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13395623" start="35415" end="35427" title="North Bengal" label="North Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="35429" end="35435" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="35449" end="35459" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="35486" end="35497" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="35502" end="35507" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109008" start="35534" end="35548" title="Varman dynasty" label="Varman dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194765" start="35594" end="35602" title="Kamarupa" label="Kamarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143895" start="35623" end="35635" title="Pushyavarman" label="Pushyavarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133363" start="35655" end="35667" title="Samudragupta" label="Samudragupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="35845" end="35857" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144246" start="35897" end="35911" title="Mahendravarman (Varman dynasty)" label="Mahendravarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q726486" start="35939" end="35949" title="Ashvamedha" label="Ashvamedha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144811" start="36078" end="36087" title="Mlechchha dynasty" label="Mlechchha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108420" start="36101" end="36105" title="Pala dynasty (Kamarupa)" label="Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144811" start="36145" end="36162" title="Mlechchha dynasty" label="Mlechchha dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021162" start="36302" end="36308" title="Tezpur" label="Tezpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181891" start="36358" end="36368" title="Narakasura" label="Narakasura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108420" start="36530" end="36554" title="Pala dynasty (Kamarupa)" label="Pala dynasty of Kamarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316658" start="36614" end="36621" title="Durjaya" label="Durjaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="36623" end="36636" title="North Gauhati" label="North Gauhati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107670" start="36690" end="36701" title="Brahma Pala" label="Brahma Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316658" start="36799" end="36806" title="Durjaya" label="Durjaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="36819" end="36833" title="North Guwahati" label="North Guwahati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269238" start="36867" end="36878" title="Dharma Pala" label="Dharma Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="36935" end="36949" title="North Guwahati" label="North Guwahati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295834" start="36951" end="36961" title="Ratna Pala" label="Ratna Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q249311" start="37064" end="37073" title="Sualkuchi" label="Sualkuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026823" start="37100" end="37110" title="Indra Pala" label="Indra Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167410" start="37175" end="37184" title="Jaya Pala" label="Jaya Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="37251" end="37258" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="37719" end="37727" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="37732" end="37739" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684060" start="37819" end="37830" title="regionalism (politics)" label="regionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="38068" end="38076" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="38572" end="38580" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="38600" end="38607" title="Pallava" label="Pallava"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="38625" end="38636" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="38646" end="38653" title="Pandyas" label="Pandyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="38718" end="38730" title="Rashtrakutas" label="Rashtrakutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="38763" end="38770" title="Pallava" label="Pallava"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="38775" end="38781" title="Pandya" label="Pandya"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="38864" end="38871" title="Pallava" label="Pallava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="38876" end="38884" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="38915" end="38927" title="Rashtrakutas" label="Rashtrakutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q234004" start="39053" end="39066" title="Narmada River" label="Narmada River"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="39079" end="39090" title="Rashtrakuta" label="Rashtrakuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="39189" end="39194" title="Pala Empire" label="Palas"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="39213" end="39219" title="Rajput" label="Rajput"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324" start="39220" end="39230" title="Prathihara" label="Prathihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="39235" end="39242" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="39607" end="39611" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="39640" end="39654" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="39937" end="39943" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="39993" end="40001" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="40003" end="40011" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="40017" end="40024" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175304" start="40219" end="40235" title="Elephanta Island" label="Elephanta Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="40242" end="40248" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="40252" end="40258" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="40287" end="40293" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="40299" end="40305" title="Ellora Caves" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q817250" start="40350" end="40360" title="Pattadakal" label="Pattadakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="40362" end="40368" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="40370" end="40376" title="Badami" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q208000" start="40394" end="40408" title="Mahaballipuram" label="Mahaballipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="40413" end="40424" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="40524" end="40532" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="40537" end="40544" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="40575" end="40580" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="40601" end="40606" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="40611" end="40617" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="40669" end="40677" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q507417" start="40778" end="40784" title="bhakti" label="bhakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921930" start="40840" end="40861" title="vernacular literature" label="vernacular literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="40865" end="40884" title="Dravidian languages" label="Dravidian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="40886" end="40893" title="Kannada language" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="40898" end="40903" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115588" start="41055" end="41069" title="Cilappatikaram" label="Cilappatikaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480970" start="41096" end="41107" title="Manimekalai" label="Manimekalai"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="41166" end="41174" title="Shaivism" label="Shaivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="41179" end="41190" title="Vaishnavism" label="Vaishnavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="41244" end="41252" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="41626" end="41631" title="Chera dynasty" label="Chera"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="41647" end="41652" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="41672" end="41678" title="Pandya" label="Pandya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10549089" start="41889" end="41905" title="Tamil literature" label="Tamil literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="41916" end="41922" title="Sangam literature" label="Sangam"/>
<link wikidata="Q185681" start="42129" end="42139" title="matriarchy" label="matriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="42524" end="42538" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="42610" end="42621" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="42661" end="42672" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q156093" start="42694" end="42700" title="Taxila" label="Taxila"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="42752" end="42759" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="42780" end="42795" title="Pandyan Kingdom" label="Pandyan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="42807" end="42817" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="43005" end="43010" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="43157" end="43161" title="Jainism" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="43377" end="43382" title="Chera dynasty" label="Chera"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="43384" end="43389" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="43391" end="43397" title="Pandyan Dynasty" label="Pandya"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="43402" end="43410" title="Pallavas" label="Pallavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="43430" end="43440" title="Sangam Literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435109" start="43628" end="43636" title="Kuttanad" label="Kuttanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974112" start="43638" end="43645" title="Muziris" label="Muziris"/>
<link wikidata="Q817218" start="43647" end="43652" title="Karur" label="Karur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572901" start="43730" end="43739" title="Kalabhras" label="Kalabhras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681435" start="43772" end="43777" title="Ancient Tamil country" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="43865" end="43870" title="Tamil people" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="43917" end="43925" title="Pallavas" label="Pallavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="43934" end="43941" title="Pandyas" label="Pandyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="44154" end="44160" title="Sangam period" label="Sangam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="44203" end="44210" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="44215" end="44223" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="44304" end="44312" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="44317" end="44321" title="Jain" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479952" start="44378" end="44386" title="Kadambas" label="Kadambas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018662" start="44395" end="44416" title="Western Ganga Dynasty" label="Western Ganga Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="44456" end="44464" title="Pallavas" label="Pallavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="44491" end="44506" title="Pandyan Kingdom" label="Pandyan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="44595" end="44604" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427885" start="44621" end="44629" title="Banavasi" label="Banavasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q579205" start="44645" end="44659" title="Uttara Kannada" label="Uttara Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="44731" end="44738" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="44752" end="44760" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="44769" end="44780" title="Rashtrakuta" label="Rashtrakuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="44854" end="44857" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707624" start="44862" end="44869" title="Hanagal" label="Hanagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="45039" end="45046" title="Mauryas" label="Mauryas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="45048" end="45059" title="Satavahanas" label="Satavahanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724621" start="45523" end="45535" title="Mayurasharma" label="Mayurasharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349733" start="45728" end="45741" title="Kakusthavarma" label="Kakusthavarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="45794" end="45807" title="Gupta Dynasty" label="Gupta Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018662" start="46090" end="46111" title="Western Ganga Dynasty" label="Western Ganga Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536427" start="46115" end="46122" title="Talakad" label="Talakad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="46330" end="46339" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q250515" start="46412" end="46426" title="Eastern Ganga Dynasty" label="Eastern Gangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="46469" end="46475" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="46627" end="46642" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallava dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="46646" end="46657" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133363" start="46731" end="46743" title="Samudragupta" label="Samudragupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q727181" start="46830" end="46835" title="Kolar, Karnataka" label="Kolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536427" start="46870" end="46877" title="Talakad" label="Talakad"/>
<link wikidata="Q216239" start="46898" end="46904" title="Kaveri" label="Kaveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q591781" start="46915" end="46930" title="Mysore district" label="Mysore district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="46964" end="46980" title="Chalukya dynasty" label="Chalukya dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="46984" end="46990" title="Badami" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="47102" end="47113" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q856691" start="47150" end="47162" title="Rashtrakuta Dynasty" label="Rashtrakutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743905" start="47166" end="47176" title="Manyakheta" label="Manyakheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="47216" end="47222" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="47390" end="47403" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41496" start="47407" end="47415" title="Tanjavur" label="Tanjavur"/>
<link wikidata="Q216239" start="47595" end="47601" title="Kaveri" label="Kaveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="47994" end="48001" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026193" start="48063" end="48079" title="Shravanabelagola" label="Shravanabelagola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767992" start="48084" end="48096" title="Kambadahalli" label="Kambadahalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="48188" end="48196" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289992" start="48209" end="48221" title="Chavundaraya" label="Chavundaraya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="48372" end="48388" title="Indian religions" label="religious topics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48392" end="48411" title="Elephant#Domestication and use" label="elephant management"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="48477" end="48483" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="48488" end="48494" title="Badami" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259171" start="48889" end="48901" title="Pulakeshin I" label="Pulakeshin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q708370" start="48975" end="48988" title="Pulakeshin II" label="Pulakeshin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q707056" start="49050" end="49061" title="Tapti River" label="Tapti River"/>
<link wikidata="Q234004" start="49066" end="49079" title="Narmada River" label="Narmada River"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="49202" end="49208" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063076" start="49386" end="49392" title="Alupas" label="Alupas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124639428" start="49410" end="49425" title="Mauryas of Puri" label="Mauryas of Puri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053762" start="49427" end="49444" title="Kosala Kingdom" label="Kingdom of Kosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="49446" end="49451" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352269" start="49453" end="49457" title="Lata (region)" label="Lata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="49483" end="49492" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="49539" end="49546" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="49885" end="49898" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="50133" end="50140" title="Pandyas" label="Pandyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="50144" end="50151" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="50153" end="50166" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="50171" end="50177" title="Chera dynasty" label="Cheras"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="50353" end="50365" title="Hiuen-Tsiang" label="Hiuen-Tsiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="50369" end="50376" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="50439" end="50446" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212732" start="50455" end="50465" title="Khosrau II" label="Khosrau II"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="50523" end="50531" title="Pallavas" label="Pallavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537058" start="50587" end="50604" title="Narasimhavarman I" label="Narasimhavarman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="50667" end="50691" title="Vatapi" label="capital of Pulakeshin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477720" start="50747" end="50762" title="Vikramaditya II" label="Vikramaditya II"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="50789" end="50800" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="51026" end="51033" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572901" start="51220" end="51228" title="Kalabhra" label="Kalabhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367138" start="51241" end="51256" title="Kappe Arabhatta" label="Kappe Arabhatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741320" start="51603" end="51613" title="Malaprabha" label="Malaprabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q817250" start="51789" end="51799" title="Pattadakal" label="Pattadakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="51803" end="51809" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="51810" end="51829" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="51851" end="51857" title="Badami" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q283287" start="51874" end="51882" title="Mahakuta group of temples" label="Mahakuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q404851" start="51927" end="51933" title="Aihole" label="Aihole"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="52002" end="52008" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q167166" start="52202" end="52207" title="Vengi" label="Vengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="52327" end="52335" title="Pallavas" label="Pallavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537043" start="52342" end="52358" title="Mahendravarman I" label="Mahendravarman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537058" start="52391" end="52408" title="Narasimhavarman I" label="Narasimhavarman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257" start="52580" end="52590" title="Satavahana" label="Satavahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="52674" end="52680" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765100" start="52741" end="52754" title="Vishnukundina" label="Vishnukundina"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="52774" end="52780" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537060" start="52814" end="52825" title="Simhavishnu" label="Simhavishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q216239" start="52928" end="52940" title="Kaveri River" label="Kaveri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="52976" end="52987" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="52993" end="53004" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q171309" start="53023" end="53045" title="Dravidian architecture" label="Dravidian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q707745" start="53088" end="53106" title="Narasimhavarman II" label="Narasimhavarman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144279" start="53117" end="53129" title="Shore Temple" label="Shore Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="53141" end="53167" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q187172" start="53191" end="53202" title="Bodhidharma" label="Bodhidharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="53223" end="53226" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="53237" end="53245" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="53261" end="53267" title="prince" label="prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="53347" end="53359" title="South Indian" label="South Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="53413" end="53427" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q167166" start="53447" end="53452" title="Vengi" label="Vengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="53576" end="53581" title="Chola" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q466581" start="53751" end="53759" title="Hoysalas" label="Hoysalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779044" start="53768" end="53775" title="Yadu" label="Yadavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003496" start="53865" end="53870" title="Eluru" label="Eluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q15404" start="53878" end="53900" title="West Godavari district" label="West Godavari district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639492" start="53941" end="53951" title="Rajamundry" label="Rajamundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="54001" end="54010" title="Chalukyas" label="Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q590751" start="54022" end="54028" title="Badami" label="Badami"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="54115" end="54121" title="Cholas" label="Cholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624218" start="54126" end="54143" title="Western Chalukyas" label="Western Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q418708" start="54352" end="54358" title="Telugu people" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="54474" end="54480" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="54582" end="54589" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="54709" end="54718" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="54802" end="54814" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="54861" end="54871" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="54892" end="54906" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="richest empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424358" start="54934" end="54956" title="Meenakshi Amman Temple" label="Meenakshi Amman Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="54960" end="54967" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990060" start="54972" end="54990" title="Nellaiappar Temple" label="Nellaiappar Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q213248" start="54994" end="55005" title="Tirunelveli" label="Tirunelveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q818666" start="55425" end="55430" title="Berar sultanate" label="Berar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771774" start="55447" end="55464" title="Amravati district" label="Amravati district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="55468" end="55479" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764262" start="55548" end="55558" title="Dantidurga" label="Dantidurga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743905" start="55687" end="55697" title="Manyakheta" label="Manyakheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641873" start="55731" end="55750" title="Kalaburagi district" label="Kalaburagi district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233094" start="56313" end="56317" title="doab" label="doab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="56328" end="56340" title="Ganges River" label="Ganges River"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="56345" end="56357" title="Yamuna" label="Jamuna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269821" start="56377" end="56395" title="Dhruva Dharavarsha" label="Dhruva Dharavarsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488714" start="56424" end="56433" title="digvijaya (conquest)" label="digvijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634713" start="56504" end="56515" title="Govinda III" label="Govinda III"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="56574" end="56586" title="Pala Dynasty" label="Pala Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="56590" end="56596" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324" start="56609" end="56618" title="Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty" label="Pratihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="56670" end="56677" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843245" start="56745" end="56764" title="tripartite struggle" label="tripartite struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="56795" end="56810" title="Gangetic plains" label="Gangetic plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="56885" end="56904" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q236221" start="56909" end="56916" title="Pandava" label="Pandava"/>
<link wikidata="Q185790" start="56917" end="56923" title="Arjuna" label="Arjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="56942" end="56953" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397346" start="57088" end="57101" title="sacred waters" label="sacred waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630862" start="57123" end="57137" title="Amoghavarsha I" label="Amoghavarsha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="57590" end="57596" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12415680" start="57610" end="57619" title="Indra III" label="Indra III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536697" start="57737" end="57748" title="Krishna III" label="Krishna III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135130" start="57884" end="57892" title="Paramara dynasty" label="Paramara"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="57896" end="57902" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q222267" start="58290" end="58302" title="Cape Comorin" label="Cape Comorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="58349" end="58356" title="Banaras" label="Banaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="58554" end="58560" title="Ellora Caves" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="58754" end="58781" title="UNESCO World Heritage Sites" label="UNESCO World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624218" start="58842" end="58859" title="Western Chalukya Empire" label="Western Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743905" start="59024" end="59034" title="Manyakheta" label="Manyakheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q712521" start="59102" end="59114" title="Basavakalyan" label="Basavakalyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="59207" end="59223" title="Badami Chalukyas" label="Badami Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600532" start="59464" end="59479" title="Vikramaditya VI" label="Vikramaditya VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676089" start="59530" end="59540" title="Tailapa II" label="Tailapa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83108" start="59583" end="59599" title="Bijapur district, Karnataka" label="Bijapur district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371249" start="59685" end="59693" title="Karka II" label="Karka II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135130" start="59772" end="59780" title="Paramara dynasty" label="Paramara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707624" start="59892" end="59899" title="Hanagal" label="Hanagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681435" start="59963" end="59972" title="Ancient Tamil country" label="Tamilakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q191314" start="60009" end="60023" title="Godavari River" label="Godavari River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193499" start="60024" end="60037" title="Krishna River" label="Krishna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q167166" start="60053" end="60058" title="Vengi" label="Vengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559999" start="60060" end="60072" title="Someshvara I" label="Someshvara I"/>
<link wikidata="Q949183" start="60172" end="60189" title="Tungabhadra River" label="Tungabhadra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="60309" end="60316" title="Kalinga (historical kingdom)" label="Kaḷinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600532" start="60584" end="60599" title="Vikramaditya VI" label="Vikramaditya VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790" start="61048" end="61073" title="Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri" label="Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086556" start="61079" end="61095" title="Kakatiya dynasty" label="Kakatiya dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q234004" start="61201" end="61214" title="Narmada River" label="Narmada River"/>
<link wikidata="Q216239" start="61235" end="61247" title="Kaveri River" label="Kaveri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561001" start="61350" end="61357" title="Bilhana" label="Bilhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28062492" start="61880" end="61889" title="Kalachuris of Mahishmati" label="Kalachuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907223" start="62062" end="62072" title="Bijjala II" label="Bijjala II"/>
<link wikidata="Q712521" start="62340" end="62347" title="Basavakalyana" label="Kalyani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="62718" end="62725" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q949183" start="62839" end="62850" title="Tungabhadra" label="Tungabhadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q234004" start="62858" end="62865" title="Narmada River" label="Narmada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="62896" end="62907" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="62915" end="62924" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="62938" end="62952" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q88667786" start="62996" end="63006" title="Daulatabad, Maharashtra" label="Daulatabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624218" start="63074" end="63091" title="Western Chalukyas" label="Western Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265028" start="63240" end="63247" title="Marathi people" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="63305" end="63316" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086556" start="63391" end="63407" title="Kakatiya dynasty" label="Kakatiya dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="63446" end="63460" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="63465" end="63474" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q418708" start="63531" end="63537" title="Telugu people" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="63751" end="63765" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="63767" end="63776" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329944" start="63794" end="63799" title="Chedi Kingdom" label="Chedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="63920" end="63929" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q28062492" start="64118" end="64148" title="Kalachuris of Mahishmati" label="Kalachuri family of Mahishmati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="64182" end="64193" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175" start="64421" end="64442" title="Kalachuris of Kalyani" label="Kalachuris of Kalyani"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="64518" end="64524" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156727" start="64563" end="64578" title="North Karnataka" label="North Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="64592" end="64603" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="64781" end="64795" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="64890" end="64899" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="64927" end="64935" title="Chalukya" label="Chalukya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395011" start="65032" end="65041" title="Chalukyas" label="Chalukyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q858640" start="65208" end="65216" title="Lingayat" label="Lingayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q858640" start="65220" end="65230" title="Virashaiva" label="Virashaiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="65304" end="65311" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907990" start="65415" end="65423" title="Vachanas" label="Vachanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883128" start="65701" end="65722" title="Kalachuris of Tripuri" label="Kalachuris of Tripuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q760603" start="66017" end="66022" title="Belur, Karnataka" label="Belur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536427" start="66229" end="66236" title="Talakad" label="Talakad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013556" start="66271" end="66279" title="Halebidu" label="Halebidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536896" start="66343" end="66349" title="Malnad" label="Malnad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556317" start="66913" end="66919" title="Vesara" label="Vesara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536222" start="67067" end="67086" title="Chennakeshava Temple, Belur" label="Chennakesava Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517561" start="67104" end="67123" title="Hoysaleswara temple" label="Hoysaleswara temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q731884" start="67216" end="67230" title="Vishnuvardhana" label="Vishnuvardhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318607" start="67259" end="67275" title="Veera Ballala II" label="Veera Ballala II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304639" start="67757" end="67766" title="Srirangam" label="Srirangam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="67995" end="68001" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="68018" end="68029" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632884" start="68130" end="68147" title="Veera Ballala III" label="Veera Ballala III"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="68171" end="68178" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726068" start="68298" end="68308" title="Harihara I" label="Harihara I"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="68325" end="68344" title="Vijayanagara Empire" label="Vijayanagara Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611788" start="68461" end="68473" title="Vijayanagara" label="Vijayanagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128757" start="68535" end="68549" title="Rajaraja Chola" label="Rajaraja Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q211483" start="68562" end="68576" title="Rajendra Chola" label="Rajendra Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="68632" end="68644" title="Chola Empire" label="Chola Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="68665" end="68671" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="68788" end="68799" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="68817" end="68826" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q211483" start="68828" end="68842" title="Rajendra Chola" label="Rajendra Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="68909" end="68916" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="68921" end="68928" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="68934" end="68961" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="68963" end="68974" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="68976" end="68983" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="68985" end="68989" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="68991" end="68997" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734077" start="69091" end="69099" title="Mahipala" label="Mahipala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493439" start="69192" end="69214" title="Gangaikonda Cholapuram" label="Gangaikonda Cholapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q916943" start="69270" end="69290" title="Brihadeeswarar Temple" label="Brihadeshwara Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q41496" start="69294" end="69303" title="Thanjavur" label="Thanjavur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="69346" end="69358" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="69407" end="69427" title="UNESCO Heritage Site" label="UNESCO Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q695229" start="69440" end="69466" title="Great Living Chola Temples" label="Great Living Chola Temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966341" start="69497" end="69515" title="Chidambaram Temple" label="Chidambaram Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q155332" start="69551" end="69562" title="Chidambaram" label="Chidambaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="69580" end="69596" title="History of India" label="History of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192933" start="69599" end="69618" title="History of Hinduism" label="History of Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638978" start="69621" end="69638" title="History of Bengal" label="History of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775300" start="69641" end="69657" title="History of Bihar" label="History of Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210326" start="69660" end="69699" title="Political history of medieval Karnataka" label="Political history of medieval Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q455430" start="69862" end="69883" title="Alexander Cunningham" label="Cunningham, Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q868011" start="70077" end="70083" title="Weilüe" label="Weilüe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294595" wikidata="Q6030703" url="?curid=294595" title="Information Council for the Environment">
<text>The Information Council for the Environment (ICE) was an American climate change denial organization created by the National Coal Association, the Western Fuels Association, and Edison Electrical Institute. 

==History==
In the 1980s, the scientific consensus on global warming had begun to form: the planet was warming as a result of humans burning fossil fuels, and this would be a problem for humanity. By the early 1990s, public awareness of the issue had grown, and the coal industry&#x27;s Western Fuels Association sought to present a counterargument that increased carbon emissions would be beneficial, rather than harmful, to the environment. To do this, they created the Greening Earth Society and ICE. To maximize the impact of their campaigns, the Western Fuels Association carried out extensive market research. Indeed, the acronym ICE was chosen before the organization was named. Other potential names included: &quot;Informed Citizens for the Environment&quot;, &quot;Intelligent Concern for the Environment&quot;, and &quot;Informed Choices for the Environment.&quot; Focus groups showed that American citizens trusted scientists more than politicians or activists, so the technical-sounding name &quot;Information Council for the Environment&quot; was selected.

In an initiative largely led by Western Fuel&#x27;s CEO, Fred Palmer, ICE spent $510,000 to run test campaigns from February through August 1991. The organization had several goals that were internally documented; when its top ten were enumerated, number one was to &quot;reposition global warming as theory (not fact).&quot; National Coal Association president Richard L. Lawson asked members to contribute to the ICE campaign. He stated in a memo, &quot;our industry cannot sit on the sidelines in this debate.&quot; Four of the 15 largest coal producers (ARCO Coal, Peabody Holding Company, Island Creek Coal Company, and Amax Coal Industries) donated at least $15,000 to the campaigns. Patrick Michaels, Robert Balling and Sherwood B. Idso all lent their names in 1991 to its scientific advisory panel. Its publicity plan called for placing these three scientists, along with fellow climate change denier S. Fred Singer, in broadcast appearances, op-ed pages, and newspaper interviews. 

Bracy, Williams &amp; Co., a Washington D.C.–based PR firm, did the advance publicity work for the interviews. Another company was contracted to conduct opinion polls, which identified &quot;older, less-educated males from larger households who are not typically active information-seekers&quot; and &quot;younger, lower-income women&quot; as &quot;good targets for radio advertisements&quot; that would &quot;directly attack the proponents of global warming [...] through comparison of global warming to historical or mythical instances of gloom and doom.&quot;

Print and radio advertisements flooded the cities selected for the campaigns. One print advertisement prepared for the ICE campaign showed a sailing ship about to drop off the edge of a flat world into the jaws of a waiting dragon. The headline read: &quot;Some say the earth is warming. Some also said the earth was flat.&quot; Another featured a cowering chicken under the headline &quot;Who Told You the Earth Was Warming . . . Chicken Little?&quot; Another ad was targeted at Minneapolis readers and asked, &quot;If the earth is getting warmer, why is Minneapolis getting colder?&quot; The statements made in the advertisements were false or exaggerated. For example, an officer of the American Meteorological Society noted that Minneapolis had actually warmed 1.0 to 1.5 degrees in the twentieth century. Many of the advertisements had a box in which people could write their contact details to receive more information, from which Bracy, Williams constructed a mailing list of sympathetic civilians.

The ICE campaign collapsed after internal memoranda were leaked by environmental activists to the press. An embarrassed Michaels hastily disassociated himself, citing what he called its &quot;blatant dishonesty.&quot; Following the collapse, he, Balling, Idso, and Singer continued to express their denial about the scientific facts of global warming. They joined organizations similar to ICE and were prominent in public discussions of climate change despite their positions being widely out of sync with the rest of the scientific community. Industry representatives continued to push the narrative that carbon dioxide emissions were good, with Palmer declaring that fossil fuels were a &quot;gift from God&quot;. He stated at a coal industry conference in 1996 that government action to inhibit global warming was the first step in a slippery slope towards socialism, and continued his lobbying and PR work with the re-launch of the Greening Earth Society in 1998.

==See also==
*Politicization of science

==References==
== External links ==
*The Coal Industry&#x27;s &quot;ICE&quot; Campaign (1999)
* Archive of ICE memos


== Further reading ==
* Naomi Oreskes: &quot;My facts are better than your facts&quot;, in: Peter Howlett, Mary S. Morgan (Hrsg.), &quot;How Well Do Facts Travel? The Dissemination of Reliable Knowledge&quot;. Cambridge University Press 2011, 136-166, .
* Riley E. Dunlap, Aaron M. McCright: &quot;Organized Climate Change Denial.&quot; In: John S. Dryzek, Richard B. Norgaard, David Schlosberg (Eds.): &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society.&quot; Oxford University Press, 2011, pp 144–160.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6030703" start="4" end="43" title="Information Council for the Environment" label="Information Council for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030703" start="45" end="48" title="Information Council for the Environment" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="66" end="87" title="climate change denial" label="climate change denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974348" start="116" end="141" title="National Coal Association" label="National Coal Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987854" start="147" end="172" title="Western Fuels Association" label="Western Fuels Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338374" start="178" end="205" title="Edison Electrical Institute" label="Edison Electrical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115646" start="239" end="259" title="scientific consensus on climate change" label="scientific consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="263" end="277" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="350" end="361" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987854" start="496" end="521" title="Western Fuels Association" label="Western Fuels Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604186" start="681" end="703" title="Greening Earth Society" label="Greening Earth Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1338" end="1349" title="Fred Palmer" label="Fred Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974348" start="1607" end="1632" title="National Coal Association" label="National Coal Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327195" start="1643" end="1660" title="Richard L. Lawson" label="Richard L. Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206017" start="1971" end="1987" title="Patrick Michaels" label="Patrick Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341840" start="1989" end="2003" title="Robert Balling" label="Robert Balling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278479" start="2008" end="2024" title="Sherwood B. Idso" label="Sherwood B. Idso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="2168" end="2189" title="climate change denier" label="climate change denier"/>
<link wikidata="Q366340" start="2190" end="2204" title="S. Fred Singer" label="S. Fred Singer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2273" end="2298" title="Bracy, Williams &amp;amp; Co." label="Bracy, Williams &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2302" end="2317" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q465726" start="3527" end="3558" title="American Meteorological Society" label="American Meteorological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q876455" start="4681" end="4695" title="slippery slope" label="slippery slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061470" start="4827" end="4852" title="Politicization of science" label="Politicization of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q205618" start="4997" end="5010" title="Naomi Oreskes" label="Naomi Oreskes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294596" wikidata="Q851029" url="?curid=294596" title="Aleșd">
<text>Aleșd (; , ) is a town in Bihor County, western Romania. It administers three villages: Pădurea Neagră (&quot;Feketeerdő&quot;), Peștiș (&quot;Sólyomkőpestes&quot;), and Tinăud (&quot;Tinód&quot;).

==Geography==
The town is located in the east of the county, near the border with Cluj County, at the foot of the Apuseni Mountains. It lies on the banks of the river Crișul Repede, where the Vadu Crișului – Aștileu Canal connects with the river. The river Izvor flows into the Crișul Repede near Aleșd; the river Secătura flows into the Izvor in Peștiș village.

Aleșd is located on the CFR main railway line between Oradea and Bucharest. Consequently, it is served by frequent rapid and intercity (IC) trains from Cluj-Napoca, Bucharest, Arad, and Timișoara. Aleșd is located in the eastern part of Bihor County, on national road DN1 (European route E60), at a distance of from Oradea and from Cluj-Napoca.

==History==
At first Aleșd was on the shores of the Crișul Repede River (meaning ”The fast river”), in its floodplain. In the first half of the 18th century, the population moved to the terrace on the right bank of the Crișul Repede, in the place that it occupies today. The move was made to escape the frequent floods.

After the break-up of Austria-Hungary at the end of World War I, the Hungarian town passed under Romanian administration during the Hungarian–Romanian War of 1919, and became part of the Kingdom of Romania in April 1920. During the interwar period, the town became the headquarters of plasa Aleșd of Bihor County. As a result of the Second Vienna Award, it was returned to Hungary in August 1940, staying under Hungarian administration until October 1944, towards the end of World War II. Following the administrative reform of 1950, it became the seat of Aleșd raion within Bihor Region (renamed Oradea Region in 1952 and Crișana Region in 1960). In 1968, the old territorial division into &quot;județe&quot; was reinstituted, and the Aleșd reverted to being part of Bihor County, and was declared a town that year.

==Population==
At the census from 2011, the town had a population of 9,619, made up of Romanians (63.9%), Hungarians (16.04%), Roma (12.73%), Slovaks (6.59%), and others (0.42%). According to the 2021 census, Aleșd has a population of 9,662; of those, 58.86% were Romanians, 15,63% Roma, 11.44% Hungarians, 6.06% Slovaks, and 7.8% of unknown ethnicity.

==Administration==
The town of Aleșd is run by a mayor and a local council composed of 17 councilors. The mayor, Ioan Coloman Todoca, from the National Liberal Party, was elected in 2016.

==Notable residents==
*Zsolt Bodoni, painter who lives in Oradea and was born in 1975 in Aleșd.
*Miklós Radnóti (1909–1944), poet and teacher who served his labor draft during World War II in Aleșd.
*Ilie Bolojan, liberal politician, the current acting President of Romania.

==Gallery==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q851029" start="0" end="5" title="Aleșd" label="Aleșd"/>
<link wikidata="Q179588" start="26" end="38" title="Bihor County" label="Bihor County"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="48" end="55" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q182624" start="281" end="292" title="Cluj County" label="Cluj County"/>
<link wikidata="Q285425" start="313" end="330" title="Apuseni Mountains" label="Apuseni Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q581015" start="366" end="379" title="Crișul Repede" label="Crișul Repede"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031106" start="391" end="420" title="Vadu Crișului – Aștileu Canal" label="Vadu Crișului – Aștileu Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13549689" start="456" end="461" title="Izvor (Crișul Repede)" label="Izvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13549691" start="513" end="521" title="Secătura" label="Secătura"/>
<link wikidata="Q795231" start="587" end="590" title="Căile Ferate Române" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413411" start="591" end="608" title="Căile Ferate Române Line 300" label="main railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="617" end="623" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="628" end="637" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="715" end="726" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="728" end="737" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q173591" start="739" end="743" title="Arad, Romania" label="Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="749" end="758" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858152" start="817" end="830" title="Roads in Romania" label="national road"/>
<link wikidata="Q898693" start="831" end="834" title="DN1" label="DN1"/>
<link wikidata="Q168020" start="836" end="854" title="European route E60" label="European route E60"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1252" end="1267" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1282" end="1293" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q252298" start="1362" end="1384" title="Hungarian–Romanian War" label="Hungarian–Romanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="1417" end="1435" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="1462" end="1477" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763194" start="1515" end="1520" title="Plasă" label="plasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="1563" end="1582" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="1603" end="1610" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1705" end="1717" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41720083" start="1733" end="1754" title="Administrative divisions of the Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="administrative reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688" start="1792" end="1797" title="raion" label="raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907120" start="1805" end="1817" title="Bihor Region" label="Bihor Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776764" start="1927" end="1932" title="județ" label="județ"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181933" start="2070" end="2086" title="2011 Romanian census" label="census from 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="2135" end="2144" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="2154" end="2164" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="2175" end="2179" title="Romani people in Romania" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989388" start="2190" end="2197" title="Slovaks of Romania" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="2244" end="2255" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="2545" end="2567" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074803" start="2614" end="2626" title="Zsolt Bodoni" label="Zsolt Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q442801" start="2688" end="2702" title="Miklós Radnóti" label="Miklós Radnóti"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2767" end="2779" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538164" start="2791" end="2803" title="Ilie Bolojan" label="Ilie Bolojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="2844" end="2864" title="President of Romania" label="President of Romania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294604" wikidata="Q1528300" url="?curid=294604" title="Myrtle Beach International Airport">
<text>Myrtle Beach International Airport is a county-owned public-use airport. It is located southwest of the central business district of Myrtle Beach, in Horry County, South Carolina, United States. It was formerly known as Myrtle Beach Jetport (1974–1989), and it is located on the site of the former [[Myrtle Beach Air Force Base]], which also includes The Market Common shopping complex.

The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems for 2017–2021 categorized it as a small-hub primary commercial service facility. Myrtle Beach has the second-busiest airport in South Carolina behind Charleston, with over 2.4 million passengers (arriving and departing) in 2018.

The airport&#x27;s official website since 2006 is flymyrtlebeach.com, which was previously an unofficial website owned by an airport employee. In July 2012 the airport launched a redesigned website with a new logo.
==History==
An airport was started on property from a former army base which the federal government transferred in 1948 through the Surplus Property Act. The city of Myrtle Beach decided not to use the property for an airport but funds from the property still had to be used for an airport. From 1958 to 1976 these funds went to Horry County Jetport in Crescent Beach, which moved to the northeast part of the base after an agreement for joint civilian and military use of the base. In 1977, the City of Myrtle Beach annexed the area of Myrtle Beach Airport. Until 1993, both MYR and Myrtle Beach AFB jointly used the main runway; this limited civil operations to 30 landings per day and led to a local business movement to build an entirely new airport.

In the 1980s, the airport was served by Piedmont Airlines mainline aircraft (later acquired by USAir) and by Delta and Eastern commuter aircraft.

In 1993, the Air Force closed the base as a result of BRAC 1991. The runway and other portions of the former military flight line were then turned over to the Horry County Department of Airports.

American Eagle became a major carrier at MYR in the early 1990s, operating multiple daily ATR 72 flights to the American Airlines hub at Raleigh–Durham International Airport. By late 1994 this route accounted for as much as 12% of the airport&#x27;s passenger traffic; however, American abruptly ended its American Eagle hub at Raleigh–Durham in December 1994, cancelling all service to MYR and other secondary airports in the region. American returned to Myrtle Beach in 2010 with a seasonal service to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.

On April 1, 1996, Myrtle Beach Airport became an international airport. A new international terminal had its grand opening August 21 of that year, and a new logo was unveiled &quot;to reflect the architectural design of the airport&#x27;s terminal and the influence of the beach by showing a pained window and a palm tree in blues and greens&quot;.

The airport served as the main hub for Hooters Air from 2003 until 2006. The airport authority offered discounted hangar space and other undisclosed benefits to Hooters Air operator Pace Airlines in an effort to relocate its operating base from Smith Reynolds Airport in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. However, Pace decided to keep its base (also used for charter operations) in Winston-Salem.

In 2006, AirTran Airways discontinued its service to Atlanta; it was the fourth-largest airline serving Myrtle Beach International at the time.

Direct Air connected a number of airports to Myrtle Beach from 2007 until 2012, when it abruptly filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and ceased operations. The failure of Direct Air caused a slump in passenger traffic at Myrtle Beach, which declined 16% in 2012 but rebounded in 2013. WestJet began service to Toronto in summer 2013 with a revenue guarantee from Horry County, but its passenger numbers fell short of expectations, forcing the county to pay WestJet around $570,000.

The airport was a designated launch abort site for the Space Shuttle, but was never used.

On July 26, 2022, it was announced that Indianapolis-based Leadership In Flight Training (LIFT) Academy would start hosting flight training operations. Leadership In Flight Training (LIFT) Academy instructs aeronaut hopefuls on how to pass and exceed the expectations set by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for commercial pilots, training up to 300 students each year. Negotiations are currently underway between LIFT, MYR, the City of Myrtle Beach about a suitable long-term facility for the flight training program. LIFT plans to begin operations in Myrtle Beach as early as October 2022, sending flight training students from its Indianapolis branch to Myrtle Beach.

===Renovations===
In 2008 two renovations took place in the terminal building. In July 2010, the FAA approved a $4.50 passenger facilities charge on all airline tickets to and from MYR in order to defray part of the cost for the terminal upgrade.

On March 16, 2021, it was reported that Myrtle Beach International Airport was working on a 20-year plan that would more than double the number of gates at the airport, however details remain to be worked out. There are currently two proposals for terminal expansions, which both would more than double the 11 gates the airport has now. One of the plans call for 23 gates, and the other calls for 25 and would be built on the east side of the airport. The plan has three possible layouts for new parking with one being a parking garage on the east side. One of the other major addition includes more international flights and there have been talks with two different international airlines. Another possible addition would be providing space for a major shipping distribution center like FedEx or Amazon. The 20-year plan has been finalized and may be presented before the Federal Aviation Administration by the end of 2021.

However, on March 18, 2021, airport officials clarified the airport&#x27;s immediate future plans stating a presentation showing the expansion of terminals as well as parking lots was a long-term concept, but no expansions will be implemented in the near future. These documents show the early stages of a legally required 20-year master plan, that began in 2018 but was put on pause due to the pandemic.

On April 8, 2022, it was announced that the airport planned a $35 million expansion that will be primarily funded by the federal Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act that was signed into law by President Joe Biden. The proposed renovations would include adding 4-5 new gates onto the end of the &quot;A&quot; gate that is located on the south side of the building, more fuel storage that will add 100,000 gallons in fuel storage capacity in case of future supply crunches, security checkpoint that will alleviate the pressure created by the current TSA bottleneck, and add more space for restaurants and retail.

On April 30, 2023, a planned terminal expansion project adding six new gates to terminal A was announced. The proposed expansion would bring the total number of gates to 18 at the airport and is part of an effort to keep up with growth, as well as the travelers, including the newly completed parking canopy over the rental car lot. The South Carolina Aeronautics Commission contributed $8 million to the project. An airport official stated that the projects total cost is still being finalized but are hoping that construction will begin in early 2024 with the project to be completed in 2025.

==Facilities==
The airport covers at an elevation of . Its single runway, 18/36, is long and wide. The airport entrance is on Harrelson Boulevard.

The Terminal Building is named for Myrtle Beach&#x27;s first mayor, Dr. Wilford Leroy Harrelson, who served from March 1938 to December 1939 and again from January 1942 to December 1943. The city bought land for the airport during his first term, and the terminal was named in his honor.

MYR has a helipad primarily used by charter tour companies at the base of runway 36.

In the year ending April 30, 2023, the airport had 149,968 aircraft operations, average 411 per day: 55% air taxi, 22% airline, 18% general aviation, and 5% military. 54 aircraft were then based at the airport: 42 single-engine, 5 multi-engine, 1 jet, and 6 helicopter.

The airport had an air cargo building at the entrance of the airport; the building has closed and is mainly used by airport maintenance for storage.

==Airlines and destinations==

===Passenger===

===Cargo===
==Statistics==

===Top destinations===
===Airline market share===
===Annual traffic===
==Accidents and incidents==
*On July 23, 1950, a USAF Curtiss C-46 Commando crashed 1.9 miles west of Myrtle Beach AFB when the left aileron detached after takeoff and lost control at an altitude of about 1000–2000 feet. Both wings failed and the aircraft crashed. All four crew and 35 occupants were killed.

== See also ==

* List of airports in South Carolina

==References==
==External links==
* Myrtle Beach International (MYR) at the South Carolina Aeronautics Commission
* Myrtle Beach International Airport page at Yelp
* Myrtle Beach Airport Shuttle page at Transportation
* Map of the airport from OpenStreetMap
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1528300" start="0" end="34" title="Myrtle Beach International Airport" label="Myrtle Beach International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q839805" start="133" end="145" title="Myrtle Beach, South Carolina" label="Myrtle Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q502288" start="150" end="162" title="Horry County, South Carolina" label="Horry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528300" start="220" end="240" title="Myrtle Beach International Airport" label="Myrtle Beach Jetport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528300" start="298" end="329" title="Myrtle Beach International Airport" label="[[Myrtle Beach Air Force Base]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750376" start="351" end="368" title="The Market Common" label="The Market Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="392" end="423" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121040" start="430" end="473" title="National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems" label="National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308813" start="488" end="499" title="FAA airport categories" label="categorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163183" start="624" end="634" title="Charleston International Airport" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646536" start="1051" end="1071" title="Surplus Property Act" label="Surplus Property Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690579" start="1272" end="1286" title="North Myrtle Beach" label="Crescent Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q839805" start="1423" end="1435" title="Myrtle Beach, South Carolina" label="Myrtle Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q15840489" start="1715" end="1732" title="Piedmont Airlines" label="Piedmont Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q208046" start="1770" end="1775" title="USAir" label="USAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="1784" end="1789" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="1794" end="1801" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="1876" end="1885" title="Base Realignment and Closure" label="BRAC 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q371306" start="2019" end="2033" title="American Eagle Airlines" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="2109" end="2115" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="2131" end="2148" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192962" start="2156" end="2192" title="Raleigh–Durham International Airport" label="Raleigh–Durham International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q459096" start="2523" end="2562" title="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport" label="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615956" start="2954" end="2965" title="Hooters Air" label="Hooters Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121897" start="3097" end="3110" title="Pace Airlines" label="Pace Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545285" start="3160" end="3182" title="Smith Reynolds Airport" label="Smith Reynolds Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="3186" end="3215" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q406695" start="3319" end="3334" title="AirTran Airways" label="AirTran Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280257" start="3455" end="3465" title="Direct Air" label="Direct Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059770" start="3735" end="3742" title="WestJet" label="WestJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640254" start="3951" end="3979" title="List of Space Shuttle landing sites" label="designated launch abort site"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="3988" end="4001" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="4303" end="4334" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="4802" end="4805" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="5741" end="5746" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="5750" end="5756" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="6414" end="6452" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="6491" end="6500" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663905" start="7622" end="7641" title="Harrelson Boulevard" label="Harrelson Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133228" start="8124" end="8132" title="air taxi" label="air taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="8151" end="8167" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="8277" end="8287" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569648" start="8309" end="8318" title="air cargo" label="air cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="8636" end="8640" title="USAF" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145708" start="8641" end="8662" title="Curtiss C-46 Commando" label="Curtiss C-46 Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432625" start="8915" end="8949" title="List of airports in South Carolina" label="List of airports in South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299611" start="9110" end="9114" title="Yelp" label="Yelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="9154" end="9168" title="Transportation" label="Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q936" start="9195" end="9208" title="OpenStreetMap" label="OpenStreetMap"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294608" wikidata="Q169247" url="?curid=294608" title="Doboj">
<text>Doboj (, ) is a city in Republika Srpska, Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is situated on the banks of the Bosna river, in the northern region of Republika Srpska. As of 2013, it has a population of 71,441 inhabitants.

Doboj is the largest national railway junction and the operational base of the Railways Corporation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is one of the oldest cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, aside from Banja Luka, the most important urban center in northern Republika Srpska.

==Geography==
Prior to the War in Bosnia and Herzegovina the municipality of the same name had a larger surface area. The larger part of the pre-war municipality is part of Republika Srpska, including the city itself. The southern rural areas are part of the Zenica-Doboj Canton of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the eastern rural part of the municipality is part of the Tuzla Canton, also in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The parts of the pre-war Doboj Municipality that are in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina are the municipalities of Doboj South (Doboj Jug), Doboj East (Doboj Istok) and the Municipality of Usora. The northern suburbs of Doboj extend into the Pannonian plains, and effectively mark the southern tip of this great Central European plain. The southern (Doboj South) and eastern suburbs (Doboj East) are spread on the gentle hills which extend to the larger Central Bosnian mountain areas (Mt. Ozren in the southeast, Mt. Krnjin in the west).

===Climate===
==History==
===Ancient times===

Doboj has been continuously inhabited ever since the Neolithic times. Fragments of pottery and decorative art were found on several localities, with the most known site in Makljenovac, south from the city proper, at the confluence of the Usora and Bosna rivers. Archeological findings from the paleolithic era were found in a cave in the Vila suburb.

The Illyrian tribe of Daesitates settled in this region as early as the twelfth century BC. Daesitates were one of the largest and most important Illyrian tribes residing at the territory of modern-day Bosnia and Herzegovina, sharing their northern borders with Breuci, another important tribe. Daesitates and Breuci started the Great Illyrian Revolt, or in Roman sources, the widespread rebellion known as Bellum Batonianum (6–9 AD). After the bloody rebellion was subdued, Roman legions permanently settled in the area and built a large military camp (Castrum) and a civilian settlement (Canabea) in Makljenovac. These structures were most likely built in the early Flavian dynasty era, during Vespasian&#x27;s rule.

The military camp was large, in the shape of a near perfect rectangle with large towers at each corner and the main gate in the middle of the central wall, and served as the most important defense on the old Roman road from Brod to Sarajevo, demarcating the very borders of the Roman provinces of Dalmatia and Pannonia. It served its role for several centuries with the evidence of Belgian and Spanish cohorts stationed there in the second and third century AD. Canabea contained Roman settlers, with evidence of a large bathhouse with a hypocaust (central heating) and a concubine house for soldiers stationed at the nearby Castrum. A large Villa Rustica was located in the modern-day suburb of Doboj, appropriately named Vila. Very fine pieces of religious and practical artefacts were found at these sites, including an altar dedicated to Jupiter, figurines of Mars, and fragments of African made Terra sigillata pottery. When South Slavic tribes migrated into this area in the sixth and seventh century AD, they had settled initially on the ruins of the previous Roman settlement and lived there continuously until the early thirteenth century at which point they used stones and building material from the old Roman Castrum in order to build the stone foundation of the Gradina fortress, several kilometers north, in the modern-day old town of Doboj. Nowadays only the walls of the former camp and civilian settlement are still open to visitors.

===Middle Ages===

The first official mention of the city itself is from 1415, in a charter issued by Dubrovnik to the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund, although there are numerous artefacts and objects that have been found (kept in the National Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina in Sarajevo and the Regional Museum in Doboj), which confirm that the area had been inhabited ever since the early Stone Age, and that the Roman Empire had an army camp (&quot;Castrum&quot;) and a settlement (&quot;Canabea&quot;) in the vicinity of the town dating from the first century AD. Following the arrival of the Slavs in the sixth century it became a part of the region/Usora banate (in medieval documents sometimes collectively mentioned with the nearby province of Soli, hence, Usora and Soli).

The Doboj fortress, a royal Kotromanić fortress, was first built in the early thirteenth century and then expanded in the early fifteenth century (1415). It was expanded again during Ottoman rule in 1490. This newer stone foundation of the fortress was built on previous layers of an older foundation (dating back to the ninth or tenth century) made of wood, mud and clay (Motte-and-bailey type). It was a very important obstacle for invaders coming from the north, Hungarians, and later on, Austrians and Germans. It was built in the Gotho-Roman style with Gothic towers and Romanesque windows. The area saw numerous battles in medieval times and the fortress often changed hands between Bosnian and Hungarian armies. Doboj was the site of a particularly major battle between the Hungarians and a Bosnian-Turkish coalition in early August 1415 in which the Hungarians were heavily defeated on the field where the modern city of Doboj lies today (especially around the Makljenovac and Usora areas). As an important border fortress between the Bosnian Kingdom and Hungary it was also frequently attacked, officially recorded as 18 times, in the Austro-Ottoman Wars, and fell to the Austro-Hungarians in 1878.

===World War I and World War II===

During World War I, Doboj was the site of the largest Austro-Hungarian concentration camp. According to the official figures, it held in total 45,791 people between 27 December 1915 and 5 July 1917, of which:

* 16,673 men from Bosnia and Herzegovina
* 16,996 women and children from Bosnia and Herzegovina (mostly of Serb ethnicity)
* 9,172 soldiers and civilians (men, women, children) from the Kingdom of Serbia
* 2,950 soldiers and civilians from the Kingdom of Montenegro
Some 12,000 people had died in this camp, largely due to malnutrition and poor sanitary conditions.

By February 1916, the authorities began redirecting the prisoners to other camps. The Serbs from Bosnia were mostly sent to Győr (Sopronyek, Šopronjek/Шопроњек).

Most of the prisoners from Bosnia were entire families from the border regions of eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is said that 5,000 families alone were uprooted from the Sarajevo district in eastern Bosnia along the border with the Kingdoms of Serbia &amp; Montenegro.

From 1929 to 1941, Doboj was part of the Vrbas Banovina of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.

During World War II, Doboj was an important site for the partisan resistance movement. From their initial uprising in August 1941 up until the end of the war, the Ozren partisan squad carried out numerous diversions against the occupation forces, among the first successful operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The city was an important stronghold for permanently stationed Ustaše and Domobran garrisons with smaller German units serving as liaison and in defense of important roads and railroads. The Waffen SS &quot;Handschar&quot; division was partly mobilized from the local Muslim population and participated in battles around Doboj in the summer and fall of 1944.

During this time, the Ustaše fascist regime, a puppet state of Nazi Germany, purged primarily ethnic Serbs, Jews and Roma, as well as pro-Partisan civilians to concentration and labor camps. According to public records 291 civilians from Doboj, of various ethnic backgrounds, perished in the Jasenovac concentration camp. In 2010, the remains of 23 people killed by Yugoslav Partisans were found in two pits near the Doboj settlement of Majevac. The non-governmental organization which discovered the remains alleges that nearby pits contain the remains of hundreds more also killed by the Partisans.

Doboj with its surrounding area, the Ozren and Trebava mountains, was also a particularly important site for the local Chetnik armed forces. They participated in battles against the Ustaše, Domobrans, and Germans, initially allied with local Partisan units and then alone, after breaking ties with the Partisans in April 1942. In November 1944, the elements of the Ozren Chetnik Corps and the Trebava Chetnik Corps partook in the Operation Halyard, the largest US rescue mission behind enemy lines. They built an airstrip in the village of Boljanić from which rescued US Airmen flew to safety to Bari, Italy.

The town was eventually liberated by the Yugoslav Partisans on 17 April 1945. The units involved were the 14th Central Bosnian Brigade and the 53rd Division.

===SFR Yugoslavia===
The city was flooded in May 1965. During this period, the city experienced mass industrialization, becoming one of the most important industrial hubs in Yugoslavia.

===Bosnian War===
Doboj was strategically important during the Bosnian War. In May 1992, the control of Doboj was held by Bosnian Serb forces and the Serb Democratic Party governed the city. What followed was mass disarming and subsequently mass arrests of all non-Serb civilians (mainly Bosniaks and Croats).

Doboj was heavily shelled throughout the entire war by local Bosniak and Croatian forces. More than 5,500 shells, mortar rounds, and other projectiles were fired into the city proper and some 100 civilians were killed and more than 400 were wounded and maimed during the indiscriminate shelling.

A number of instances of war crimes and ethnic cleansing were committed by Bosnian Serb forces. Biljana Plavšić, Radovan Karadžić, Momčilo Krajišnik and others planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted the planning, preparation or execution of the destruction of the Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats. Plavšić was charged with crimes against humanity that include but are not limited to the killings in Doboj. Her indictment was related to genocide charges in Doboj specifically.

Bosnian Serb forces were implicated in the systematic looting and destruction of Bosniak and Croat properties during the Bosnian War. A number of women were raped and civilians tortured or killed. All the mosques in the town were destroyed. A number of mass executions took place in Spreča Prison, on the banks of the river Bosna and in the &quot;July 4th&quot; military barrack in the village of Miljkovac, all in 1992. Many of the non-Serbs were detained at various locations in the town, subjected to inhumane conditions, including regular beatings, torture and forced labour. A school in Grapska and the factory used by the Bosanka company that produced jams and juices in Doboj was used as a rape camp. Four different armies of soldiers were present at the rape camps, including the local Serbian militia, the Yugoslav army (JNA), police forces based in the Serbian-occupied town of Knin and members of the White Eagles paramilitary group. The man who oversaw the women&#x27;s detention in the school was Nikola Jorgić, a former police officer in Doboj, who had been convicted of genocide in Germany but died during the serving of his life sentence.

After the Dayton Agreement and the peace following in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the city served as a major HQ/base for IFOR (later SFOR) units.

The Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina is processing several cases for other war crimes in Doboj.

===2014 floods===
In May 2014, Doboj was the city in Bosnia and Herzegovina that accounted for the most damage and casualties during and following the historic rainfall that caused massive flooding and landslides, taking the lives of at least 20 people in Doboj alone.

Throughout the two weeks after the beginning of the natural disaster, the corpses of victims were still being found on the streets, in homes and automobiles. On 26 May 2014, it was announced that the floods and landslides had uncovered mass graves with the skeletal remains of Bosniak victims of the Bosnian War of the 1990s. The mass graves are located in the Usora Municipality and the exact number of victims is as of yet unknown.

==Demographics==
=== Population ===
===Ethnic composition===


=== Urban area by settlements (1991) ===
*Bare: 732 (62%) Serbs; 153 (13%) Yugoslavs; 135 (11%) Croats; 112 (9%) Bosniaks; 53 (4%) others, 1,185 total
*Centar: 3,720 (35%) Serbs; 3,365 (31%) Bosniaks; 1,982 (18%) Yugoslavs; 1,236 (12%) Croats; 432 (4%) others, 10,735 total
*Čaršija: 3,561 (72%) Bosniaks; 594 (12%) Yugoslavs; 303 (6%) Serbs; 195 (4%) Croats; 273 (6%) others, 4,926 total
*Doboj Novi: 358 (48%) Bosniaks; 237 (32%) Serbs; 39 (5%) Yugoslavs; 7 (1%) Croats; 108 (14%) others, 749 total
*Donji Grad: 1,879 (37%) Serbs; 1,547 (31%) Bosniaks; 844 (17%) Yugoslavs; 569 (11%) Croats; 196 (4%) others, 5,035 total
*Orašje: 1,411 (66%) Bosniaks; 293 (14%) Serbs; 231 (11%) Yugoslavs; 111 (5%) Croats, 90 (4%) others, 2,136 total
*Usora: 924 (33%) Serbs; 779 (28%) Bosniaks; 502 (18%) Croats; 491 (17%) Yugoslavs; 117 (4%) others, 2,813 total

==Economy==

As a railway hub, before the Bosnian War, Doboj focused much of its industrial activities around it. Moreover, as a regional center, it was home to several factories, now mostly bankrupt from mismanagement or privatization, including &quot;Bosanka Doboj&quot;, a fruit and vegetable produce factory; &quot;Trudbenik&quot;, a maker of air compressors and equipment, etc. Nowadays, most of the economy, similar to the rest of the country and typical for the poorly executed transition from state-controlled to a market economy, is based around the service industry. High unemployment warrants a vibrant coffee shop and bar scene, crowded throughout most of the day and night (it is commonly believed that Doboj is one of the top three cities having the largest number of cafes and bars/pubs within city limits in Bosnia &amp; Herzegovina).

In 1981, Doboj&#x27;s GDP per capita was 53% of the Yugoslav average.

;Economic preview
The following table gives a preview of total number of registered people employed in professional fields per their core activity (as of 2018):
==Transportation==
The city is the region&#x27;s primary railroad junction, going south to Ploče on the Adriatic Sea, west to Banja Luka and Zagreb, north to Vinkovci, Croatia, and east to Tuzla, Bijeljina and Zvornik. A highway toward western RS and Banja Luka has been completed and opened since 2018.

==Society==
===Education===
Doboj hosts the private Slobomir P University, with several colleges like
the Faculty of information technology;
the Faculty of economics and management;
the Faculty of philology; the Faculty of law;
a Fiscal Academy and the Academy of Arts. Doboj also seats the Mechanical and Electrical Engineering Technical School, as well as several specialized high schools.

Doboj also hosts the public Faculty of Transport and Traffic Engineering, a branch of the University of East Sarajevo with several departments: Road &amp; Urban Transport; Rail Transport; Postal Transport; Telecommunication and Logistics. Since the 2015/2016 academic year, it has opened new departments: Air Transport; Roads; IT Transport and Motor Vehicles.

===Sport===
The local football club, Sloga Doboj, plays in the First League of the Republika Srpska. The town&#x27;s favourite sport, however, is handball. The local handball club is Sloga Doboj. Sloga Doboj ranks among the country&#x27;s top teams and consistently qualifies for international competitions. Very importantly, Doboj traditionally hosts &quot;The Annual Doboj International Champions&#x27; Handball Tournament&quot; every year during the last days of August. Its 55th tournament was in 2023 and once again. The prestige of this EHF-listed tournament was consistently strong enough to attract the most important names in the European team handball over the past five decades such as: Barcelona, Grasshopper, Gummersbach, Ademar León, CSKA, Steaua, Dinamo București, Atlético Madrid, Red Star, Metaloplastika, Partizan, Pelister, Nordhorn, Pick Szeged, Veszprém, Göppingen, Montpellier, d&#x27;Ivry and Chekhovski Medvedi.

==Symbol==
The four squares represent the four mountains which mark the outer borders of the Doboj valley in which the City of Doboj lies in: Ozren, Trebava, Vučjak, and Krnjin. The fleur-de-lis represent the medieval origins of the city in the royal fortress &quot;Gradina&quot; built by the kings from the medieval Bosnian dynasty of Kotromanić.

==Notable places==
* The Doboj Fortress from the early thirteenth century, looking over the town.
* A Roman military camp (Castrum) from the first century AD (right above the confluence of the Usora and the Bosna rivers)
* Goransko Jezero, lake and recreation park in the vicinity of town.

==Notable people==

*Aleksandar Đurić, Singapore footballer
*Bojan Šarčević, basketball player
*Borislav Paravac, politician
*Danijel Pranjić, Croatian footballer
*Danijel Šarić, Bosnian-Qatari handball player
*Dina Bajraktarević, singer
*Dino Djulbic, Australian footballer
*Dragan Mikerević, politician
*Fahrudin Omerović, footballer
*Igor Vukojević, singer
*Indira Radić, singer
*Izet Sarajlić, historian
*Jasmin Džeko, footballer
*Krešimir Zubak, politician
*Mirsada Bajraktarević, singer
*Nenad Marković, basketball player
*Ognjen Kuzmić, Serbian basketball player
*Pero Bukejlović, politician
*Sejad Halilović, former footballer
*Silvana Armenulić, singer
*Spomenko Gostić, soldier
*Vladimir Tica, Serbian basketball player
*Vlastimir Jovanović, footballer
*Zoran Kvržić, footballer
*Aidin Mahmutović, footballer
*Zdenko Križić, Croatian Roman Catholic prelate
*Benjamin Burić, handball goalkeeper
*Senjamin Burić, handballer
==Twin towns – sister cities==

Doboj is twinned with:
* Celje, Slovenia (1965)
* Ćuprija, Serbia

==References==
==External links==
* City homepage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169247" start="0" end="5" title="Doboj" label="Doboj"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="24" end="40" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="42" end="64" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="101" end="106" title="Bosna (river)" label="Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="414" end="424" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="516" end="545" title="Bosnian War" label="War in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="662" end="678" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q18253" start="748" end="767" title="Zenica-Doboj Canton" label="Zenica-Doboj Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="775" end="811" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18250" start="875" end="887" title="Tuzla Canton" label="Tuzla Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="999" end="1035" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272667" start="1062" end="1073" title="Doboj South" label="Doboj South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233337" start="1087" end="1097" title="Doboj East" label="Doboj East"/>
<link wikidata="Q738451" start="1120" end="1141" title="Usora Municipality" label="Municipality of Usora"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="1189" end="1205" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276168" start="1437" end="1442" title="Ozren (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Ozren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1587" end="1596" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143105" start="1706" end="1717" title="Makljenovac" label="Makljenovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q250786" start="1772" end="1777" title="Usora (river)" label="Usora"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="1782" end="1787" title="Bosna (river)" label="Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="1828" end="1843" title="paleolithic era" label="paleolithic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="1890" end="1898" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254432" start="1908" end="1918" title="Daesitiates" label="Daesitates"/>
<link wikidata="Q171812" start="1958" end="1976" title="12th century BC" label="twelfth century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q649179" start="2148" end="2154" title="Breuci" label="Breuci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265861" start="2215" end="2236" title="Great Illyrian revolt" label="Great Illyrian Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265861" start="2293" end="2310" title="Bellum Batonianum" label="Bellum Batonianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="2440" end="2447" title="Castra" label="Castrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="2554" end="2569" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="2582" end="2591" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q194482" start="2830" end="2834" title="Brod, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="2838" end="2846" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330965" start="2903" end="2911" title="Dalmatia (Roman province)" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="2916" end="2924" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q731794" start="3144" end="3153" title="hypocaust" label="hypocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="3448" end="3455" title="Jupiter (god)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="3470" end="3474" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q367622" start="3506" end="3521" title="Terra sigillata" label="Terra sigillata"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="3536" end="3555" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="4160" end="4169" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4177" end="4187" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="4196" end="4205" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q568938" start="4291" end="4332" title="National Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="National Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="4448" end="4457" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4472" end="4484" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="4654" end="4659" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q295985" start="4712" end="4717" title="Usora (zemlja)" label="Usora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557747" start="4809" end="4813" title="Soli (zemlja)" label="Soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396154" start="4844" end="4858" title="Doboj fortress" label="Doboj fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q178438" start="4868" end="4878" title="Kotromanić" label="Kotromanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5023" end="5030" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="5213" end="5229" title="Motte-and-bailey castle" label="Motte-and-bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="5306" end="5316" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q237534" start="5332" end="5341" title="Austrians" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="5346" end="5353" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="5375" end="5380" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="5381" end="5386" title="Ancient Roman architecture" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="5416" end="5426" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980623" start="5529" end="5536" title="Kingdom of Bosnia" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="5541" end="5550" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980623" start="5883" end="5898" title="Kingdom of Bosnia" label="Bosnian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="5903" end="5910" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q698985" start="5984" end="6003" title="Ottoman wars in Europe" label="Austro-Ottoman Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="6021" end="6038" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6092" end="6103" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="6139" end="6155" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="6156" end="6174" title="Internment" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="6313" end="6335" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="6482" end="6499" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q386496" start="6540" end="6561" title="Kingdom of Montenegro" label="Kingdom of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="6749" end="6766" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Serbs from Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134494" start="6787" end="6791" title="Győr" label="Győr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="7000" end="7008" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419985" start="7141" end="7155" title="Vrbas Banovina" label="Vrbas Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="7163" end="7184" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7194" end="7206" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="7244" end="7272" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="partisan resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276168" start="7350" end="7355" title="Ozren (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Ozren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435190" start="7562" end="7568" title="Ustaše Militia" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888411" start="7573" end="7581" title="Home guard" label="Domobran"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="7605" end="7611" title="Wehrmacht" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q141482" start="7690" end="7730" title="13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar (1st Croatian)" label="Waffen SS &amp;quot;Handschar&amp;quot; division"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="7881" end="7887" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="7906" end="7918" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="7922" end="7934" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="7960" end="7965" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="7967" end="7971" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="7976" end="7980" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="7997" end="8005" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="8151" end="8179" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120291" start="8296" end="8304" title="Majevac (Doboj)" label="Majevac."/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="8309" end="8338" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276168" start="8498" end="8503" title="Ozren (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Ozren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470535" start="8508" end="8515" title="Trebava" label="Trebava"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="8580" end="8600" title="Chetniks" label="Chetnik armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623174" start="8891" end="8908" title="Operation Halyard" label="Operation Halyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909443" start="9001" end="9009" title="Boljanić" label="Boljanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="9057" end="9061" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="9063" end="9068" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="9404" end="9414" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="9480" end="9491" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="9539" end="9558" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Bosnian Serb forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164533" start="9567" end="9588" title="Serb Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Serb Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="9705" end="9713" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="9718" end="9724" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q26769" start="10121" end="10136" title="Biljana Plavšić" label="Biljana Plavšić"/>
<link wikidata="Q123923" start="10138" end="10154" title="Radovan Karadžić" label="Radovan Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q26776" start="10156" end="10173" title="Momčilo Krajišnik" label="Momčilo Krajišnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="10321" end="10329" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="10334" end="10348" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="10610" end="10617" title="Bosniak" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="10622" end="10627" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="10650" end="10661" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="10853" end="10858" title="Bosna (river)" label="Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043414" start="10926" end="10935" title="Miljkovac, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Miljkovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="11365" end="11421" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="police forces based in the Serbian-occupied town of Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q815581" start="11441" end="11453" title="White Eagles (paramilitary)" label="White Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445518" start="11539" end="11552" title="Nikola Jorgić" label="Nikola Jorgić"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="11614" end="11622" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="11695" end="11711" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="11802" end="11806" title="IFOR" label="IFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="11814" end="11818" title="SFOR" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q113567" start="11832" end="11863" title="Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879871" start="12105" end="12136" title="2014 Southeast Europe floods" label="massive flooding and landslides"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="12471" end="12478" title="Bosniak" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="12494" end="12505" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q738451" start="12555" end="12573" title="Usora Municipality" label="Usora Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="13585" end="13596" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q115117" start="14718" end="14723" title="Ploče" label="Ploče"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="14731" end="14743" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="14753" end="14763" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="14768" end="14774" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q221495" start="14785" end="14793" title="Vinkovci" label="Vinkovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="14795" end="14802" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="14816" end="14821" title="Tuzla" label="Tuzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q207801" start="14823" end="14832" title="Bijeljina" label="Bijeljina"/>
<link wikidata="Q231517" start="14837" end="14844" title="Zvornik" label="Zvornik"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="14878" end="14888" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541224" start="14984" end="15005" title="Slobomir P University" label="Slobomir P University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470528" start="15415" end="15442" title="University of East Sarajevo" label="University of East Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q516739" start="15469" end="15473" title="Road Transport" label="Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="15480" end="15495" title="Public transport" label="Urban Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="15497" end="15511" title="Rail Transport" label="Rail Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="15513" end="15529" title="Postal services" label="Postal Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="15531" end="15548" title="Telecommunication" label="Telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="15553" end="15562" title="Logistics" label="Logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="15630" end="15643" title="Aviation" label="Air Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="15645" end="15650" title="Roads" label="Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="15669" end="15683" title="Motor vehicles" label="Motor Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q28083137" start="15708" end="15721" title="Football team" label="football club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443529" start="15723" end="15734" title="FK Sloga Doboj" label="Sloga Doboj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361974" start="15749" end="15785" title="First League of the Republika Srpska" label="First League of the Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="15832" end="15840" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124304" start="15869" end="15880" title="RK Sloga Doboj" label="Sloga Doboj"/>
<link wikidata="Q330395" start="16229" end="16232" title="EHF Champions League" label="EHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q378906" start="16384" end="16393" title="FC Barcelona Handbol" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q201360" start="16395" end="16406" title="Grasshopper Club Zürich" label="Grasshopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q679685" start="16408" end="16419" title="VfL Gummersbach" label="Gummersbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q355708" start="16421" end="16432" title="CB Ademar León" label="Ademar León"/>
<link wikidata="Q41221673" start="16434" end="16438" title="HBC CSKA Moscow" label="CSKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038487" start="16440" end="16446" title="Steaua București Handball" label="Steaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158074" start="16448" end="16464" title="HC Dinamo București" label="Dinamo București"/>
<link wikidata="Q757447" start="16466" end="16481" title="Atlético Madrid BM" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061925" start="16483" end="16491" title="RK Crvena zvezda" label="Red Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851841" start="16493" end="16507" title="RK Metaloplastika" label="Metaloplastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124328" start="16509" end="16517" title="RK Partizan" label="Partizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q575908" start="16519" end="16527" title="RK Pelister" label="Pelister"/>
<link wikidata="Q704348" start="16529" end="16537" title="HSG Nordhorn" label="Nordhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074299" start="16539" end="16550" title="SC Pick Szeged" label="Pick Szeged"/>
<link wikidata="Q643692" start="16552" end="16560" title="MKB Veszprém" label="Veszprém"/>
<link wikidata="Q708510" start="16562" end="16571" title="Frisch Auf Göppingen" label="Göppingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q901613" start="16573" end="16584" title="Montpellier Agglomération Handball" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298568" start="16586" end="16597" title="US d&amp;#x27;Ivry Handball" label="d&amp;#x27;Ivry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535530" start="16602" end="16620" title="Chekhovskiye Medvedi" label="Chekhovski Medvedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276168" start="16765" end="16770" title="Ozren (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Ozren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470535" start="16772" end="16779" title="Trebava" label="Trebava"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="16805" end="16817" title="fleur-de-lis" label="fleur-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178438" start="16959" end="16969" title="Kotromanić" label="Kotromanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396154" start="16997" end="17011" title="Fortress of Doboj" label="Doboj Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="17074" end="17079" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q250786" start="17165" end="17170" title="Usora (river)" label="Usora"/>
<link wikidata="Q208367" start="17179" end="17184" title="Bosna (river)" label="Bosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q715706" start="17284" end="17300" title="Aleksandar Đurić" label="Aleksandar Đurić"/>
<link wikidata="Q891158" start="17324" end="17338" title="Bojan Šarčević" label="Bojan Šarčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q470649" start="17359" end="17375" title="Borislav Paravac" label="Borislav Paravac"/>
<link wikidata="Q154512" start="17389" end="17404" title="Danijel Pranjić" label="Danijel Pranjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q356925" start="17427" end="17440" title="Danijel Šarić (handballer)" label="Danijel Šarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277833" start="17474" end="17492" title="Dina Bajraktarević" label="Dina Bajraktarević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100551" start="17502" end="17514" title="Dino Djulbic" label="Dino Djulbic"/>
<link wikidata="Q705229" start="17539" end="17555" title="Dragan Mikerević" label="Dragan Mikerević"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187872" start="17569" end="17586" title="Fahrudin Omerović" label="Fahrudin Omerović"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594488" start="17600" end="17614" title="Igor Vukojević" label="Igor Vukojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q267822" start="17624" end="17636" title="Indira Radić" label="Indira Radić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280423" start="17646" end="17659" title="Izet Sarajlić" label="Izet Sarajlić"/>
<link wikidata="Q10438453" start="17672" end="17684" title="Jasmin Džeko" label="Jasmin Džeko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437194" start="17698" end="17712" title="Krešimir Zubak" label="Krešimir Zubak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874704" start="17726" end="17747" title="Mirsada Bajraktarević" label="Mirsada Bajraktarević"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569502" start="17757" end="17771" title="Nenad Marković" label="Nenad Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700323" start="17792" end="17805" title="Ognjen Kuzmić" label="Ognjen Kuzmić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445847" start="17834" end="17849" title="Pero Bukejlović" label="Pero Bukejlović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434622" start="17863" end="17878" title="Sejad Halilović" label="Sejad Halilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q469505" start="17899" end="17916" title="Silvana Armenulić" label="Silvana Armenulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855260" start="17926" end="17941" title="Spomenko Gostić" label="Spomenko Gostić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938674" start="17952" end="17965" title="Vladimir Tica" label="Vladimir Tica"/>
<link wikidata="Q643558" start="17994" end="18013" title="Vlastimir Jovanović" label="Vlastimir Jovanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024799" start="18027" end="18039" title="Zoran Kvržić" label="Zoran Kvržić"/>
<link wikidata="Q412678" start="18053" end="18069" title="Aidin Mahmutović" label="Aidin Mahmutović"/>
<link wikidata="Q23711406" start="18083" end="18096" title="Zdenko Križić" label="Zdenko Križić"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763905" start="18131" end="18145" title="Benjamin Burić" label="Benjamin Burić"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763906" start="18168" end="18182" title="Senjamin Burić" label="Senjamin Burić"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="18236" end="18243" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012" start="18252" end="18257" title="Celje" label="Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q336475" start="18277" end="18284" title="Ćuprija" label="Ćuprija"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294627" wikidata="Q47622" url="?curid=294627" title="Mr. Garrison">
<text>Mr. Herbert Garrison is a fictional character and occasional antagonist featured in the American animated television series &quot;South Park&quot;, created by Matt Stone and Trey Parker (who also voices the character). Garrison first appeared in &quot;South Park&quot;″s pilot episode, &quot;Cartman Gets an Anal Probe&quot;, which aired on August 13, 1997.

Garrison is primarily employed as a teacher at South Park Elementary, originally of the main characters&#x27; third grade class, and currently, their fourth-grade class. In the earlier seasons, Garrison uses a hand puppet named Mr. Hat as a teaching resource; the puppet occasionally shows signs of sentience and has been suggested to be a manifestation of Garrison&#x27;s own latent homosexual feelings. Mr. Hat was largely retired by the sixth season. Garrison was partially inspired by Parker&#x27;s kindergarten teacher, who also used a puppet named Mr. Hat, as well as a British literature professor Parker had at the University of Colorado. Garrison is characterized as particularly cynical, especially in comparison with the other adults in South Park, and he is one of the few characters on &quot;South Park&quot; to have broken the fourth wall.

In the ninth season premiere, &quot;Mr. Garrison&#x27;s Fancy New Vagina&quot;, Garrison comes out as a trans woman, undergoes a sex change operation and renames herself Janet Garrison. In the twelfth season episode &quot;Eek, a Penis!&quot;, a disillusioned Garrison undergoes another sex change operation to detransition. During the twentieth season, Garrison is elected President of the United States and serves in the role until the twenty–fourth season. He is never referred to by name during this period, and is exclusively referred to as &quot;the President&quot;.

Parker has stated that Garrison has become one of the most complex characters on &quot;South Park&quot;, particularly due to his relationship with Mr. Hat and his sexuality and gender issues. He describes Garrison as &quot;the soap opera element to the whole series. [He] has a real story going on.&quot;

==Role in &quot;South Park&quot;==
In &quot;South Park&quot;, Garrison was raised in Arkansas and claims to have a master&#x27;s degree in mechanical engineering from Denver Community College, as depicted in &quot;The Entity&quot;. Garrison is characterized as being sexually confused, having had both heterosexual and same-sex relationships in addition to two sex reassignment surgeries.

In many episodes, Garrison displays racist tendencies. In the episode &quot;Chef Goes Nanners&quot;, Garrison&#x27;s hand puppet, Mr. Hat, is a member of the local chapter of the Ku Klux Klan, which Garrison resents, and he insists to Chef that he wants nothing to do with it. However, in the later episode &quot;Here Comes the Neighborhood&quot;, he leads an effort to run affluent residents–who are all Black–out of town using Klan techniques, including burning crosses. Although the townsfolk at first claim that this is because of the &quot;richers&#x27;&quot; wealth, in his last line of the episode, Garrison&#x27;s intentions are revealed to be indeed racially motivated. In the episode &quot;An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig&quot;, he states that &quot;genetic engineering erases all of God&#x27;s mistakes, like German people&quot;. In multiple episodes, he expresses disdain for Mexican people, to the point of attempting to prolong the COVID-19 pandemic in order to keep his campaign promise to eradicate Mexicans, even if countless other people also died.

In the first three seasons, Garrison teaches the third–grade class at South Park Elementary School. He was portrayed as a closeted homosexual, of which he was ashamed. He pretends to have highly negative views on homosexuality in earlier episodes. Garrison usually uses a hand puppet named Mr. Hat, which he uses to emote more aggressively as well as to display his internal conflicts. It was suggested that Mr. Hat, and his temporary replacement Mr. Twig, were characters through which Garrison could express his repressed gay feelings. Though Garrison emphatically denies being gay, he acknowledges that Mr. Hat and Mr. Twig had homosexual fantasies. He eventually comes out as gay in the episode &quot;4th Grade&quot;.

It has been established that Garrison has had heterosexual relationships, including with Liane Cartman. Possible same-sex relationships include Stephen Stotch in &quot;Butters&#x27; Very Own Episode&quot;, and he sought a tryst with Eric Cartman in &quot;Cartman Joins NAMBLA&quot;, in which Garrison solicited sex from Cartman, not knowing that he had contacted the latter online; Garrison was consequently arrested for this act and then temporarily dismissed from his teaching position. In his absence from teaching, Garrison wrote an erotic romance novel titled &quot;In the Valley of Penises&quot;, which sold respectably before it won the Gay Pulitzer Prize and was deemed to be &quot;the best work of homoerotic literature since &quot;Huckleberry Finn&quot;&quot;.

In the episodes following the release of his novel, Garrison has a nervous breakdown and flees South Park to become a hermit, where he eventually comes to terms with his gay identity. After this point, he is portrayed as openly embracing his homosexuality.

He is rehired by South Park Elementary as a kindergarten teacher, as his previous position as the fourth grade teacher was held by Diane Choksondik. In the sixth season episode &quot;The Death Camp of Tolerance&quot;, he was promoted to the fourth grade following Choksondik&#x27;s death. However, when Garrison finds that he could sue the school for substantial compensation if he were discriminated against, he purposely attempts to be dismissed. To that end, he abandons his puppet counterpart in favor of a human assistant, Mr. Slave, Garrison&#x27;s personal BDSM slave and lover. The two proceed to perform several sexually explicit homosexual acts in front of Garrison&#x27;s students. Garrison&#x27;s plan was unsuccessful, and he was instead praised for his perceived bravery.

The show has implied that Garrison has corprophilic tendencies in &quot;Proper Condom Use&quot;, wherein the majority of sexual acts he taught to the kindergarten class involved feces or defecation. In that episode, Chef refers to Garrison as a &quot;complete pervert&quot;.

Despite having declared himself gay, Garrison continues to appear ashamed of it as a part of his continual emotional and psychological problems. In the season three finale, &quot;World Wide Recorder Concert&quot;, he was portrayed as in despair over the fact that his father, Garrison Senior, had not sexually abused him when Garrison was young, believing that he did not love his son. After being repeatedly pressed by his son to have sex with him, Garrison Senior has Kenny G do so. In two episodes–&quot;An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig&quot; and &quot;Jakovasaurs&quot;–Garrison was implied to have practiced bestiality with Cartman&#x27;s pig and a pigeon, respectively.

Garrison is characterized as highly inept as a teacher, regularly introducing dubious curricula, such as showing &quot;Barnaby Jones&quot; videos to the class for eight days, asking the class &quot;why Chubby Checker left the Beatles in 1972&quot; or teaching the students how to tell the difference between a prostitute and a police officer. On the other hand, he will occasionally teach the children advanced subjects such as theories on evolution, Stalin, and communism. Despite his cynicism, he appears to genuinely enjoy his job, falling into a depression when he is fired or is suspended from teaching. He also carries a gun and badge with him in class at all times, despite being told the teachers do not carry guns.

Garrison did not have a known given name until the episode &quot;Cherokee Hair Tampons&quot;. In that episode, his full name is Ethan P. Garrison. In &quot;The Entity&quot;, his given name is changed to Herbert. During Garrison&#x27;s presidency, he is generally not referred to by name at all, with characters only referring to him as &quot;The President&quot;.

===As Janet Garrison===
In the season nine premiere, &quot;Mr. Garrison&#x27;s Fancy New Vagina&quot;, Garrison comes out as a trans woman and decides to undergo a vaginoplasty and breast augmentation. In the episode &quot;D-Yikes!&quot;, it is revealed that she renamed herself Janet. Garrison frequently asserts her femininity, including through misandry and open proclamations of her sexuality.

The transition causes her relationship with Mr. Slave to end, as the latter had not been consulted before the operation. Garrison also realizes that she has had no menstrual periods after the operation, leading her to believe that she is pregnant. Garrison attempts to abort before she is told that her procedure does not result in the creation of reproductive organs. In the episode &quot;Follow That Egg!&quot;, she attempts to prevent same-sex marriage from becoming legal after finding out that Mr. Slave is engaged to Big Gay Al.

In the episode &quot;Go God Go&quot;, Garrison is ordered by the school district to teach evolution. Due to her personal aversion to the concept, she deliberately underperforms and is subsequently replaced by Richard Dawkins. Dawkins becomes attracted to Garrison, and they begin dating. Dawkins converts Garrison to atheism, and they subsequently decide to eradicate all religion from the world, leading to a future where the global populace embraces atheism and ignores logic, causing wars about the answer to &quot;the Great Question&quot;. In the following episode, &quot;Go God Go XII&quot;, Eric Cartman, having been cryonically frozen 500 years earlier, contacts Garrison&#x27;s home from the future. Dawkins answers the phone and learns from Cartman about Garrison&#x27;s previous life. Repulsed, Dawkins hastily ends his relationship with Garrison. The episode reveals that Garrison was the motivation that convinced Dawkins to teach atheism to the world, and as their relationship ended, the future changed once more.

In the episode &quot;D-Yikes&quot;, Mrs. Garrison starts to have lesbian relationships. After an unnamed boyfriend abandons her, Garrison meets Allison, a lesbian who becomes quickly attracted to the former. Unaware of Allison&#x27;s sexual orientation or growing affection, Garrison unwittingly joins her at a lesbian bar. After Garrison learns the truth, she is initially shocked but quickly returns Allison&#x27;s feelings, and the two begin to date. As a result, Garrison begins openly identifying as a lesbian.

====Detransition====
In the episode &quot;Eek, a Penis!&quot;, Garrison becomes disillusioned with living as a woman and wants to detransition. After hearing about genetic engineering being used to grow human body parts on mice, she pays for a procedure to grow a penis on a mouse. After Garrison spends most of the episode chasing the runaway mouse, it returns to Garrison and the sex change operation proves successful.

After his detransition between seasons 12 through 18, Garrison&#x27;s behavior was shown to be less eccentric than before, with significantly fewer acts of deviant sexual behavior, outrageous outbursts, racism, or psychotic episodes. His sexual identity was left ambiguous, being shown a Republican despite his ever-changing sexual and gender identities in &quot;About Last Night...&quot;, being absent from &quot;Gays against faggots&quot; in &quot;The F Word&quot;. In &quot;200&quot;, he at first assists Stan, Kyle and Cartman in angering Tom Cruise unintentionally, but also later is consulted by Cartman regarding the events of &quot;Cartman&#x27;s Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut&quot;, after Mitch Connor tells Cartman that the allegations Ms. Cartman was intersex and Cartman&#x27;s father are a lie – while Garrison tries to steer Cartman away, Cartman convinces him to bring out Mr. Hat, and Mr. Hat confesses the declaration of Ms. Cartman being his father (and intersex) was fake and that Eric Cartman&#x27;s real father was in the room. The episode ends with an abrupt cliffhanger while Garrison is about to reveal the identity of Cartman&#x27;s father.

===Presidential campaign, presidency and post-presidency===

During the nineteenth season, following Principal Victoria&#x27;s replacement with PC Principal, Garrison becomes frustrated with a recent influx of illegal Canadian immigrants. He begins denigrating the immigrants and is consequently dismissed from his teaching job. He begins a political campaign on promises to get rid of the immigrants and build a wall, parodying Donald Trump&#x27;s then-current presidential campaign. After discovering Canada has already built a wall, Garrison goes over Niagara Falls to Canada and rapes the Canadian President—a caricature of Trump—to death. Convinced that his policies work, Garrison continues his campaign with Caitlyn Jenner as his running mate. The episode &quot;Sponsored Content&quot; features Principal Victoria convincing Garrison to return to South Park.

Parker and Stone had expected Trump&#x27;s campaign to end before the 2016 election. They opined that a direct portrayal of Trump would be dated if the campaign ended quickly, and felt it would be more appropriate to use one of their characters in his role, having already decided Garrison would come into conflict with the new principal.

In the following seasons, Garrison receives the Republican Party nomination and continues his campaign. He realizes that he will be incapable of actually performing his duties as the president if he is elected, and tries to sabotage his own campaign, even outright telling people to vote for Hillary Clinton instead of him. While his attempts are initially unsuccessful, he eventually manages to lower his poll numbers by making inflammatory comments about women. As he attempts to tell his supporters that the election is rigged against him, they realize that he had never intended to actually make it as far as he did and furiously pursue him. Seeking refuge in a support group run by Randy Marsh, Garrison learns that people want him to become president because J. J. Abrams brainwashed people into liking &quot;Star Wars: The Force Awakens&quot; using Member Berries. After failing to destroy the Member Berries, Garrison makes a speech urging Americans to vote for Clinton in protest of the new film.

Despite his efforts, Garrison is elected president and brainwashed by Jenner, who herself was brainwashed by the Member Berries. Upon winning the election, he uses his newfound power to force people with whom he has had altercations to perform fellatio on him. Garrison plays a role in the season twenty finale by helping to defeat the season&#x27;s other antagonists while remaining in power.

Parker and Stone expected Clinton to win the election, and revealed that they waited for the election to end to focus on other storylines, intending for a humbled Garrison to return to teaching. Garrison was also intended to play a role in resolving the conflict between the male and female students at the school classroom that had developed over the course of the season, taking responsibility for causing their behavior. Following Trump&#x27;s win, Parker and Stone were consequently forced to rewrite the season&#x27;s final episodes, and felt that they could not resolve some of the season&#x27;s storylines in a satisfying way as a result.

The twenty-first season sees a desperate Garrison returning to South Park after launching a nuclear strike against Canada in &quot;Super Hard PCness&quot;. Garrison was absent in all but one episode of the following season, appearing in a cameo in the season finale, &quot;Bike Parade&quot;.

Garrison reappears in &quot;The Pandemic Special&quot; as an antagonist who wants to prolong the COVID-19 pandemic, as the virus is also killing Mexicans. At the end of the episode, Garrison kills the pangolin being researched in for vaccine development with a flamethrower, along with the scientist holding the pangolin. In &quot;South ParQ Vaccination Special&quot;, Garrison returns to South Park after losing the 2020 election to return to teaching, but is opposed by everyone except the QAnon-adhering White family. Garrison pleads to the elites, who are toying with him and Bob White, to return his life to normal; he later regains the townspeople&#x27;s respect after securing COVID-19 vaccines for everyone with the elites&#x27; help.

In the twenty-fifth season, Mr. Garrison started dating a man named Rick in the episode &quot;Pajama Day&quot;. Garrison&#x27;s relationship with Rick is tested in the season twenty-six finale &quot;Spring Break&quot; when Garrison is pressured by his supporters to run for president again in 2024. Garrison is forced to choose between his relationship with Rick and personal gain, ultimately choosing the former. Garrison returns to Rick, and the two reconcile.

==Mr. Hat==

Mr. Hat initially appears to be simply a puppet used by Mr. Garrison as a teaching aid. However, in some episodes, Mr. Hat is able to perform activities that would not have been possible if he were merely a puppet. In the show, it is not entirely clear how much autonomy Mr. Hat and Mr. Garrison have from each other. In the episode &quot;Chef Aid&quot;, Mr. Hat is able to drive a car through a prison wall to rescue Mr. Garrison and Chef, to which Chef remarks, &quot;How the hell did he reach the gas pedal?&quot;.

Other episodes also portray Mr. Hat as somewhat autonomous. In one episode, Mr. Hat is able to move his eyes and blink towards Mr. Garrison and Brett Favre, and in &quot;Worldwide Recorder Concert&quot;, Mr. Hat beats up Mr. Mackey. In the &quot;South Park&quot; video game, Mr. Hat owns and runs a robot factory by himself. In &quot;South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp; Uncut&quot;, Satan picks up Mr. Hat as a companion to replace Saddam Hussein. Satan speaks Mr. Hat&#x27;s lines in a voice very similar to Mr. Garrison&#x27;s.

Mr. Hat is portrayed as racist, as seen in &quot;Chef Goes Nanners&quot;, where he is a member of the South Park branch of the Ku Klux Klan. Mr. Hat argues with Mr. Garrison and seemingly disappears to attend a meeting without him. Mr. Hat also appears to be somewhat psychotic. In &quot;Weight Gain 4000&quot;, furious at Kathie Lee Gifford for a talent show he and Mr. Garrison had lost years ago, Mr. Hat convinces Mr. Garrison to kill her, which he attempts to do. It is unclear in the show if Mr. Hat is independent or if Mr. Garrison&#x27;s own psychosis is 
projected to his puppet.

In &quot;Summer Sucks&quot;, during a fictional crossover psychotherapy session with Dr. Katz (from another Comedy Central series), Katz suggests that Mr. Hat is a personification of Mr. Garrison&#x27;s &quot;gay side&quot;. Garrison rejects this, and Katz is unable to make a counterpoint because he is killed shortly afterward by a gigantic novelty firework. Despite this suggestion, Mr. Garrison continues to use Mr. Hat even after coming out as gay. Mr. Hat is permanently abandoned in favor of Mr. Slave when Mr. Garrison begins teaching fourth grade.

Parker and Stone have said that the removal of Mr. Hat was symbolic of the show abandoning its original style as a surreal comedy in favor of its current format of satirizing real-life issues and events. Mr. Hat was not seen again until the climax of the episode &quot;200&quot;, when Eric Cartman demands to speak with him, at which point Mr. Garrison produces Mr. Hat from a dresser drawer, and despite his initial reluctance, Garrison again seems unable to control Mr. Hat, and again addresses him separately. At the conclusion of the storyline, Mr. Hat is again discarded, subsequently appearing briefly in the game &quot;South Park: The Stick of Truth&quot; and the 2021 special &quot;South ParQ Vaccination Special&quot;.

===Mr. Twig===
Starting in the episode &quot;Summer Sucks&quot;, Mr. Garrison temporarily replaces Mr. Hat with Mr. Twig, who consists of a twig wearing a purple shirt with a pink triangle symbol. His voice is identical to Mr. Hat&#x27;s until his final scene in &quot;Chef Aid&quot;, where he speaks with a French accent. Mr. Twig is poorly received by the children in Garrison&#x27;s third grade class, who repeatedly call for the return of Mr. Hat and suggest that Mr. Twig would be better used as a coat rack, to which Garrison takes offense. Eventually, Mr. Hat returns in &quot;Chef Aid&quot;, heralding the fact by some psychopathic attacks on Mr. Twig. Though Garrison constantly assures himself that Mr. Twig is a better choice than Mr. Hat, he comes to terms with his attachment to Mr. Hat at the end of the episode upon being broken out of jail by him. Garrison reunites with Mr. Hat after Mr. Twig advises him to follow his heart.
==See also==

*South Park (Park County, Colorado)
*South Park City
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47622" start="0" end="20" title="Mr. Garrison" label="Mr. Herbert Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="61" end="71" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="97" end="123" title="animated television series" label="animated television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="130" end="140" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="159" end="169" title="Matt Stone" label="Matt Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="174" end="185" title="Trey Parker" label="Trey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="271" end="284" title="pilot episode" label="pilot episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q930486" start="292" end="318" title="Cartman Gets an Anal Probe" label="Cartman Gets an Anal Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47622" start="587" end="594" title="Mr. Garrison" label="Mr. Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="743" end="753" title="Homosexuality" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="982" end="1004" title="University of Colorado at Boulder" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q245781" start="1048" end="1055" title="cynical" label="cynical"/>
<link wikidata="Q741726" start="1200" end="1211" title="fourth wall" label="fourth wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q280800" start="1250" end="1286" title="Mr. Garrison&amp;#x27;s Fancy New Vagina" label="Mr. Garrison&amp;#x27;s Fancy New Vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="1303" end="1312" title="coming out" label="comes out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="1318" end="1329" title="trans woman" label="trans woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="1343" end="1363" title="sex change operation" label="sex change operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47622" start="1384" end="1398" title="Mr. Garrison" label="Janet Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q903879" start="1436" end="1449" title="Eek, a Penis!" label="Eek, a Penis!"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396757" start="1524" end="1536" title="detransition" label="detransition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1587" end="1617" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="2014" end="2024" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="2178" end="2186" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="2232" end="2254" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154691" start="2260" end="2284" title="Denver Community College" label="Denver Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q221108" start="2307" end="2317" title="The Entity (South Park)" label="The Entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q722060" start="2559" end="2576" title="Chef Goes Nanners" label="Chef Goes Nanners"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="2662" end="2674" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47594" start="2718" end="2722" title="Chef (South Park)" label="Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q735347" start="2796" end="2823" title="Here Comes the Neighborhood" label="Here Comes the Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="2888" end="2893" title="Black people" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q278588" start="3183" end="3214" title="An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig" label="An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="3429" end="3446" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574320" start="3673" end="3681" title="closeted" label="closeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="4218" end="4227" title="Coming out" label="comes out"/>
<link wikidata="Q470401" start="4256" end="4265" title="4th Grade (South Park)" label="4th Grade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4363" end="4376" title="List of South Park families#Liane Cartman" label="Liane Cartman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4418" end="4432" title="List of South Park families#Stephen Stotch" label="Stephen Stotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q257614" start="4442" end="4472" title="Butters&amp;#x27; Very Own Episode" label="Butters&amp;#x27; Very Own Episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q47352" start="4507" end="4519" title="Eric Cartman" label="Eric Cartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q858733" start="4529" end="4549" title="Cartman Joins NAMBLA" label="Cartman Joins NAMBLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="4922" end="4936" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069508" start="4981" end="4991" title="homoeroticism" label="homoerotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215410" start="5015" end="5031" title="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" label="Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="5164" end="5170" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47226" start="5435" end="5451" title="Ms. Choksondik" label="Diane Choksondik"/>
<link wikidata="Q472294" start="5487" end="5514" title="The Death Camp of Tolerance" label="The Death Camp of Tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190845" start="5868" end="5872" title="BDSM" label="BDSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q464215" start="6130" end="6142" title="Coprophilia" label="corprophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040346" start="6163" end="6180" title="Proper Condom Use" label="Proper Condom Use"/>
<link wikidata="Q478003" start="6546" end="6573" title="World Wide Recorder Concert" label="World Wide Recorder Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q295777" start="6837" end="6844" title="Kenny G" label="Kenny G"/>
<link wikidata="Q278588" start="6874" end="6905" title="An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig" label="An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q794110" start="6922" end="6933" title="Jakovasaurs" label="Jakovasaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8392" start="6979" end="6989" title="bestiality" label="bestiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q808420" start="7162" end="7175" title="Barnaby Jones" label="Barnaby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q317254" start="7245" end="7259" title="Chubby Checker" label="Chubby Checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="7269" end="7276" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="7353" end="7363" title="prostitute" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q384593" start="7370" end="7384" title="police officer" label="police officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="7483" end="7492" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="7494" end="7500" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="7506" end="7515" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q836927" start="7833" end="7854" title="Cherokee Hair Tampons" label="Cherokee Hair Tampons"/>
<link wikidata="Q221108" start="7924" end="7934" title="The Entity (South Park)" label="The Entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q280800" start="8191" end="8227" title="Mr. Garrison&amp;#x27;s Fancy New Vagina" label="Mr. Garrison&amp;#x27;s Fancy New Vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="8244" end="8253" title="comes out" label="comes out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="8259" end="8270" title="trans woman" label="trans woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537534" start="8296" end="8308" title="vaginoplasty" label="vaginoplasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851652" start="8313" end="8332" title="breast augmentation" label="breast augmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976422" start="8355" end="8363" title="D-Yikes!" label="D-Yikes!"/>
<link wikidata="Q866081" start="8450" end="8460" title="femininity" label="femininity"/>
<link wikidata="Q848867" start="8480" end="8488" title="misandry" label="misandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="8695" end="8712" title="menstrual periods" label="menstrual periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="8800" end="8805" title="abortion" label="abort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="8879" end="8898" title="reproductive organs" label="reproductive organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q898152" start="8921" end="8937" title="Follow That Egg!" label="Follow That Egg!"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="8969" end="8986" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940075" start="9088" end="9097" title="Go God Go" label="Go God Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="9157" end="9166" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="9276" end="9291" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060471" start="9643" end="9656" title="Go God Go XII" label="Go God Go XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q47352" start="9664" end="9676" title="Eric Cartman" label="Eric Cartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976422" start="10117" end="10124" title="D-Yikes" label="D-Yikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="10161" end="10168" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q903879" start="10655" end="10668" title="Eek, a Penis!" label="Eek, a Penis!"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396757" start="10743" end="10755" title="detransition" label="detransition"/>
<link wikidata="Q902422" start="11399" end="11418" title="About Last Night... (South Park)" label="About Last Night..."/>
<link wikidata="Q457548" start="11486" end="11496" title="The F Word (South Park)" label="The F Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q211685" start="11513" end="11516" title="200_(South_Park)" label="200"/>
<link wikidata="Q858744" start="11676" end="11716" title="Cartman&amp;#x27;s Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut" label="Cartman&amp;#x27;s Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="12628" end="12640" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q20121517" start="12661" end="12682" title="Donald Trump presidential campaign, 2016" label="presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q34221" start="12754" end="12767" title="Niagara Falls" label="Niagara Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q365144" start="12914" end="12928" title="Caitlyn Jenner" label="Caitlyn Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q22812744" start="12968" end="12985" title="Sponsored Content (South Park)" label="Sponsored Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="13136" end="13149" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="13454" end="13470" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="13698" end="13713" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47275" start="14093" end="14104" title="Randy Marsh (South Park)" label="Randy Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q188137" start="14171" end="14183" title="J. J. Abrams" label="J. J. Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14221" end="14249" title="Star Wars: The Force Awakens" label="Star Wars: The Force Awakens"/>
<link wikidata="Q44968902" start="15586" end="15603" title="Super Hard PCness" label="Super Hard PCness"/>
<link wikidata="Q59694907" start="15728" end="15739" title="Bike Parade" label="Bike Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q99578927" start="15776" end="15796" title="The Pandemic Special" label="The Pandemic Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="15845" end="15862" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191516" start="15949" end="15957" title="pangolin" label="pangolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105622485" start="16079" end="16109" title="South ParQ Vaccination Special" label="South ParQ Vaccination Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="16165" end="16178" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q51213808" start="16240" end="16245" title="QAnon" label="QAnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="16432" end="16440" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q110918454" start="16586" end="16596" title="Pajama Day (South Park)" label="Pajama Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q117358113" start="16691" end="16703" title="Spring Break (South Park)" label="Spring Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q898198" start="17308" end="17316" title="Chef Aid" label="Chef Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47594" start="17404" end="17408" title="Chef (South Park)" label="Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q267088" start="17632" end="17643" title="Brett Favre" label="Brett Favre"/>
<link wikidata="Q478003" start="17658" end="17684" title="Worldwide Recorder Concert" label="Worldwide Recorder Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636173" start="17724" end="17761" title="South Park (video game)" label="the &amp;quot;South Park&amp;quot; video game"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17822" end="17860" title="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut" label="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17868" end="17873" title="List of recurring South Park characters#Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q722060" start="18065" end="18082" title="Chef Goes Nanners" label="Chef Goes Nanners"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="18143" end="18155" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q388457" start="18304" end="18320" title="Weight Gain 4000" label="Weight Gain 4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q465695" start="18339" end="18357" title="Kathie Lee Gifford" label="Kathie Lee Gifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q280244" start="18616" end="18628" title="Summer Sucks" label="Summer Sucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253951" start="18692" end="18700" title="Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist" label="Dr. Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="18715" end="18729" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q211685" start="19434" end="19437" title="200 (South Park)" label="200"/>
<link wikidata="Q47352" start="19450" end="19462" title="Eric Cartman" label="Eric Cartman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19791" end="19821" title="South Park: The Stick of Truth" label="South Park: The Stick of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q105622485" start="19855" end="19885" title="South ParQ Vaccination Special" label="South ParQ Vaccination Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q280244" start="19939" end="19951" title="Summer Sucks" label="Summer Sucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11162356" start="20034" end="20038" title="twig" label="twig"/>
<link wikidata="Q165371" start="20069" end="20082" title="pink triangle" label="pink triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q898198" start="20163" end="20171" title="Chef Aid" label="Chef Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q951038" start="20852" end="20886" title="South Park (Park County, Colorado)" label="South Park (Park County, Colorado)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304558" start="20888" end="20903" title="South Park City" label="South Park City"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294628" wikidata="Q742202" url="?curid=294628" title="2005 in film">
<text>2005 in film is an overview of events, including the highest-grossing films, award ceremonies, festivals, a list of country-specific lists of films released, notable deaths and film debuts.

== Highest-grossing films ==

The top 10 films released in 2005 by worldwide gross are as follows:

==Events==
==Awards==
== 2005 films ==
=== By country/region ===
* List of American films of 2005
* List of Argentine films of 2005
* List of Australian films of 2005
* List of Bangladeshi films of 2005
* List of Brazilian films of 2005
* List of British films of 2005
* List of Chinese films of 2005
* List of Canadian films of 2005
* List of Dutch films of 2005
* List of French films of 2005
* List of German films of the 2000s
* List of Hong Kong films of 2005
* List of Indian films of 2005
** List of Bengali films of 2005
** List of Bollywood films of 2005
**List of Kannada films of 2005
**List of Malayalam films of 2005
** List of Tamil films of 2005
** List of Telugu films of 2005
* List of Italian films of 2005
* List of Japanese films of 2005
* List of Mexican films of 2005
* List of Pakistani films of 2005
* List of Russian films of 2005
* List of South Korean films of 2005
* List of Spanish films of 2005

=== By genre/medium ===
* List of action films of 2005
* List of animated feature films of 2005
* List of avant-garde films of 2005
* List of crime films of 2005
* List of comedy films of 2005
* List of drama films of 2005
* List of horror films of 2005
* List of science fiction films of 2005
* List of thriller films of 2005
* List of western films of 2005

== Births ==
* January 4 – Dafne Keen, Spanish-English actress
* January 25 – Avantika Vandanapu, American actress
* February 23 – Arica Himmel, American actress 
* February 25 – Noah Jupe, English actor
* April 13 – Brandon Severs, American actor 
* April 29 – Shahadi Wright Joseph, American actress, singer and dancer
* May 3 – Maxwell Jenkins, American actor
* May 13 – Tristan Pravong, American actor
* June 6 – Soma Santoki, Japanese actor
* July 20 – Alison Fernandez, American actress
* July 25 – Pierce Gagnon, American actor
* August 10 – Sunny Suljic, American actor
* August 18 – Brady Hepner, American actor
* August 30 – Sophia Valverde, Brazilian actress
* September 20 – Jason Drucker, American actor
* October 1 – Rosalie Chiang, American actress
* October 7 – Lulu Wilson, American actress
* October 31 - Dixie Egerickx, English actress
* November 18 – Lia McHugh, American actress
* December 16 – Owen Vaccaro, American actor
* December 30 – Brady Noon, American actor

== Deaths ==
==Film debuts==
==References==
==External links==
*List of 2005 films at IMDb
* 2005 Domestic Grosses at Box Office Mojo
*List of 2005 deaths at IMDb
* List of 2005 births at IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q742202" start="0" end="12" title="2005 in film" label="2005 in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561575" start="358" end="388" title="List of American films of 2005" label="List of American films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437575" start="391" end="422" title="List of Argentine films of 2005" label="List of Argentine films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562849" start="425" end="457" title="List of Australian films of 2005" label="List of Australian films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891488" start="460" end="493" title="List of Bangladeshi films of 2005" label="List of Bangladeshi films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564598" start="496" end="527" title="List of Brazilian films of 2005" label="List of Brazilian films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q777161" start="530" end="559" title="List of British films of 2005" label="List of British films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838377" start="562" end="591" title="List of Chinese films of 2005" label="List of Chinese films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565843" start="594" end="624" title="List of Canadian films of 2005" label="List of Canadian films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q131823653" start="627" end="654" title="List of Dutch films of 2005" label="List of Dutch films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571375" start="657" end="685" title="List of French films of 2005" label="List of French films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571819" start="688" end="721" title="List of German films of the 2000s" label="List of German films of the 2000s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573466" start="724" end="755" title="List of Hong Kong films of 2005" label="List of Hong Kong films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="758" end="786" title="List of Indian films of 2005" label="List of Indian films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563729" start="790" end="819" title="List of Bengali films of 2005" label="List of Bengali films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564331" start="823" end="854" title="List of Bollywood films of 2005" label="List of Bollywood films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575679" start="857" end="886" title="List of Kannada films of 2005" label="List of Kannada films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q778227" start="889" end="920" title="List of Malayalam films of 2005" label="List of Malayalam films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q776611" start="924" end="951" title="List of Tamil films of 2005" label="List of Tamil films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599238" start="955" end="983" title="List of Telugu films of 2005" label="List of Telugu films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574843" start="986" end="1015" title="List of Italian films of 2005" label="List of Italian films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575146" start="1018" end="1048" title="List of Japanese films of 2005" label="List of Japanese films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070256" start="1051" end="1080" title="List of Mexican films of 2005" label="List of Mexican films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593404" start="1083" end="1114" title="List of Pakistani films of 2005" label="List of Pakistani films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q777202" start="1117" end="1146" title="List of Russian films of 2005" label="List of Russian films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597582" start="1149" end="1183" title="List of South Korean films of 2005" label="List of South Korean films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q777318" start="1186" end="1215" title="List of Spanish films of 2005" label="List of Spanish films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1243" end="1271" title="List of action films of the 2000s#2005" label="List of action films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605918" start="1274" end="1312" title="List of animated feature films of 2005" label="List of animated feature films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606454" start="1315" end="1348" title="List of avant-garde films of the 2000s" label="List of avant-garde films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820709" start="1351" end="1378" title="List of crime films of 2005" label="List of crime films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1381" end="1409" title="List of comedy films of the 2000s#2005" label="List of comedy films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1412" end="1439" title="List of drama films of the 2000s#2005" label="List of drama films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623501" start="1442" end="1470" title="List of horror films of 2005" label="List of horror films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1473" end="1510" title="List of science fiction films of the 2000s#2005fc" label="List of science fiction films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1513" end="1543" title="List of thriller films of the 2000s#2005" label="List of thriller films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604036" start="1546" end="1575" title="List of Western films of the 2000s" label="List of western films of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q27560621" start="1604" end="1614" title="Dafne Keen" label="Dafne Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19955713" start="1655" end="1673" title="Avantika Vandanapu" label="Avantika Vandanapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q86463454" start="1708" end="1720" title="Arica Himmel" label="Arica Himmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38410137" start="1756" end="1765" title="Noah Jupe" label="Noah Jupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q62570944" start="1839" end="1860" title="Shahadi Wright Joseph" label="Shahadi Wright Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063370" start="1908" end="1923" title="Maxwell Jenkins" label="Maxwell Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q102246948" start="1994" end="2006" title="Soma Santoki" label="Soma Santoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304850" start="2035" end="2051" title="Alison Fernandez" label="Alison Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382695" start="2082" end="2095" title="Pierce Gagnon" label="Pierce Gagnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47467684" start="2126" end="2138" title="Sunny Suljic" label="Sunny Suljic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47503689" start="2212" end="2227" title="Sophia Valverde" label="Sophia Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924936" start="2264" end="2277" title="Jason Drucker" label="Jason Drucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q107565301" start="2308" end="2322" title="Rosalie Chiang" label="Rosalie Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q28802743" start="2355" end="2366" title="Lulu Wilson" label="Lulu Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q82252268" start="2400" end="2414" title="Dixie Egerickx" label="Dixie Egerickx"/>
<link wikidata="Q65768597" start="2448" end="2458" title="Lia McHugh" label="Lia McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134507" start="2493" end="2505" title="Owen Vaccaro" label="Owen Vaccaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q66779636" start="2538" end="2548" title="Brady Noon" label="Brady Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="2652" end="2656" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q223142" start="2684" end="2699" title="Box Office Mojo" label="Box Office Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="2724" end="2728" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="2754" end="2758" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294629" wikidata="Q3306217" url="?curid=294629" title="Sea of clouds">
<text>A sea of clouds is an overcast layer of stratocumulus clouds, as viewed from above, with a relatively uniform top which shows undulations of very different lengths resembling waves on the sea. A sea of fog is formed from stratus clouds or fog and does not show undulations.

In both cases, the phenomenon looks very similar to the open ocean. The comparison is even more complete if some mountain peaks rise above the clouds, thus resembling islands.

== Formation ==
A sea of clouds forms generally in valleys or over seas in very stable air mass conditions such as in a temperature inversion. Humidity can then reach saturation and condensation leads to a very uniform stratocumulus cloud, stratus cloud or fog. Above this layer, the air must be dry. This is a common situation in a high-pressure area with cooling at the surface by radiative cooling at night in summer, or advection of cold air in winter or in a marine layer.

== Artistic uses ==
* The term &quot;Sea of Clouds&quot; (雲海) is a Chinese poetic term for the surroundings of a mountain&#x27;s summit, such as the one at Huangshan.
* &quot;Wanderer above the Sea of Fog&quot; is an oil painting composed in 1818 by the German Romantic artist Caspar David Friedrich depicting this phenomenon.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3306217" start="2" end="15" title="Sea of clouds" label="sea of clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055865" start="22" end="30" title="overcast" label="overcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q40564" start="40" end="59" title="stratocumulus cloud" label="stratocumulus cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306217" start="195" end="205" title="Sea of clouds" label="sea of fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q40526" start="221" end="234" title="stratus cloud" label="stratus cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="239" end="242" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q216823" start="539" end="547" title="air mass" label="air mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="572" end="593" title="temperature inversion" label="temperature inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709543" start="785" end="803" title="high-pressure area" label="high-pressure area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997395" start="835" end="852" title="radiative cooling" label="radiative cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764294" start="916" end="928" title="marine layer" label="marine layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36034" start="1087" end="1096" title="Huangshan" label="Huangshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311243" start="1106" end="1135" title="Wanderer above the Sea of Fog" label="Wanderer above the Sea of Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q174705" start="1148" end="1160" title="oil painting" label="oil painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="1185" end="1200" title="German Romantic" label="German Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104884" start="1208" end="1230" title="Caspar David Friedrich" label="Caspar David Friedrich"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294632" wikidata="Q3254775" url="?curid=294632" title="List of Washington Metro stations">
<text>The Washington Metro (commonly called Metro, and branded Metrorail) is a rapid transit system serving Washington, D.C. and neighboring communities in Maryland and Virginia, both inside and outside the Capital Beltway.

With an average weekday ridership of 764,300, the Washington Metro is the second-busiest rapid transit system in the United States behind the New York City Subway. , the system has 98 active stations on six lines with of tracks.

The Washington Metro system was conceived as an alternative to constructing a large freeway system throughout the Washington, D.C. area. It was partially financed with funds originally dedicated to highway construction. Construction began in 1969, and in 1976 the first section of the Metro system opened along the Red Line between the and stations in Washington, D.C. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, more stations were opened in the city and the suburban communities of Arlington County, the City of Alexandria, and Fairfax County in Virginia as well as Montgomery and Prince George&#x27;s Counties in Maryland. By 1991, five rail lines were open: the Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, and Blue Lines. The system, as originally planned, was completed in 2001 with the extension of the Green Line to . In 2004, three stations were opened: an extension of the Blue Line to the and stations and the first infill station, . The Silver Line opened in two phases, adding five stations in 2014 and six in 2022. On the Yellow and Blue Lines, an additional infill station at opened on May 19, 2023.

Nine Metrorail stations are officially designated transfer stations, although other intermediate stations also allow passengers to transfer between lines. Four of these stations have separate, perpendicular upper and lower levels, which open at different times. Two other transfer stations, and , have parallel stacked platforms. Ten stations are termini (stations at the end of lines); several other non-terminus stations are used to short turn trains in regular service.

The busiest station in the system in 2023 was Metro Center, with more than 3.9 million passenger entries over the course of the year. Rosslyn was the busiest station in Virginia, while Silver Spring was the busiest in Maryland. The system&#x27;s 10 busiest stations are all located in Washington.

==Lines==

There are six Washington Metro lines, each named for a different color. All lines except the Red Line share tracks.

==Stations==





==Notes==
* Stations noted in this list twice with upper and lower levels are considered by WMATA as a single station. The levels are noted separately here because they opened on different dates.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="4" end="20" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254775" start="38" end="43" title="List of Washington Metro stations" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254775" start="57" end="66" title="List of Washington Metro stations" label="Metrorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="73" end="86" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="102" end="118" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="150" end="158" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="163" end="171" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999662" start="201" end="216" title="Interstate 495 (Capital Beltway)" label="Capital Beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602914" start="293" end="349" title="List of United States rapid transit systems by ridership" label="second-busiest rapid transit system in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="361" end="381" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="533" end="540" title="Controlled-access highway" label="freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193330" start="764" end="772" title="Red Line (Washington Metro)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="920" end="936" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="938" end="960" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="the City of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="966" end="980" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="1004" end="1014" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="1019" end="1039" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715683" start="1107" end="1113" title="Orange Line (Washington Metro)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715207" start="1123" end="1128" title="Green Line (Washington Metro)" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q11504311" start="1346" end="1360" title="infill station" label="infill station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711838" start="1368" end="1379" title="Silver Line (Washington Metro)" label="Silver Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710841" start="1455" end="1461" title="Yellow Line (Washington Metro)" label="Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602185" start="1466" end="1470" title="Blue Line (Washington Metro)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578710" start="1846" end="1863" title="split platform" label="stacked platforms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1882" end="1889" title="Train station#Terminus" label="termini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502119" start="1970" end="1980" title="short turn" label="short turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966977" start="2055" end="2067" title="Metro Center station" label="Metro Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516347" start="2194" end="2207" title="Silver Spring station (Maryland)" label="Silver Spring"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294633" wikidata="Q7938761" url="?curid=294633" title="Vladimir Žerjavić">
<text>Vladimir Žerjavić (2 August 1912 – 5 September 2001) was a Croatian economist and demographer who published a series of historical articles and books during the 1980s and 1990s on demographic losses in Yugoslavia during World War II and of Axis forces and civilians in the Bleiburg repatriations shortly after the capitulation of Germany. From 1964 to 1982, he worked as an adviser for industrial development in the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa.

==Early life==
Žerjavić was born in Križ, Zagreb County and graduated at the Faculty of Economics at the University of Zagreb. He was one of four siblings, having two sisters, Viktorija (1908–1993) and Darinka (1921–2009) and a brother, Slavko. After 1934 he worked in the private sector, and after 1945 in various institutions of SFR Yugoslavia. Between 1958 and 1982 he worked abroad as an industrial consultant. In 1964 he joined the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and later consulted the governments of various nations.

==Žerjavić&#x27;s calculations regarding World War II in Yugoslavia==
In the 1980s Žerjavić conducted a research on demographic losses in Yugoslavia during World War II, at about the same time as Bogoljub Kočović, a Serb statistician. Žerjavić&#x27;s calculations of total victims in Yugoslavia are based on looking at pre- and post-war censuses. Zerjavić asserted that Yugoslavia lost a total 1,027,000 people in World War II.

Of those, the vast majority, 623,000 people, died in the Independent State of Croatia - 295,000 in Croatia itself, and 328,000 in Bosnia and Herzegovina (both part of the Independent State of Croatia and under the Ustaše regime at the time), and another 36,000 from those countries died abroad. According to ethnicity and/or religion as needed, Žerjavić provided the following estimates of victims in the Independent State of Croatia, for both the war and immediate post-war period:

:*322,000 Serbs
:*192,000 Croats
:*77,000 Muslims
:*26,000 Jews
:*16,000 Roma

His claims include 153,000 civilian victims in Croatia and 174,000 in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and of that, 85,000 people from Bosnia and Herzegovina and 48,000 from Croatia died in concentration camps. As for the total casualties in Jasenovac concentration camp, he estimated that 85,000 were killed, of which 45–52,000 were Serbs, 13,000 were Jews, 10,000 were Roma, 10,000 were Croats and 2,000 were Muslims.

With regard to Serbs, Žerjavić&#x27;s calculation ended with a total of 197,000 Serbian civilian victims within the borders of the Independent State of Croatia: 50,000 at Jasenovac concentration camp, 25,000 of typhoid, 45,000 killed by the Germans, 15,000 killed by Italians, 34,000 civilians killed in battles between Ustaše, Chetniks and Partisans, 28,000 killed in prisons, pits and other camps, etc. Another 125,000 Serbs inside the Independent State of Croatia were killed as combatants, raising the total to 322,000.

Regarding the Yugoslav Partisan pursuit of Nazi collaborators, when soldiers and civilians associated with the NDH and other Axis forces were killed by the Yugoslav Partisans, Žerjavić estimated that around 45–55,000 Croats and Bosniaks, 8-10,000 Slovenes, and around 2,000 Serbs and Montenegrins were killed.

===Žerjavić&#x27;s opinions and statements===
Žerjavić&#x27;s investigations and statistical analyses, like others such as Kočović&#x27;s examinations, aim to show that the original number of lives lost on all sides during World War II in Yugoslavia was considerably exaggerated, partly due to the war reparations claims by the Yugoslav government shortly after the war.

An excerpt from Žerjavić&#x27;s book &quot;Manipulations with WW2 victims in Yugoslavia&quot; reads:
===Independent verification ===
====Positive====
Some international agencies and experts have accepted Žerjavić&#x27;s (and almost equal data achieved by Serbian statistician Bogoljub Kočović) calculations as the most reliable data on war losses in Yugoslavia during World War II. A U.S. Census report from 1954 states: &quot;Details of the (Yugoslav) 1948 census were kept secret but, in negotiations with Germany, it became apparent that the real figure of the dead was about one million. An American study in 1954 calculated 1,067,000.&quot;

Following Tito&#x27;s death in 1980, the 1948 census results became available for comparison with those of 1931. Allowances had to be made for the birth rates of the different communities and for emigration. Research was pioneered by Professor Kočović, a Serb living in the West, whose findings were published in January 1985. He assessed the number of dead as 1,014,000. Later that year a Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts Conference heard that the figure was 1,100,000.

Žerjavić&#x27;s and Kočović&#x27;s calculations of war losses in Yugoslavia during World War II were accepted by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, together with other typically higher estimates:

Due to differing views and lack of documentation, estimates for the number of Serbian victims in Croatia range widely, from 25,000 to more than one million. The estimated number of Serbs killed in Jasenovac ranges from 25,000 to 700,000. The most reliable figures place the number of Serbs killed by the Ustaša between 330,000 and 390,000, with 45,000 to 52,000 Serbs murdered in Jasenovac.

Concerning Žerjavić&#x27;s calculations on the number of casualties linked to the Bleiburg repatriations, historian Ivo Goldstein writes that it is &quot;difficult to speak of the overall number&quot; and that &quot;the only option is to rely on the research by Vladimir Žerjavić, which has up to now shown itself to be the most reliable in overall estimates&quot;.
====Negative====
Some Serb critics of Žerjavić consider his work to have been politically motivated, with the aim of downplaying Croatian nationalist atrocities during the war, such as at Jasenovac.

Critics point out that Serbs in Bosnia and Croatia lived in rural areas and therefore had a much higher growth rate than others. Žerjavić used growth rates for Serbs in Bosnia as 1.1% (as for all nations together), while actual growth rate was 2.4% (1921–31) and 3.5% (1949–53). They posit he intentionally underestimated growth rate of Serbs to decrease the Serb death count, according to critics. Some, like Đorđević, claimed that Serbian losses were in fact 1.6 million, a number which goes in other direction compared to the official estimates that Žerjavić denied. The higher numbers was opposed by Bogoljub Kočović&#x27;s book, published in 1997, which tries to refute Đorđević&#x27;s efforts to &quot;reinstate&quot; the &quot;great numbers&quot; victims figures dominant in Communist Yugoslavia.

The Simon Wiesenthal Center and Yad Vashem still use the old estimates given by the Yugoslav authorities. The Simon Wiesenthal Center cites the Yad Vashem document, the &quot;Encyclopedia of the Holocaust&quot;. In a separate entry on the Ustasha movement in general, however, Yad Vashem cites the extermination of &quot;over 500,000&quot; Serbs in the entire NDH.

Regarding Žerjavić&#x27;s research on World War Two casualties, Croatian historian Vladimir Geiger notes that individual researchers who assert the inevitability of using identification of casualties and fatalities by individual names have raised serious objections to Žerjavić&#x27;s calculations/estimates of human losses by using standard statistical methods and consolidation of data from various sources, pointing out that such an approach is insufficient and unreliable in determining the number and character of casualties and fatalities, as well as the affiliation of the perpetrators of the crimes.

==Žerjavić&#x27;s calculations regarding the Bosnian war==
According to Žerjavić&#x27;s calculations, there were 215,000 victims in Bosnia-Herzegovina in the Bosnian war of 1992–95, of which 160,000 were Bosniaks, 30,000 Croats and 25,000 Serbs. However, according to newer research done by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the number of people killed in the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina was around 102,000: 69.24% (70,625) Bosniaks, 25.35% (25,857) Serbs, and 5.33% (5,437) Croats.

==References== 
===Sources===
*

==External links==
*Dinko Sakic trial, srce.hr; accessed 10 November 2015.
*&quot;Žrtve licitiranja &quot;Sahrana jednog mita, Bogoljub Kočović&quot;, knjizara.com; accessed 10 November 2015. 
*Human Rights Watch: &quot;Šansa za pravdu? Procesuiranje ratnih zločina u bosanskoj Republici Srpskoj: Kontekst&quot; (March 2006); accessed 10 November 2015. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7938761" start="0" end="17" title="Vladimir Žerjavić" label="Vladimir Žerjavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="59" end="66" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="68" end="77" title="economics" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="220" end="232" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="273" end="295" title="Bleiburg repatriations" label="Bleiburg repatriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="416" end="461" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q263195" start="500" end="519" title="Križ, Zagreb County" label="Križ, Zagreb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q675848" start="569" end="589" title="University of Zagreb" label="University of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="795" end="809" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="SFR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="901" end="946" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="1045" end="1071" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="World War II in Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937692" start="1200" end="1216" title="Bogoljub Kočović" label="Bogoljub Kočović"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="1563" end="1585" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="1604" end="1632" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="1647" end="1653" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="2177" end="2195" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="2229" end="2257" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="2423" end="2428" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="2539" end="2567" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="2736" end="2744" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="2749" end="2758" title="Partisans (Yugoslavia)" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="2846" end="2874" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="2947" end="2994" title="Yugoslav Partisan pursuit of Nazi collaborators" label="Yugoslav Partisan pursuit of Nazi collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3467" end="3479" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036450" start="3542" end="3613" title="World War II reparations towards Yugoslavia" label="war reparations claims by the Yugoslav government shortly after the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3984" end="3996" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132636" start="4653" end="4689" title="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4822" end="4834" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q238990" start="4856" end="4895" title="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum" label="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q945901" start="5454" end="5467" title="Ivo Goldstein" label="Ivo Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="6713" end="6736" title="Simon Wiesenthal Center" label="Simon Wiesenthal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="6741" end="6751" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="6819" end="6842" title="Simon Wiesenthal Center" label="Simon Wiesenthal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906963" start="6884" end="6913" title="Encyclopedia of the Holocaust" label="Encyclopedia of the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="7816" end="7834" title="Bosnia-Herzegovina" label="Bosnia-Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="7842" end="7853" title="Bosnian war" label="Bosnian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="7888" end="7896" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="7905" end="7910" title="Croat" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="7923" end="7927" title="Serb" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="8038" end="8042" title="ICTY" label="ICTY"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294634" wikidata="Q643599" url="?curid=294634" title="2004 in film">
<text>2004 in film is an overview of events, including the highest-grossing films, award ceremonies, festivals, a list of country-specific lists of films released, notable deaths and film debuts. &quot;Shrek 2&quot; was the year&#x27;s top-grossing film, and &quot;Million Dollar Baby&quot; won the Academy Award for Best Picture.

==Evaluation of the year==
American film critic and professor Emanuel Levy described 2004 as &quot;a banner year for actors, particularly men.&quot; He went on to emphasize, &quot;I can&#x27;t think of another year in which there were so many good performances, in every genre. It was a year in which we saw the entire spectrum of demographics displayed on the big screen, from vet actors such as Clint Eastwood and Morgan Freeman, to seniors such as Pacino, De Niro, and Hoffman, to newcomers such as Topher Grace. As always, though, the center of the male acting pyramid is occupied by actors in their forties and fifties, such as Sean Penn, Johnny Depp, Liam Neeson, Kevin Kline, Don Cheadle, Jim Carrey. In terms of film genres, Levy stated, &quot;The year&#x27;s most prominent genre was the biopicture, a genre that in the past has suffered from lack of prestige and abundance of clichés. There were a dozen worthy biopictures, including &quot;Alexander&quot;, &quot;The Aviator&quot;, &quot;Beyond the Sea&quot;, &quot;Finding Neverland&quot;, &quot;Hotel Rwanda&quot;, &quot;Kinsey&quot;, &quot;Motorcycle Diaries&quot;, and &quot;Ray&quot;. Celebrating entrepreneurs, playwrights, singers, sex researchers, composers, and politicians, they continued to show one alarming bias: They were all about men. You don&#x27;t have to be a feminist critic or a sociologist to deduct that, as far as real or reel heroes are concerned, women matter less in Hollywood and American society at large. Can&#x27;t anyone come up with a strong part for a femme-driven bio a la British film &quot;Vera Drake&quot;, without relegating women to showbiz personae.&quot; Levy also stated, &quot;Classic Hollywood cinema, which reached its height during the golden age of studio system and has been in decline, is kept alive by one major force: Clint Eastwood. The &quot;Man With No Name&quot; has become the &quot;Man With the Best Name&quot;, a director who&#x27;s experiencing an unparallel artistic height with “Million Dollar Baby,” a follow-up to the equally sublime &quot;Mystic River&quot;.&quot;

==Highest-grossing films==

The top 10 films released in 2004 by worldwide gross are as follows:

&quot;Shrek 2&quot; set a new record for total gross by an animated film making it the highest-grossing animated film of all time. The record was later surpassed by &quot;Toy Story 3&quot; in 2010. It also remained the highest-grossing non-Disney animated film until it was surpassed by &quot;Despicable Me 2&quot; in 2013 and the highest-grossing non Disney or Universal animated film until it was surpassed by &quot;Ne Zha 2&quot; in 2025. On July 7, &quot;Spider-Man 2&quot; reached a $200 million domestic gross in a record time of eight days. On July 18, after 19 days in release, &quot;Spider-Man 2&quot; reached $300 million domestically in another record time. &quot;Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban&quot; has the highest international revenue of $546 million compared to &quot;Shrek 2&quot;″s $487.5 million.

&quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot;, directed by Mel Gibson, became the first blockbuster motion picture of 2004 and also the highest grossing R-rated film domestically. &quot;Meet the Fockers&quot; beat 2003&#x27;s &quot;Bruce Almighty&quot; record for the highest-grossing comedy film; both were released by Universal.

==Events==
==Awards==
;Palme d&#x27;Or (Cannes Film Festival):
:&quot;Fahrenheit 9/11&quot;, directed by Michael Moore, United States
;Golden Lion (Venice Film Festival):
:&quot;Vera Drake&quot;, directed by Mike Leigh, United Kingdom
;Golden Bear (Berlin Film Festival):
:&quot;Head-On&quot;, directed by Fatih Akın, Germany &amp; Turkey

== 2004 films ==
=== By country/region ===
* List of American films of 2004
* List of Argentine films of 2004
* List of Australian films of 2004
* List of Bangladeshi films of 2004
* List of Brazilian films of 2004
* List of British films of 2004
* List of Canadian films of 2004
* List of Chinese films of 2004
** List of Hong Kong films of 2004
* List of French films of 2004
* List of Indian films of 2004
**List of Bengali films of 2004
** List of Bollywood films of 2004
** List of Kannada films of 2004
** List of Tamil films of 2004
** List of Telugu films of 2004
**List of Malayalam films of 2004
* List of Italian films of 2004
* List of Japanese films of 2004
* List of Mexican films of 2004
* List of Pakistani films of 2004
* List of Russian films of 2004
* List of South Korean films of 2004
* List of Spanish films of 2004

=== By genre/medium ===
* List of action films of 2004
* List of animated feature films of 2004
* List of avant-garde films of 2004
* List of crime films of 2004
* List of comedy films of 2004
* List of drama films of 2004
* List of horror films of 2004
* List of science fiction films of 2004
* List of thriller films of 2004
* List of western films of 2004

==Births==
* January 10 – Kaitlyn Maher, American singer and actress
* January 16 – Harry Collett, English actor
* January 25 – Rohan Chand, American actor
* February 19 – Millie Bobby Brown, English actress and producer
* March 5 – Kit Connor, English actor
* April 21 – Emma Tremblay, Canadian actress
* April 23 – Teagan Croft, Australian actress
* May 3 – Mel Maia, Brazilian actress
* May 13 – Ava Acres, American actress
* May 22 – Peyton Elizabeth Lee, American actress
* June 8 - Francesca Capaldi, American actress 
* June 19 – Louis Ashbourne Serkis, English actor
* July 2 – Caitlin Carmichael, American actress
* July 4 – Alex R. Hibbert, American actor
* July 6 – Dylan Kingwell, Canadian actor
* July 16
**Ruby Barnhill, English actress
**Amiah Miller, American actress
* July 17
**Logan Allen, American actor
** Shamon Brown Jr., American actor
* August 5 – Albert Tsai, American actor
* August 14 – Marsai Martin, American actress
* August 19 – Siena Agudong, American actress
* September 10 – Gabriel Bateman, American actor
* September 23 – Anthony Gonzalez, American actor
* October 3 – Noah Schnapp, American actor
* October 10 – Zain Al Rafeea, Syrian-born Norwegian actor
* November 1 
**Jayden Bartels, American YouTuber, singer and actress
* November 11 – Oakes Fegley, American actor
* November 16
**Marlon Kazadi, Canadian actor
**Jack Champion, American actor
* November 27 – Jet Jurgensmeyer, American actor
* December 5 – Jules LeBlanc, American YouTuber, singer and actress
* December 9 – Nico Parker, English actress
* December 22 – Bryce Gheisar, American actor 
* December 30 – Lyliana Wray, American actress

== Deaths ==

== Film debuts ==
== References ==
==External links==
*List of 2004 films at IMDb
* 2004 Domestic Grosses at Box Office Mojo
*List of 2004 deaths at IMDb
* List of 2004 births at IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q643599" start="0" end="12" title="2004 in film" label="2004 in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q485983" start="196" end="203" title="Shrek 2" label="Shrek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q184255" start="259" end="278" title="Million Dollar Baby" label="Million Dollar Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="293" end="323" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369097" start="388" end="400" title="Emanuel Levy" label="Emanuel Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="723" end="737" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q48337" start="742" end="756" title="Morgan Freeman" label="Morgan Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="777" end="783" title="Al Pacino" label="Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="785" end="792" title="Robert De Niro" label="De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="798" end="805" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q277978" start="828" end="840" title="Topher Grace" label="Topher Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="959" end="968" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="970" end="981" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="983" end="994" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105817" start="996" end="1007" title="Kevin Kline" label="Kevin Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q272019" start="1009" end="1020" title="Don Cheadle" label="Don Cheadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="1022" end="1032" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q485983" start="2521" end="2528" title="Shrek 2" label="Shrek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q187278" start="2686" end="2697" title="Toy Story 3" label="Toy Story 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q824328" start="2707" end="2711" title="2010 in film" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q637212" start="2808" end="2823" title="Despicable Me 2" label="Despicable Me 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q131937861" start="2933" end="2941" title="Ne Zha 2" label="Ne Zha 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q190145" start="2974" end="2986" title="Spider-Man 2" label="Spider-Man 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="3348" end="3373" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="3393" end="3403" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="3422" end="3433" title="blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="3487" end="3494" title="Motion Picture Association of America film rating system" label="R-rated"/>
<link wikidata="Q207816" start="3566" end="3580" title="Bruce Almighty" label="Bruce Almighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="3689" end="3704" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q221852" start="3736" end="3751" title="Fahrenheit 9/11" label="Fahrenheit 9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="3771" end="3784" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q209459" start="3801" end="3812" title="Golden Lion" label="Golden Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q916645" start="3844" end="3854" title="Vera Drake" label="Vera Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q315756" start="3874" end="3884" title="Mike Leigh" label="Mike Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="3902" end="3913" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q325648" start="3945" end="3952" title="Head-On (film)" label="Head-On"/>
<link wikidata="Q77061" start="3972" end="3982" title="Fatih Akın" label="Fatih Akın"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561574" start="4051" end="4081" title="List of American films of 2004" label="List of American films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437574" start="4084" end="4115" title="List of Argentine films of 2004" label="List of Argentine films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562847" start="4118" end="4150" title="List of Australian films of 2004" label="List of Australian films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589321" start="4153" end="4186" title="List of Bangladeshi films of 2004" label="List of Bangladeshi films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564596" start="4189" end="4220" title="List of Brazilian films of 2004" label="List of Brazilian films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q777714" start="4223" end="4252" title="List of British films of 2004" label="List of British films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565841" start="4255" end="4285" title="List of Canadian films of 2004" label="List of Canadian films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838372" start="4288" end="4317" title="List of Chinese films of 2004" label="List of Chinese films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578084" start="4321" end="4352" title="List of Hong Kong films of 2004" label="List of Hong Kong films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571374" start="4355" end="4383" title="List of French films of 2004" label="List of French films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563728" start="4417" end="4446" title="List of Bengali films of 2004" label="List of Bengali films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564330" start="4450" end="4481" title="List of Bollywood films of 2004" label="List of Bollywood films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575678" start="4485" end="4514" title="List of Kannada films of 2004" label="List of Kannada films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q777135" start="4518" end="4545" title="List of Tamil films of 2004" label="List of Tamil films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599237" start="4549" end="4577" title="List of Telugu films of 2004" label="List of Telugu films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589112" start="4580" end="4611" title="List of Malayalam films of 2004" label="List of Malayalam films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574841" start="4614" end="4643" title="List of Italian films of 2004" label="List of Italian films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575145" start="4646" end="4676" title="List of Japanese films of 2004" label="List of Japanese films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070239" start="4679" end="4708" title="List of Mexican films of 2004" label="List of Mexican films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593402" start="4711" end="4742" title="List of Pakistani films of 2004" label="List of Pakistani films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596061" start="4745" end="4774" title="List of Russian films of 2004" label="List of Russian films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597581" start="4777" end="4811" title="List of South Korean films of 2004" label="List of South Korean films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q777349" start="4814" end="4843" title="List of Spanish films of 2004" label="List of Spanish films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4871" end="4899" title="List of action films of the 2000s#2004" label="List of action films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605915" start="4902" end="4940" title="List of animated feature films of 2004" label="List of animated feature films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606454" start="4943" end="4976" title="List of avant-garde films of the 2000s" label="List of avant-garde films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820704" start="4979" end="5006" title="List of crime films of 2004" label="List of crime films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5009" end="5037" title="List of comedy films of the 2000s#2004" label="List of comedy films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5040" end="5067" title="List of drama films of the 2000s#2004" label="List of drama films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623500" start="5070" end="5098" title="List of horror films of 2004" label="List of horror films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5101" end="5138" title="List of science fiction films of the 2000s#2004fc" label="List of science fiction films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5141" end="5171" title="List of thriller films of the 2000s#2004" label="List of thriller films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604036" start="5174" end="5203" title="List of Western films of the 2000s" label="List of western films of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q522088" start="5231" end="5244" title="Kaitlyn Maher" label="Kaitlyn Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q79189030" start="5289" end="5302" title="Harry Collett" label="Harry Collett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202628" start="5333" end="5344" title="Rohan Chand" label="Rohan Chand"/>
<link wikidata="Q25936414" start="5377" end="5395" title="Millie Bobby Brown" label="Millie Bobby Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q58007617" start="5438" end="5448" title="Kit Connor" label="Kit Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47009399" start="5477" end="5490" title="Emma Tremblay" label="Emma Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q26255161" start="5522" end="5534" title="Teagan Croft" label="Teagan Croft"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424556" start="5565" end="5573" title="Mel Maia" label="Mel Maia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637051" start="5604" end="5613" title="Ava Acres" label="Ava Acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069887" start="5643" end="5663" title="Peyton Elizabeth Lee" label="Peyton Elizabeth Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685550" start="5693" end="5710" title="Francesca Capaldi" label="Francesca Capaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26727504" start="5742" end="5764" title="Louis Ashbourne Serkis" label="Louis Ashbourne Serkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017882" start="5791" end="5809" title="Caitlin Carmichael" label="Caitlin Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717178" start="5839" end="5854" title="Alex R. Hibbert" label="Alex R. Hibbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q28677094" start="5882" end="5896" title="Dylan Kingwell" label="Dylan Kingwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20867700" start="5925" end="5938" title="Ruby Barnhill" label="Ruby Barnhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982442" start="5958" end="5970" title="Amiah Miller" label="Amiah Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803253" start="6001" end="6012" title="Logan Allen (actor)" label="Logan Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856584" start="6078" end="6089" title="Albert Tsai" label="Albert Tsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q23874827" start="6120" end="6133" title="Marsai Martin" label="Marsai Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56633923" start="6166" end="6179" title="Siena Agudong" label="Siena Agudong"/>
<link wikidata="Q20740875" start="6215" end="6230" title="Gabriel Bateman" label="Gabriel Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42720644" start="6264" end="6280" title="Anthony Gonzalez (actor)" label="Anthony Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q26926633" start="6311" end="6323" title="Noah Schnapp" label="Noah Schnapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q53761485" start="6355" end="6369" title="Zain Al Rafeea" label="Zain Al Rafeea"/>
<link wikidata="Q90545626" start="6415" end="6429" title="Jayden Bartels" label="Jayden Bartels"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974029" start="6485" end="6497" title="Oakes Fegley" label="Oakes Fegley"/>
<link wikidata="Q105727489" start="6530" end="6543" title="Marlon Kazadi" label="Marlon Kazadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65966450" start="6562" end="6575" title="Jack Champion" label="Jack Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670585" start="6608" end="6624" title="Jet Jurgensmeyer" label="Jet Jurgensmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55362352" start="6656" end="6669" title="Jules LeBlanc" label="Jules LeBlanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q62902417" start="6724" end="6735" title="Nico Parker" label="Nico Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q47009271" start="6769" end="6782" title="Bryce Gheisar" label="Bryce Gheisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q111876907" start="6816" end="6828" title="Lyliana Wray" label="Lyliana Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="6939" end="6943" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q223142" start="6971" end="6986" title="Box Office Mojo" label="Box Office Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="7011" end="7015" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="7041" end="7045" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294639" wikidata="Q1191035" url="?curid=294639" title="Mahayana sutras">
<text>The Mahāyāna sūtras are a broad genre of Buddhist scripture (&quot;sūtra&quot;) that are accepted as and as &quot;buddhavacana&quot; (&quot;Buddha word&quot;) in certain communities of Mahāyāna Buddhism. They are largely preserved in Sanskrit manuscripts, and translations in the Tibetan Buddhist canon and Chinese Buddhist canon. Several hundred Mahāyāna sūtras survive in Sanskrit, or in Chinese and Tibetan translations. They are also sometimes called &quot;Vaipulya&quot; (&quot;extensive&quot;) sūtras by earlier sources. The Buddhist scholar Asaṅga classified the Mahāyāna sūtras as part of the &quot;Bodhisattva Piṭaka&quot;, a collection of texts meant for bodhisattvas.

Modern scholars of Buddhist studies generally hold that these sūtras first began to appear between the 1st century BCE and the 1st century CE. They continued being composed, compiled, and edited until the decline of Buddhism in ancient India. Some of them may have also been composed outside of India, such as in Central Asia and in East Asia. Some of the most influential Mahāyāna sūtras include the &quot;Lotus Sutra&quot;, the &quot;Perfection of Wisdom Sutras&quot;, the &quot;Avatamsaka Sutra&quot;, the &quot;Lankavatara Sutra&quot;, the &quot;Pure Land Sutras,&quot; and the &quot;Nirvana Sutra.&quot;

Mahāyāna Buddhists typically consider several major Mahāyāna sūtras to have been taught by Shakyamuni Buddha, committed to memory and recited by his disciples, in particular Ananda. However, other Mahāyāna sūtras are presented as being taught by other figures, such as bodhisattvas like Mañjuśrī and Avalokiteśvara. There are various reasons that Indian Mahāyāna Buddhists gave to explain the fact that they only appeared at a later time. One such reason was that they had been hidden away in the land of the Nāgas (snake deities, dragons) until the proper time for their dissemination arrived.

The Mahāyāna sūtras were not accepted by all Buddhists in ancient India, and the various Indian Buddhist schools disagreed on their status as &quot;word of the Buddha&quot;. They are generally not accepted as the Buddha&#x27;s word by the school of Theravāda Buddhism.

== History and background ==
===Origins and early history===
The origins of the Mahāyāna and their sūtras are not completely understood. Modern scholars have proposed numerous theories about the origins of Mahāyāna and the Mahāyāna texts.

Some of the main theories are the following:

* The lay origins theory, first proposed by Jean Przyluski and then defended by Étienne Lamotte and Akira Hirakawa, states that laypersons were particularly important in the development of Mahāyāna and its texts. This is partly based on some texts like the Vimalakirti Sūtra, which praise lay figures at the expense of monastics. This theory is no longer widely accepted.
* The theory which held that Mahāyāna developed within the Mahāsāṃghika tradition. Drewes notes that there is actually little evidence that Mahāsāṃghika schools had a special connection to the production of Mahāyāna texts, and it seems Mahāyāna arose as a pan-Buddhist phenomenon.
* The &quot;forest hypothesis&quot;, which states that Mahāyāna arose mainly among hardcore wilderness ascetics (&quot;aranyavasins&quot;) who were attempting to imitate the Buddha. This has been defended by Paul Harrison and Jan Nattier. This theory is based on certain sutras like the &quot;Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra&quot; and the &quot;Mahāyāna Rāṣṭrapālapaṛiprcchā&quot; which promote ascetic practice in the wilderness as a superior and elite path. These texts criticize monks who live in cities and denigrate the forest life. However, Drewes notes that only a few early Mahāyāna texts advocate or promote this practice, and other Sūtras outright discourage forest dwelling or say it is unnecessary.
* The cult of the book theory, defended by Gregory Schopen, states that Mahāyāna arose among a number of loosely connected book worshiping groups of monastics, who studied, memorized, copied and revered particular Mahāyāna sūtras. Schopen also argued that these groups mostly rejected stupa worship, or worshiping holy relics.

According to David Drewes, none of these theories have been satisfactorily proven and they lack sufficient evidence. Drewes writes that the most likely origin of Mahāyāna is that it was &quot;primarily a textual movement, focused on the revelation, preaching, and dissemination of Mahāyāna sūtras, that developed within, and never really departed from, traditional Buddhist social and institutional structures.&quot; The figures of this movement probably saw themselves as bodhisattvas entrusted with teaching and preserving the Mahāyāna sūtras.

Scholars like Joseph Walser have also noted how Mahāyāna sūtras are heterogeneous and seem to have been composed in different communities with varying ideas. Walser writes that &quot;Mahāyāna was probably never unitary, but differed from region to region.&quot;. Likewise, Hajime Nakamura states:Unlike the various recensions of the Hīnayāna canon, which were virtually closed by the early centuries of the common era and which shared, at least ideally, a common structure . . . the Mahāyāna scriptures were composed in a variety of disparate social and religious environments over the course of several centuries, diverge widely from each other in content and outlook, and were in many cases meant to stand as individual works representing (it has been conjectured) rivals to the entire Hīnayāna corpus.There is also no evidence that Mahāyāna ever referred to a separate formal school or sect of Buddhism, but rather that it existed within the early Buddhist schools as a certain set of ideals, texts and later doctrines, for bodhisattvas. Mahāyānists also never had a separate Vinaya (monastic rule) from the early Buddhist schools. The Chinese monk Yijing who visited India in the seventh century, writes about how Mahāyāna monastics and non-Mahāyāna monastics lived together under the same Vinaya. The only difference among them was that Mahāyāna monks venerated the bodhisattvas and read the Mahāyāna sūtras.

Some scholars like Richard Gombrich think that Mahāyāna Sūtras only arose after the practice of writing down religious texts became widespread in India and thus that they were always written documents. However, James Apple and David Drewes have drawn attention to these oral features of the early Mahāyāna texts, which were not written documents but orally preserved teachings. Drewes writes, that Mahāyāna sūtras advocate mnemic/oral/aural practices more frequently than they do written ones, make reference to people who have memorized or are in the process of memorizing them, and consistently attach higher prestige to mnemic/oral practices than to ones involving written texts. Study of differences in various versions of sutras translated into Chinese has directly shown that these texts were often transmitted orally. Mahāyāna sūtras were committed to memory and recited by important learned monks called &quot;Dharma reciters&quot; (&quot;dharmabhāṇaka&quot;), who were viewed as the substitute for the actual speaking presence of the Buddha.

Much of the early extant evidence for the origins of Mahāyāna comes from early Chinese translations of Mahāyāna texts. These Mahāyāna teachings were first propagated into China by Lokakṣema, the first translator of Mahāyāna Sūtras into Chinese during the second century.

The Mahāyāna movement remained quite small until the fifth century, with very few manuscripts having been found before then (the exceptions are from Bamiyan). According to Joseph Walser, the fifth and sixth centuries saw a great increase in their production. By this time, Chinese pilgrims, such as Faxian, Yijing, and Xuanzang were traveling to India, and their writings describe monasteries which they label &#x27;Mahāyāna&#x27; as well as monasteries where both Mahāyāna monks and non-Mahāyāna monks lived together.

===Modern scholarly views on dating===
Dating the Mahāyāna sūtras is quite difficult; and many can only be dated firmly to when they were translated into another language.

Andrew Skilton summarizes a common prevailing view of the Mahāyāna sūtras among modern Buddhist studies scholars as follows:

A. K. Warder notes that the Mahāyāna Sūtras are highly unlikely to have come from the teachings of the historical Buddha, since the language and style of every extant Mahāyāna Sūtra is comparable more to later Indian texts than to texts that could have circulated in the Buddha&#x27;s putative lifetime. Warder also notes that the Tibetan historian Tāranātha (1575–1634) proclaimed that after the Buddha taught the sutras, they disappeared from the human world and circulated only in the world of the nagas. In Warder&#x27;s view, &quot;this is as good as an admission that no such texts existed until the 2nd century A.D.&quot;

Paul Williams writes that while Mahāyāna tradition believes that the Mahāyāna sūtras were taught by the Buddha, &quot;source-critical and historical awareness has made it impossible for the modern scholar to accept this traditional account.&quot; However, Williams further writes thatNevertheless, it is not always absurd to suggest that a Mahāyāna sūtra or teaching may contain elements of a tradition which goes back to the Buddha himself, which was played down or just possibly excluded from the canonical formulations of the early schools. We have seen that even at the First Council there is evidence of disagreement as regards the details of the Buddha&#x27;s teaching.John W. Pettit writes that &quot;Mahāyāna has not got a strong historical claim for representing the explicit teachings of the historical Buddha&quot;. However, he also argues that basic Mahāyāna concepts such as &quot;the bodhisattva ethic, emptiness (sunyata), and the recognition of a distinction between buddhahood and arhatship as spiritual ideals,&quot; can be seen in the Pāli Canon. According to Pettit, this suggests that Mahāyāna is &quot;not simply an accretion of fabricated doctrines&quot; but &quot;has a strong connection with the teachings of Buddha himself&quot;.

=== Questions of authenticity ===

Mahāyāna sūtras are generally regarded by Mahāyānists as being more profound than the śrāvaka texts as well as generating more spiritual merit and benefit. Thus, they are seen as superior and more virtuous to non-Mahāyāna sūtras.

The Mahāyāna sūtras were not recognized as being Buddha word (&quot;buddhavacana&quot;) by various groups of Indian Buddhists and there was lively debate over their authenticity throughout the Buddhist world. Buddhist communities such as the Mahāsāṃghika school and the Theravada tradition of Sri Lanka became divided into groups which accepted or did not accept these texts. Theravāda commentaries of the Mahavihara sub-school mention these texts (which they call &quot;Vedalla/Vetulla&quot;) as not being the Buddha word and being counterfeit scriptures. The Saṃmitīya school was also known as being strongly opposed to the Mahayana sutras as noted by the Tibetan historian Tāranātha. Xuanzang reports that a Saṃmitīya known as Prajñāgupta composed a treatise which argued against the Mahāyāna.

Various Mahāyāna sūtras warn against the charge that they are not word of the Buddha and defend their authenticity in different ways. Some Mahāyāna sūtras such as the &quot;Gaṇḍavyūha&quot; often criticize early Buddhist figures, such as Sariputra for lacking knowledge and goodness, and thus, these elders or śrāvaka are seen as not intelligent enough to receive the Mahāyāna teachings.

The reason these accounts give for the historically late disclosure of the Mahāyāna teachings is that most people were initially unable to understand the Mahāyāna sūtras at the time of the Buddha (500 BCE) and suitable recipients for these teachings had not yet arisen. Some traditional accounts of the transmission of the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; &quot;sūtras&quot; claim that they were originally stored or hidden in the realm of the &quot;nāgas&quot; (serpent-like supernatural beings). Later, these sūtras were retrieved by Nāgārjuna. Other Mahāyāna sources state that they were preached or preserved by bodhisattvas like Mañjuśrī or Buddhas like Vajradhāra.

Another Mahāyāna explanation for the later appearance of the Mahāyāna sūtras in the historical record is the idea that they are the revelations of certain Buddhas and bodhisattvas, transmitted through visions and meditative experiences to a select few individuals. The practice of visualization of Buddhas (in texts like the &quot;Sukhāvatīvyūha&quot;) has been seen by some scholars as a possible explanation for the source of certain Mahāyāna sūtras which were seen as revelations from Buddha in other heavenly worlds. Williams also notes that there are other Mahāyāna texts which speak of sūtras being revealed or entrusted to forest dwelling monks by devas (deities). Paul Harrison notes that the idea that devas may preach the Buddha word is also present in non-Mahāyāna texts. Paul Harrison has also noted the importance of dream revelations in certain texts such as the &quot;Arya-svapna-nirdesa&quot; which lists and interprets 108 dream signs.

==== &quot;Word of the Buddha&quot; as what leads to awakening ====
A different Mahāyāna justification for the authenticity of the Mahāyāna sūtras is that they are in accord with the truth, with the Buddha&#x27;s Dharma and therefore they lead to awakening. This is based on the idea that &quot;Whatever is well spoken [&quot;subhasita&quot;], all that is the word of the Buddha [&quot;buddhabhasita&quot;].&quot; As such, this idea holds that Mahāyāna is the &quot;word of the Buddha&quot; because it leads to awakening (&quot;bodhi&quot;), not because it was spoken by a specific individual with the title &quot;Buddha&quot;. According to Venerable Hsuan Hua, there are five types of beings who may speak &quot;Buddha word&quot;: a Buddha, a disciple of a Buddha, a deva (heavenly being), a ṛṣi (a sage), or an emanation of one of these beings; however, they must first receive certification from a Buddha that its contents are true Dharma.

The Indian Mahāyāna scholar Shantideva (8th century) states:Through four factors is an inspired utterance [&quot;pratibhana&quot;] the word of the Buddhas. What four? (i)...the inspired utterance is connected with truth, not untruth; (ii) it is connected with the Dharma, not that which is not the Dharma; (iii) it brings about the renunciation of moral taints [&quot;klesa&quot;] not their increase; and (iv) it shows the laudable qualities of nirvana, not those of the cycle of rebirth [samsara].Williams writes that similar ideas can be found in the Pali Canon, though it is interpreted in a more open ended way in the Mahāyāna in order to include a larger set of teachings that were seen as spiritually useful.

The modern Japanese Zen Buddhist scholar D. T. Suzuki similarly argued that while the Mahāyāna sūtras may not have been directly taught by the historical Buddha, the &quot;spirit and central ideas&quot; of Mahāyāna &quot;are those of its founder&quot;. Thus, Suzuki admits (and celebrates) how the Mahāyāna evolved and adapted itself to suit the times by developing new teachings and texts, while at the same time maintaining the core &quot;spirit&quot; of the Buddha.

== Teachings ==
=== New ideas ===
The teachings as contained in the Mahāyāna sūtras as a whole have been described as a loosely bound bundle of many teachings, which was able to contain the various contradictions. Because of these contradictory elements, there are &quot;very few things that can be said with certainty about Mahāyāna Buddhism&quot;.

Central to the Mahāyāna sūtras is the ideal of the Bodhisattva path, something which is not unique to them, however, as such a path is also taught in non-Mahayana texts which also required prediction of future Buddhahood in the presence of a living Buddha. What is unique to Mahāyāna sūtras is the idea that the term bodhisattva is applicable to any person from the moment they intend to become a Buddha (i.e. the arising of bodhicitta) and without the requirement of a living Buddha. They also claim that any person who accepts and uses Mahāyāna sūtras either had already received or will soon receive such a prediction from a Buddha, establishing their position as an irreversible bodhisattva. Some Mahāyāna sūtras promote it as a universal path for everyone, while others like the &quot;Ugraparipṛcchā&quot; see it as something for a small elite of hardcore ascetics.

While some Mahāyāna sūtras like the Vimalakirti sūtra and the White Lotus sūtra criticize arhats and sravakas (referring to non-Mahāyānists) as lacking wisdom, and reject their path as a lower vehicle, i.e. &#x27;hīnayāna&#x27; (the &#x27;inferior way&#x27;), earlier Mahāyāna sūtras do not do this. As noted by David Drewes &quot;early Mahāyāna sūtras often present their teachings as useful not only to people who wish to become Buddhas, but to those who wish to attain arhatship or pratyekabuddhahood as well. The old idea that the Mahāyāna began with the rejection of the arhat ideal in favor of that of the bodhisattva is thus clearly incorrect.&quot; Paul Williams also writes that earlier Mahāyāna sūtras like the &quot;Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra&quot; and the &quot;Ajitasena sutra&quot; do not present any antagonism towards the hearers or the ideal of arhatship like later sutras.

According to David Drewes, Mahāyāna sūtras contain several elements besides the promotion of the bodhisattva ideal, including &quot;expanded cosmologies and mythical histories, ideas of purelands and great, &#x27;celestial&#x27; Buddhas and bodhisattvas, descriptions of powerful new religious practices, new ideas on the nature of the Buddha, and a range of new philosophical perspectives.&quot;

Several Mahāyāna sūtras depict Buddhas or Bodhisattvas not found in earlier texts, such as the Buddhas Amitabha, Akshobhya and Vairocana, and the bodhisattvas Maitreya, Mañjusri, Ksitigarbha, and Avalokiteshvara. An important feature of Mahāyāna is the way that it understands the nature of Buddhahood. Mahāyāna texts see Buddhas (and to a lesser extent, certain bodhisattvas as well) as transcendental or supramundane (&quot;lokuttara&quot;) beings, who live for eons constantly helping others through their activity.

According to Paul Williams, in Mahāyāna, a Buddha is often seen as &quot;a spiritual king, relating to and caring for the world&quot;, rather than simply a teacher who after his death &quot;has completely &#x27;gone beyond&#x27; the world and its cares&quot;. Buddha Sakyamuni&#x27;s life and death on earth is then usually understood docetically, as a &quot;mere appearance&quot;, his death was an unreal show (which was done in order to teach others), while in reality he continues to live in a transcendent realm in order to help all beings.

=== Spiritual Practices ===

Mahāyāna sūtras, especially those of the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; genre, teach the importance of the practice of the six perfections (&quot;pāramitā&quot;) as part of the path to Buddhahood, and special attention is given to the perfection of wisdom (&quot;prajñāpāramitā&quot;) which is seen as primary. The importance of developing &quot;bodhicitta&quot;, which refers to a mind that is aimed at full awakening (i.e. Buddhahood) is also stressed.

Another central practice advocated by the Mahāyāna sūtras is focused around &quot;the acquisition of merit, the universal currency of the Buddhist world, a vast quantity of which was believed to be necessary for the attainment of Buddhahood&quot;.

According to David Drewes, Mahāyāna sūtras teach simple religious practices that are supposed to make Buddhahood easy to achieve. Some of the most widely taught practices taught in Mahāyāna sūtras include:

* hearing the names of certain Buddhas or bodhisattvas, or reciting their name
* maintaining Buddhist precepts, including new bodhisattva precepts
* listening to, memorizing, reciting, preaching, worshiping and copying Mahāyāna sūtras,
* rejoicing (&quot;anumodana&quot;) in the collected meritorious actions of all previous Buddhas and other beings.

Another innovative &quot;shortcut&quot; to Buddhahood in Mahāyāna sutras are what are often called Pure Land practices. These involve the invocation of Buddhas such as Amitabha and Aksobhya, who are said to have created &quot;Buddha fields&quot; or &quot;pure lands&quot; especially so that those beings who wish to be reborn there can easily and quickly become Buddhas. Reciting certain sūtras, along with meditating on and reciting the names of these Buddhas can allow one to be reborn in these pure buddha-fields. Once there, one can hear the Dharma directly from a Buddha and train in the bodhisattva path in a pure place without disturbances.

The study of Mahāyāna sūtras is central to East Asian Buddhism, where they are widely read. In Tibetan Buddhism meanwhile, there is a greater emphasis on the study of Mahāyāna śāstras (philosophical treatises), which are seen as more systematic ways of studying the content found in the sūtras.

=== Textual practices ===

Numerous Mahayana sutras teach the veneration and recitation of the sutras themselves as a religious icon and as an embodiment of the Dharma and the Buddha. In Indian Mahayana Buddhism, the worship of sutras, like the Prajñāpāramitā sutra books (pustaka) and manuscripts became an important part of Mahayana practice which was considered to bring wisdom, merit and apotropaic protection from harm. This practice is promoted in some of the sutras themselves.

The Prajñāpāramitā sutras promote the copying, reading, recitation, contemplation, and distribution of the sutra, and they also teach its worship and veneration. The &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot; states:Here, the sons or daughters of good family are enjoined to put up a copy of the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; on an altar, and to pay respect to it, to revere, worship and adore it, pay regard and reverence to it with flowers, incense, powders, umbrellas, banners, bells, and rows of burning lamps.
The Prajñāpāramitā sutras also reference themselves as the highest object of study and worship, claiming that studying, reciting, and worshiping them is superior to worshiping stupas, Buddha relics, and other objects. The &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā&quot; claims that this is because &quot;the relics of the Tathāgata have come forth from this perfection of wisdom&quot;. Since the very concept of &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; (transcendent knowledge, perfection of wisdom) is linked with the texts themselves, the texts were considered to have a mystic power within, which is the source of all the merit in the other religious objects, like Buddha relics.

Furthermore, Mahayana sutras like the &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā&quot; often claim that the Buddha is present in the text. For example the &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā&quot; says that &quot;when a pūja is done to the Prajñāpāramitā, it is a pūja to the venerable past, present, and future Buddhas.&quot; This sutra also states that wherever the sutra itself is placed or recited, it makes the ground a caitya (a sacred space, shrine, sanctuary). According to Jacob Kinnard, Prajñāpāramitā sutras even present their physical form (as books, manuscripts, etc) as being akin to the Buddha&#x27;s rūpakāya (physical form to be worshiped, like his relics) as well as being his dharmakāya (which contains the Dharma, the Buddha&#x27;s teachings).

The &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā&quot; further states:One might hear this deep perfection of wisdom being spoken, being taught, being explained, being pointed out, and having heard it here he might bring forth the designation &#x27;Teacher&#x27; with regard to this perfection of wisdom—he thinks, &#x27;The Teacher is face to face with me, the Teacher is seen by me.&#x27;Since the sutras teach and lead one to perfect wisdom, and perfect wisdom was considered to be the mother of all Buddhas, then to honor and to know the text was to honor and to know the Buddha. As such, the &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā&quot; states:In the same way in which you, Ānanda, honor me, who is now the Tathāgata...so also, Ānanda, this perfection of wisdom is to be [always] spread, praised, worshipped, venerated, respected, honored, protected, copied, recited, explained, taught, pointed out, advanced, studied, spoken, and elevated, with the same solicitude, affection, respect, and in the same virtuous spirit...But, in short, in the same way in which I am your teacher, so is the perfection of wisdom.The worship of Mahayana sutra books and even in anthropomorphic form (through deities like Prajñāpāramitā Devi) remains important in many Mahayana Buddhist traditions, including Newar Buddhism, Tibetan Buddhism and East Asian Buddhism. This is often done in rituals in which the sutras (or a deity representing the sutra) are presented various types of offerings. The sutra may then be chanted (partially or completely), though sometimes, a mantra representing the sutra or just the title of the sutra is recited. For example, the practice of chanting the title of the &quot;Lotus Sutra&quot; (called the Daimoku) is the central practice in Nichiren Buddhism, a form of Mahayana which focuses on the veneration of this sutra. In the Huayan tradition meanwhile, a central practice is the recitation and copying of the &quot;Avatamsaka Sutra&quot; (which is often done in a group setting or on solitary retreat).

== Key Mahāyāna Sūtras ==
===Proto-Mahayana sutras===
The &quot;Ajitasena Sūtra&quot; has been called &quot;Proto-Mahāyāna&quot; by Paul Williams. While it promotes Buddhahood for all, the text lacks the usual antagonism towards the &quot;śravakas&quot; and &quot;arhats&quot;, as is typical of later Mahāyāna texts like the &quot;Vimalakīrti-nirdeśa Sūtra&quot;. It also lacks any self-awareness of itself as being part of &quot;Mahāyāna.&quot; It promotes giving to monks like any non-Mahāyāna text, but also includes the depiction of a prince who has visions of many Buddhafields (including Sukhavati and Abhirati) on becoming an arhat.

The &quot;Salistamba Sūtra&quot; (rice stalk or rice sapling sūtra) has been considered one of the first Mahayana sutras. According to N. Ross Reat, this sutra has many parallels with the material in the Pali suttas (especially the &quot;Mahatanha-sahkhaya sutta&quot;, M1:256-71), and could date as far back as 200 BCE. It is possible that this sutra represents a period of Buddhist literature before Mahāyāna doctrine had diverged significantly from the doctrines of the early Buddhist texts.

=== Prajñāpāramitā Sūtras ===
Some of the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā Sūtras&quot; are considered to be some of the earliest Mahāyāna Sūtras. Various Western scholars generally hold that the &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot; is one of the earliest of these texts (c. 1st century BCE). The &quot;Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot; is also seen by scholars like Schopen and numerous Japanese scholars as being very early.

Paul Williams also notes that in Lewis Lancaster&#x27;s analysis of the earliest Chinese versions of the &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot; &quot;a number of key Mahayana concepts are missing from the earliest versions although present in later versions. The world of the earliest Aṣṭasāhasrika is reasonably close to that of the pre-Mahayana traditions.&quot;

The main topics of these Sūtras are the path of the bodhisattva, the six transcendent virtues and, in particular, transcendent wisdom (&quot;prajñāpāramitā&quot;) the most important of these. The bodhisattva &quot;mahasattva&quot; (great being) is a being who is training towards full Buddhahood for the benefit of all. &quot;Transcendent Wisdom&quot; (also: the &quot;Perfection of Wisdom&quot;) meanwhile, means the ability to see reality as it truly is, a deep and liberating spiritual knowledge that is the source of all virtues. &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; is thus &quot;a state of consciousness which understands emptiness (&quot;shunyata&quot;), the absence of &#x27;self&#x27; or intrinsic nature even in dharmas.&quot; Since all phenomena (even Nirvana) lack any essence, unchanging core or independence, they are merely conceptual constructs and as such, they are like magical illusions (&quot;maya&quot;).

Many of these sutras are known by the number of lines, or &quot;ślokas&quot;, that they contain, such as the &quot;Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā&quot; (25,000 line) PP Sūtra, the &quot;Aṣṭadaśasāhasrikā&quot; (18,000 lines), and the &quot;Śatasāhasrikā&quot; (100,000 lines) etc.

=== The &quot;White&quot; &quot;Lotus Sūtra&quot; ===

The &quot;Saddharma-pundarīka-sūtra&quot; (&quot;True Dharma White Lotus Sūtra)&quot; is a very influential Sūtra, especially in East Asian Buddhism, where it is considered the supreme Sūtra by many East Asian Buddhists (especially in the Tiantai and Nichiren schools).

Probably written down between 100 BCE –150 CE, the &quot;Lotus Sūtra&quot; states that the three &quot;yānas&quot; (&quot;śrāvakayāna&quot;, &quot;pratyekabuddhayāna&quot; and &quot;bodhisattvayāna&quot;) are not real paths leading to different goals, there is in fact only one path (ekayāna), with one goal - Buddhahood. The sutra predicts that all those who hear the Dharma will eventually achieve this goal. The earlier teachings are said to be skilful means to teach beings according to their capacities.

The sutra is notable for the idea that a Buddha is not inaccessible after his &quot;parinirvāṇa&quot; since a Buddha&#x27;s life-span is incalculably long. Instead of passing into a totally transcendent state, a Buddha remains to help all sentient beings in countless ways, like a great spiritual father that has been around for eons and will continue to teach for many more eons to come.

In some East Asian traditions, the Lotus Sūtra has been compiled together with two other sutras which serve as a prologue and epilogue, respectively the &quot;Innumerable Meanings Sutra&quot; and the &quot;Samantabhadra Meditation Sutra&quot;. This composite sutra is often called the &quot;Threefold Lotus Sūtra&quot; or &quot;Three-Part Dharma Flower Sutra&quot;.

=== Buddhafield Sūtras ===

Several sutras focus on the pure buddhafields (&quot;viśuddhabuddhakṣetra&quot;) or a Buddha&#x27;s &quot;pure lands&quot; (as they are known in Chinese translation). The most popular of these are three sutras that deal with the pure land of Amitābha Buddha, called Sukhāvatī (the Blissful). These texts are very influential in East Asia, particularly in Pure Land Buddhism, which focuses on the salvific power of faith in Amitābha&#x27;s salvific vow-power (pūrva-praṇidhāna-vaśa, the power of his past vows) to effortlessly transport all beings who think of him to his pure land. 

The three main &quot;Pure land sutras&quot; in East Asian Pure Land Buddhism are: 

* &quot;Long Sukhāvatīvyūha&quot; (also known as the &quot;Sutra of Immeasurable Life&quot;)
* &quot;Short Sukhāvatīvyūha&quot; (also known as the &quot;Sutra of Immeasurable Light&quot;) 
* &quot;Amitāyus Contemplation Sūtra&quot;

Furthermore, there are also other sutras which teach about other Buddhas and their pure lands, though they are not as influential as the Amitabha sutras. They include the &quot;Bhaiṣajyaguru-vaiḍūryaprabhārāja Sūtra&quot;, which focuses on Bhaiṣajyaguru, a healing Buddha also known as the &quot;Medicine Buddha&quot;; as well as the &quot;Akṣobhyatathāgata-syavyūha Sūtra&quot;, which focuses on the Buddha Akṣobhya and his pure land of Abhirati (which is one of the oldest &quot;Pure land&quot; texts). 

=== Samādhi Sūtras ===
Amongst the earliest Mahāyāna texts, the &quot;&quot;Samādhi&quot; &quot;Sūtras&quot;&quot; are a group of sutras that focus on the attainment of profound states of consciousness reached in meditation (samādhi, &quot;meditative absorption, concentration&quot;), perhaps suggesting that meditation played an important role in the development of early Mahāyāna. However, in these texts, the term &quot;samādhi&quot; general signifies a more complex and diverse idea which includes numerous practices that are not purely contemplative.

&quot;&quot;Samādhi&quot; &quot;Sūtras&quot;&quot; include:&quot;&quot; 

* &quot;Pratyutpannabuddha Saṃmukhāvasthita Samādhi Sūtra&quot; (&quot;Samādhi for Directly Encountering the Buddhas of the Present&quot; &quot;Sūtra&quot;)
* &quot;Samādhirāja-sūtra (King of Samādhis Sūtra)&quot;
* &quot;Śūraṅgama-samādhi-sūtra (Samādhi of the Heroic Progression Sūtra)&quot;
* &quot;Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhi&quot; (&quot;The Absorption that Encapsulates All Merit&quot;)
* &quot;The Absorption of the Miraculous Ascertainment of Peace&quot; (&quot;Pra­śāntaviniścayaprātihāryasamādhi&quot;)

=== Visualization and Meditation Sūtras ===
There is also another genre of Mahāyāna meditation texts called Visualization Sutras (Chinese: 觀經, &quot;guan jing&quot;). A key feature of these sutras is their promotion of meditation practices which focus on mentally visualizing or maintaining a mental image. Perhaps the most popular of these is the &quot;Sutra on the Contemplation of the Buddha of Immeasurable Life&quot;. Others include the &quot;Sutra on the Sea of Samādhi Attained through Contemplation of the Buddha&quot; (&quot;Guan Fo Sanmei Hai Jing&quot;), and the &quot;Sutra on the Contemplation of the Cultivation Methods of the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra&quot; (&quot;Guan Puxian Pusa Xingfa Jing&quot;), commonly known as Samantabhadra Contemplation Sutra.

There are also some meditation focused texts called &quot;Dhyāna Sūtras&quot; (禪経) translated into Chinese by figures like Kumarajiva. Some of these Sūtras contain Mahāyāna meditation teachings.

=== &quot;Buddhāvataṃsaka&quot; &quot;Sūtra&quot; ===

There are also various composite &quot;sūtras,&quot; which are actually large collections of other sūtras. One quite influential composite sūtra is the &quot;Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra&quot; (&quot;The Buddha Wreath Sūtra&quot;), a large text contraining numerous chapters on varying topics, some of which circulated separately as independent sūtras before being joined into the mature &quot;Buddhāvataṃsaka&quot;. The largest and most influential of these include the &quot;Daśabhūmika Sūtra&quot; and the &quot;Gaṇḍavyūha Sūtra&quot;. The &quot;Buddhāvataṃsaka&quot; probably reached its current form by about the 4th century CE, and this compilation may have happened in Central Asia.

Williams notes that the &quot;Buddhāvataṃsaka sutra&quot; includes both the Yogacara mind-only teaching and the emptiness doctrine, but does so mainly from the perspective of highly advanced beings who have spiritually realized these teachings through deep meditative absoprtion, and thus have all sorts of magical powers which they use to help others. The &quot;Buddhāvataṃsaka&quot; is therefore a text that depicts various mystical visionary scenes, with countless world systems and countless Buddhas and bodhisattvas who travel freely throughout this multiverse helping all beings out of compassion. One of the most important Buddhas in this text is Mahāvairocana (&quot;Great Illuminator&quot;), who fills the entire cosmos with his light, his omniscient awareness and his magical emanations (one of which was Shakyamuni Buddha). In China, the &quot;Buddhāvataṃsaka&quot; became the central text for the Huayen (Jp. Kegon) school of Buddhism, which later went on to influence Chinese Chan Buddhism and Pure Land Buddhism.

=== &quot;Mahāratnakūṭa&quot; and &quot;Mahāsamnipāta&quot; Sūtras ===
Two other important Mahāyāna &quot;sūtras&quot; which are also collections of smaller independent sūtras are the &quot;Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra&quot; (&quot;The Heap of Jewels Sūtra&quot;) which contains 49 individual sūtras, and the &quot;Mahāsamnipāta Sūtra&quot; (&quot;Sūtra of the Great Assembly&quot;) which is a collection of 17 sūtras. 

Important sutras in the &quot;Mahāratnakūṭa&quot; include the &quot;Bodhisattvapiṭaka, the Śrīmālādevī Siṃhanāda Sūtra, the Longer Sukhāvatī-vyūha Sutra, the Akṣobhya-vyūha, Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra (The inquiry of Ugra)&quot;, the &quot;Saptaśatikā (700 Line) Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra,&quot; and the &quot;Tathāgataguhya Sūtra&quot; (&quot;The Secrets of the Tathāgata&quot;).&quot;&quot; Important sutras in the &quot;Mahāsamnipāta&quot; include larger works like the &quot;Akṣayamati-nirdeśa&quot;, and the &quot;Gaganagañja-paripṛcchā,&quot; which themselves also circulated as independent sutras.&quot;&quot;
=== Hagiographical sutras about the Buddha ===
Some Mahayana sutras focus on the hagiography of the Buddha, other Buddhas, or even tell stories of numerous Buddhas. The &quot;Lalitavistara Sūtra&quot; is one of the most important of the hagiographical sutras. It focuses on the story of Shakyamuni Buddha&#x27;s final birth. 

The &quot;Karuṇā­puṇḍarīka Sūtra&quot; (&quot;White Lotus of Compassion Sutra&quot;) is another hagiographical sutra which tells a story about a key event in the past life of Shakyamuni Buddha.

The &quot;Bhadrakalpika Sūtra&quot; give a list of over one thousand Buddhas which will arise in this &quot;fortunate aeon&quot;.

=== Sūtras on specific bodhisattvas ===

A large number of Sūtras focus on the nature, teachings and virtues of a particular bodhisattva. They include:

* Sūtras which focus on the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī and his teachings, such as the &quot;Mañjuśrī-buddhakṣetra-guṇavyūha&quot; (&quot;Array of Mañjushri&#x27;s Buddhaland&quot;).
* Sutras which focus on Avalokitesvara, like the &quot;Sūtra of the Prophecy Bestowed upon Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva&quot; 
* The &quot;Kṣitigarbhasūtra,&quot; which focuses on the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha.
* Sūtras which focus on the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha.
* Sūtras which focus on Maitreya, such as the &quot;Maitreyavyakarana (Maitreya Prophecy)&quot; and &quot;The Sutra That Expounds the Descent of Maitreya Buddha&quot; (Taisho 454)&quot;.&quot; 
*The &quot;Samantabhadra Meditation Sūtra&quot;

=== Yogācāra Sūtras ===

These sutras primarily teach doctrines associated with the Yogācāra school, such as the doctrine of &quot;vijñapti-mātra&quot; (ideas-only, impressions-only etc.), which states that there can only ever be awareness of mental images or impressions which manifest themselves as external objects, but are not actually external to the mind. 

The &quot;Ārya-saṃdhi-nirmocana-Sūtra&quot; (&quot;Noble sūtra of the Explanation of the Profound Secrets,&quot; c. 2nd century CE) is the earliest surviving sutra in this class, and its the main text. It divides the teachings of the Buddha into three types, which it calls the &quot;three turnings of the wheel of Dharma.&quot; To the first turning, it ascribes the &quot;Āgamas&quot; of the &quot;śravakas&quot;, to the second turning the lower Mahāyāna sutras including the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; sutras, and finally sutras like itself are deemed to comprise the third turning. Moreover, the first two turnings are considered to be provisional (&quot;neyārtha&quot;) in this system of classification, while the third group is said to present the final truth without a need for further explication (&quot;nītārtha&quot;).

Another Indian Yogācāra sutra is the &quot;Buddhabhūmi Sūtra&quot; (Sutra on the Buddha Land). This sutra was important enough in India to have at least two Indian Yogācāra commentaries written on it, Śīlabhadra&#x27;s &quot;Buddhabhūmi&quot;-&quot;vyākhyāna&quot; and Bandhuprabha&#x27;s &quot;Buddhabhūmyupadeśa&quot;. This text is also an important source of Indian Pure Land Buddhist ideas. 

The &quot;Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra&quot; (c. 4th century CE) and the &quot;Ghanavyūha Sūtra,&quot; are also seen as sūtras associated with the Yogācāra tradition. However both are somewhat syncretic in nature, combining Yogācāra doctrines with those of the buddha-nature texts. In particular, both sutras associate the tathāgatagarbha (i.e. buddha-nature) with the Yogācāra doctrine of the storehouse consciousness (&quot;alayavijñāna&quot;). The &quot;Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra&quot; was particularly influential for Chan Buddhism.

=== The &quot;Vimalakirtinirdeśa&quot; ===

In the &quot;Vimalakirtinirdeśa&quot;, composed some time between the first and second century CE, the bodhisattva Vimalakīrti appears as a layman to teach the Dharma. This is seen by some as a strong assertion of the value of lay practice. The sutra teaches, among other subjects, the meaning of non-dualism, the doctrine of the true body of the Buddha, the characteristically Mahāyāna claim that the appearances of the world are mere illusions, and the superiority of the Mahāyāna over other paths. It places in the mouth of the lay practitioner Vimalakīrti a teaching addressed to both arhats and bodhisattvas, regarding the doctrine of śūnyatā. In most versions, the discourse of the text culminates with a wordless teaching of silence. This sutra has been very popular in China and Japan.

=== Buddha-nature Sūtras ===
The class of texts called &quot;Tathāgatagarbha sūtras&quot; teach the important Mahāyāna doctrine of &quot;Tathāgatagarbha,&quot; (Tathāgata-embryo, Tathāgata-womb, Inner Tathāgata, also known as &quot;Sugatagarbha&quot;) and &quot;Buddha-dhatu&quot; (Buddha nature&quot;,&quot; Buddha source, Buddha element). According to Williams, this doctrine states that all beings &quot;have a Tathāgata [i.e. a Buddha] within them, in seed or embryo, that sentient beings are the wombs or matrices of the Tathāgata, or that they have a Tathāgata as their essence, core, or essential inner nature.&quot;

The earliest of these texts have been seen by modern scholars as including the &quot;Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra&quot; (not to be confused with the Pāli &quot;Mahaparinibbana Sutta&quot; and its parallels) and the &quot;Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra&quot; (however, the dating of these texts is far from settled)&quot;.&quot; 

Other important sutras in this genre include the &quot;Śrīmālā Sūtra&quot;, the &quot;Aṅgulimālīya Sūtra,&quot; the &quot;Anūnatvāpurnatvanirdeśa (The Teaching on the Absence of Increase and Decrease),&quot; the &quot;Mahābherī Sūtra&quot; (&quot;Great Drum&quot;), and the &quot;Mahāmegha Sūtra&quot; (&quot;Great Cloud Sutra&quot;) .

=== Ethical Discipline Sūtras ===
These focus on principles that guide the ethical behaviour (&quot;Śīla&quot;) of bodhisattvas and the bodhisattva precepts, and include the &quot;Kāshyapa-parivarta&quot;, the &quot;Bodhisattva-prātimokṣa Sutra&quot;, the &quot;Upāliparipṛcchā&quot; (also known in Chinese as &quot;The Buddha Speaks of Decisive Vinaya Sutra&quot;) and the &quot;Brahmajāla Sutra&quot; (or &quot;Brahmajāla Bodhisattva Śīla Sūtra).&quot; For East Asian Zen monastics, the &quot;Bequeathed Teachings Sutra&quot; is a widely chanted and studied text on ethical discipline. Yet there is also the &quot;Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra, Purification of Karmic Obscurations&quot; (&quot;Karmāvaraṇaviśuddhi&quot;) describing “the monk Stainless Light, who had been seduced by a prostitute and feels strong remorse for having violated his vows” after which “the Buddha explains the lack of inherent nature of all phenomena and the luminous nature of mind.”

=== Confession Sūtras ===

The &quot;Sutra of the Three Heaps&quot; (Sanskrit: &quot;Triskandhadharmasutra&quot;) and the &quot;Golden Light Sutra&quot; (&quot;Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sūtra&quot;) focus on the practice of confession of faults. The &quot;Golden Light Sutra&quot; became especially influential in East Asian Buddhism, particularly because of its teaching on how the Four Heavenly Kings protect the ruler who governs his country in the proper manner and upholds the sutra. 

The &quot;Sutra of the Three Heaps&quot; meanwhile remains an important confession focused sutra in Tibetan Buddhism.

=== Dhāraṇī sutras ===

Dhāraṇī sutras are Mahayana sutras that focus on specific dhāraṇīs (recitations, chants, incantations, spells), which are mostly in some form of Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit. Dhāraṇīs are understood as having various magical powers, including protection against evil, purification, promotion of good rebirth, generation of merit, and even enlightenment. The word &quot;dhāraṇī&quot; derives from a Sanskrit root √&quot;dhṛ&quot; meaning &quot;to hold or maintain&quot;. 

The Dhāraṇī sutra genre is ancient, and similar works can be found in even non-Mahayana Buddhist canons, one example being the &quot;Atanatiya Sutra&quot;. Several early Buddhist schools had also maintained a collection of scriptures focused on dhāraṇī and magical practices, sometimes called Dhāraṇī Piṭaka or called the Vidyādhara Piṭaka (Wizardry Collection) which included various types of rituals and spells (vidyā). For example, the Dharmaguptaka school&#x27;s Tripiṭaka is said to have contained a Dhāraṇī Piṭaka. The Mahayana Dhāraṇī sutras developed out of this ancient Buddhist magical tradition. While many classic Mahayana sutras (like the &quot;Lotus&quot; and &quot;Golden Light&quot;) contain dhāraṇī, Dhāraṇī sutras are focused specifically on dhāraṇī practice and associated rites.

Mahayana dhāraṇī literature became popular in East Asia in the first millennium CE, with Chinese records suggesting their profusion by the early centuries of the common era. These migrated from China to Korea and Japan. The demand for printed dhāraṇī led to innovations in block printing. Today, the recitation of dhāraṇī remains a major part of Mahayana Buddhist practice, and they are also used as amulets and protective charms.Some important dhāraṇī texts include:

* &quot;Uṣṇīṣa Vijaya Dhāraṇī Sūtra (Dhāraṇī of Victorious Uṣṇīṣa)&quot;
* &quot;Nīlakaṇṭha Dhāraṇī (Dhāraṇī of the Blue Necked One)&quot;
* &quot;Cundī Dhāraṇī Sūtra&quot; 
* &quot;Eleven-Faced Avalokitesvara Heart Dharani Sūtra&quot; (&quot;Avalokiteśvara-ekadaśamukha Dhāraṇī Sūtra&quot;)
* &quot;Amoghapāśa Dhāraṇī Sūtra&quot; (不空罥索咒經, Taishō no. 1093)&quot;,&quot; first translated in 587 by Jñānagupta (ca. 522–600).
* &quot;Pañcarakṣā,&quot; five dhāraṇīs of the &quot;Five Protectresses&quot;
*&quot;Pure Land Rebirth Dhāraṇī&quot;
*&quot;Aparimitāyur-jñāna-suviniścita-tejo-rājāya dhāraṇī&quot; (an Amitayus &quot;dhāraṇī&quot;)
*The &quot;Great Dharani Sutra of Immaculate and Pure Light&quot; (Korean: 무구정광대다라니경; Hanja: 無垢淨光大陀羅尼經; RR: Mugu jeonggwang dae darani-gyeong) is currently the oldest surviving woodblock print in the world.
*The &quot;Cintāmaṇicakra Dhāraṇī Sūtra&quot; (&quot;Ruyilun tuoluoni jing&quot; 如意輪陀羅尼經, T. 1080) translated by Bodhiruci
*&quot;Sūtra of the Whole-Body Relic Treasure Chest Seal Dhāraṇī&quot;.
Dhāraṇī texts were often collected together into Dhāraṇī collections, such as the &quot;Dhāraṇī Saṃgraha&quot; and the &quot;Collected Dhāraṇī Sūtras&quot; (Tuoluoni jijing 陀羅尼集), Taisho Tripitaka no. 901, translated by Atikūṭa in 654.

=== Esoteric Sūtras ===

Esoteric Sūtras (&quot;Guhyamantra,&quot; i.e. &quot;Secret mantra&quot; sutras&quot;,&quot; known as 密教 &quot;Mìjiao&quot; in Chinese and &quot;Mikkyō&quot; in Japanese) comprise an important category of works that are related to mantric and esoteric Buddhist practices. Most of these differ from simpler &quot;Dhāraṇī sutras&quot; in that they contain much more elaborate ritual technology and schemas (such as the use of images, altars, fire offerings, abhiṣeka, mandalas or visualization meditations). While earlier &quot;Dhāraṇī sutras&quot; focus on the simple recitation mantric formulas, later esoteric sūtras contain descriptions of mandalas, mudras, complex rituals involving elements like bathing, setting up a ritual perimeter, and so forth. These more complex esoteric sutras developed gradually out of simpler &quot;Dhāraṇī&quot; recitation sutras. 

According to Koichi Shinohara, the early &quot;esoteric&quot; sutras were not initially considered a separate category of &quot;tantric&quot; or &quot;esoteric&quot; sutras, and they were not seen as separate from mainstream Mahayana. By the 7th century, the complexity of the rituals had reached a new stage of mature Indian Mantric Buddhism, as seen in the &quot;Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sūtra&quot;. 

Over time, these esoteric sutras became seen as part of a separate category of texts and even of a separate &quot;vehicle&quot; to liberation - the Mantrayana or Vajrayana. While the texts listed below call themselves sutras, later Buddhist traditions often reclassified these as &quot;tantras&quot; due to their Mantrayana content. Some important esoteric Mahayana texts include:

*The &quot;Golden Light Sutra&quot; (&quot;Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sūtra&quot;) contains perhaps the first mandala with five Buddhas, a key feature of later tantric texts. It also includes dhāraṇī and other ritual practices. 
*The &quot;Śūraṅgama Sūtra&quot;, which teaches the &quot;Sitātapatra Uṣṇīṣa Dhāraṇī&quot; (Ch. 大白傘蓋陀羅尼) and is included in the Taisho Tripitaka&#x27;s Esoteric Sutra category. 
*The &quot;Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra&quot;, known for teaching the famous mantra of Avalokiteśvara, &quot;Om mani padme hum&quot; and the Cundi dhāraṇī. 
*&quot;Amoghapāśa-kalparāja-sūtra (Sovereign Ritual of Amoghapāśa),&quot; which includes numerous rituals associated with the Lotus Buddha family and contains the important &quot;Mantra of Light.&quot; The first chapter of this esoteric ritual text is actually the &quot;Amoghapāśa Dhāraṇī Sūtra,&quot; which shows how these sutras expanded over time to include more ritual elements.
*&quot;Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sūtra,&quot; one of the first mature Mantrayana sutras, a key text for Chinese Esoteric Buddhism and Shingon. 
* &quot;Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha Sūtra,&quot; and the &quot;Vajraśekhara Sūtra&quot;.

Some late Prajñaparamita texts (dated to c. 8th century up to 11th century CE) also include mantric and dhāraṇī elements, and are thus known as esoteric Prajñaparamita sutras. These later esoteric Prajñāpāramitā sutras are generally short texts which contain mantras and/or dhāraṇīs and also reference esoteric Buddhist (Mantrayana) ideas. They often promote simple practices based on recitation which lead to the accumulation of merit and help one reach awakening. 

Esoteric Prajñāpāramitā sutras include: &quot;Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot; (150 lines), the famous &quot;Heart Sutra&quot; (&quot;Prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya&quot;), the &quot;Ekaślokikā prajñāpāramitā, Svalpākṣarā Prajñāpāramitā, Kauśikā&quot; &quot;Prajñāpāramitā, Saptaślokikā Prajñāpāramitā&quot;, the &quot;*Prajñāpāramitānāmāṣṭaśataka&quot; and the &quot;Candragarbha Prajñāpāramitā.&quot;

=== Non-Indic sūtras ===
There are various sūtras that were traditionally considered to be translations from Indian sources (and which are written to mimic Indic works) but that modern scholars have now shown were most likely composed in East Asia or Central Asia. These texts may also contain colophons which claim to be translations of an Indian original. These sutras are sometimes called &quot;apocryphal&quot; sūtras (a term borrowed from biblical studies) by modern scholars. In Buddhist studies, the term does not necessarily carry the pejorative connotations that it may have in other contexts (and these works are certainly not considered &quot;heretical&quot;). 

According to Charles Muller, &quot;while certain texts are fit to be classified with the &#x27;spurious&#x27; connotations of the term apocrypha, a significant portion of them were extremely well written works, whose contents accorded with the most profound of the Buddhist doctrines.&quot; East Asian Buddhists were aware of the phenomenon of writing original works and attributing them to Indian sources. These texts were sometimes classified either as i-ching (疑經 &quot;scriptures of doubtful authenticity&quot;) or as wei-ching (僞教 &quot;spurious scriptures&quot;). Chinese Buddhists like Seng-yu (僧祐; 445–518) noted these spurious works in their Buddhist text catalogues.

Some Mahayana sutras in the Chinese canon which have been influential in East Asian Buddhism and are likely apocryphal include:
*&quot;Amitāyus Contemplation Sūtra&quot; (佛說觀無量壽佛經, &quot;Guan-wuliangshou-jing, Sutra on the Visualization of [the Buddha] Immeasurable Life&quot;), an important sutra in Pure Land Buddhism, now considered by most scholars to be a Chinese (or possibly Central Asian) composition.
*&quot;Brahma&#x27;s Net Sutra&quot; (梵網經; &quot;Fànwǎng jīng),&quot; which according to Muller is now considered apocryphal by most scholars&quot;.&quot;
*&quot;Blood Bowl Sutra (&quot;血盆經&quot;; Xuèpénjīng&quot;), of Chinese origin.
*&quot;Vajrasamadhi&quot; &quot;Sūtra&quot; (金剛三昧經, &quot;Kŭmgang sammaegyŏng&quot;), traditionally seen as an Indian text, scholars have recently found that it was produced in Korea in about 685 CE.
*&quot;Innumerable Meanings Sutra&quot; (無量義經; pinyin: &quot;Wúliáng yì jīng&quot;).
*&quot;Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment&quot; (圓覺經; pinyin&quot;: Yuánjué jīng&quot;).
*&quot;Humane King Sutra&quot; (仁王經; &quot;rén wáng jīng&quot;).
*&quot;Śūraṅgama Sūtra&quot;(楞严經) - the status of this sutra is still a subject of debate. Some scholars, like Kogen Mizuno and Bernard Faure, consider it apocryphal, while others like Ronald Epstein disagree.

Since there are many apocryphal sutras in the Chinese Canon, modern scholars have developed various taxonomies of the different types of Apocryphal Sūtras. For example, according to Mochizuki Shinkō&#x27;s &quot;Bukkyō kyōten seiritsushi ron,&quot; there are three main types of apocryphal Chinese &quot;sutras&quot;. Makita Tairyō outlines five types of apocryphal sutras.

== Mahāyāna sutra commentaries ==
There are many commentaries to the Mahāyāna sutras. Some Indian commentaries survive, mostly in translation. Other commentaries were written in Chinese and Tibetan.

Important Mahāyāna sutra commentaries include:

* Commentaries on the &quot;Diamond Sutra&quot; by Asanga and Vasubandhu.
* Vasubandhu&#x27;s commentaries on the &quot;Amitabha sutra&quot; (&quot;Amitayus sutropadeśa&quot;) and on the &quot;Lotus Sutra.&quot;
* &quot;Śatasāhasrikā-pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāṣṭādaśasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-bṛhaṭṭīkā&quot;, often attributed to Vasubandhu (4th century). 
* The &quot;Dazhidulun&quot; (大智度論, T no. 1509), the large commentary on the &quot;Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā&quot; translated by the Kuchan monk Kumārajīva (344–413 CE).
* Two commentaries on the &quot;Daśabhūmika sutra, the Daśabhūmikavibhāṣā&quot; attributed to Nagarjuna and the &quot;Dasabhūmikabhāsya&quot; of Vasubandhu.
* Two sutra commentaries by Sthiramati, &quot;Commentary on the Kāśyapa Chapter&quot; (&quot;*Kāśyapaparivartaṭīkā&quot;), and &quot;Commentary on the Exposition of Akṣayamati&quot; (&quot;*Akṣayamatinirdeśaṭīkā&quot;).
* Dignāga&#x27;s &quot;Samantabhadracaryā­praṇidhānārtha-saṃgraha&quot; (&quot;A Summary for the Purpose of The Prayer for Completely Good Conduct&quot;, Tibetan translation at Toh 4012) a commentary on the last section of the &quot;Gaṇḍavyūha Sutra&quot;, the &quot;Samantabhadracaryā­praṇidhāna&quot; (which also circulated as an independent sutra).
* &quot;Zhu Weimojie jing&quot; (注維摩詰經), collected commentaries to the &quot;Vimalakirti sutra&quot; which are attributed to Kumārajīva and his translation team.
* Three Indian commentaries to the &quot;Śālistamba sutra,&quot; the &quot;Śālistambakakārikā&quot;, the &quot;Śālistambakamahāyanasūtra­ṭīkā,&quot; and the &quot;Śālistamba[ka]ṭīkā&quot; (Kamalashila).
* The commentaries on the &quot;Abhisamayālaṅkāra&quot; by Arya Vimuktisena and by Haribhadra (late 8th century) are simultaneously also commentaries on the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; sutras.
* The &quot;Da Ban Niepan Jing Ji Jie&quot; (大般涅槃經集解), the earliest available commentary on the &quot;Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra,&quot; attributed to Bao Liang and other Chinese scholars of the Liang dynasty&quot;.&quot;
* There are two commentaries on &quot;Saṃdhinirmocanasutra&quot; attributed to Asaṅga, the &quot;Compendium of Ascertainments&quot; (&quot;Viniscaya-samgrahani&quot;) and the &quot;Āryasaṃdhinirmocana-bhasya&quot;. Their attribution to Asanga is questioned by modern scholars.
* &quot;Āryasaṃdhinirmocana-sutre-arya-maitreya-kevala-parivarta-bhasya&quot;, Jñānagarbha&#x27;s (8th-century) commentary to the eighth chapter of the &quot;Saṃdhinirmocanasutra&quot;.
* The &quot;Kīrtimala&quot; (Tibetan: &quot;grags pa&#x27;i phreng ba&quot;), a commentary the &quot;Samādhirāja Sūtra&quot; by Mañjuśrīkīrti, survives in Tibetan translation.
* Ratnākaraśānti&#x27;s (late-10th century to mid-11th century) &quot;Prajñāpāramitopadeśa.&quot;
* Two Indian commentaries on the &quot;Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra&quot; by Jñānaśrībhadra (11th century) and Jñānavajra (12th century) survive in Tibetan translation.
* Commentaries by the Sogdian Sanskrit scholar and translator Fazang, including a commentary to the &quot;Ghanavyūha sūtra&quot; titled &quot;Dasheng miyan jing shu&quot; (大乘密嚴經疏, no. X368), a commentary to the &quot;Ghanavyūha sūtra&quot;, a &quot;Commentary on the Brahmajala sutra&quot; (&quot;Fanwang jing pusa jieben shu&quot;, Taisho 40, no. 1813) and a &quot;Commentary to the Lankavatara sutra&quot;.
* Zhiyi&#x27;s commentaries to the &quot;Lotus Sutra: Words and Phrases of the Lotus Sutra&quot; (法華文句, Fahua Wenju)&quot;, and Profound Meaning of the Lotus Sutra&quot; (法華玄義, Fahua Xuanyi)

== Mahāyāna Sūtra Collections ==
Some Buddhist Schools in India had collections of Mahāyāna Sūtras which were part of their scriptural canon, sometimes in their own textual collection referred to as &quot;Bodhisattva Piṭaka&quot;. Jan Nattier notes that the &quot;Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra&quot; mentions a &quot;Bodhisattva Piṭaka&quot; (as part of a four part canon that also includes the Sutra Piṭaka, the Vinaya Piṭaka, and the Abhidharma Piṭaka). According to Nattier, schools which maintained a &quot;Bodhisattva Piṭaka&quot; include the Dharmaguptaka and perhaps the Bahuśrutīya (or whoever authored the &quot;Tattvasiddhi-Śāstra&quot;). Some sutras translated by Lokaksema (c. 147-189 CE) also mention a &quot;&quot;Bodhisattva Piṭaka&quot;.&quot;

In the 4th century Mahāyāna abhidharma work &quot;Abhidharmasamuccaya&quot;, Asaṅga refers to the collection which contains the āgamas as the &quot;Śrāvakapiṭaka&quot;, and associates it with the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. Asaṅga classifies the Mahāyāna Sūtras as belonging to the &quot;Bodhisattvapiṭaka&quot;, which is designated as the collection of teachings for bodhisattvas.

The Mahāyāna Sūtras survive predominantly in &quot;Buddhist Chinese&quot; (&quot;fójiào hànyǔ&quot; 佛教漢語, a variety of written ancient Chinese) and Classical Tibetan translations. The source texts were probably in Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit or various Prakrit languages such as Gandhari. The main collections are found in the Tibetan Kangyur and the Chinese Tripiṭaka. There are also numerous Sanskrit manuscripts of individual texts from various finds like Dunhuang, and Sanskrit collections from Nepal. Many parallel translations of certain Sūtras exist. A handful of them, such as the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; sutras like the &quot;Heart Sutra&quot; and the &quot;Diamond Sutra&quot;, are considered fundamental by most modern Mahāyāna traditions.

=== The earliest group of Mahāyāna Sūtras translated into Chinese ===
Some scholars have traditionally considered the earliest Mahāyāna Sūtras to include the very first versions of the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; series, along with texts concerning Akshobhya, which were probably composed in the 1st century BCE in the south of India. According to A.K. Warder, some scholars think that the earliest Mahāyāna Sūtras were mainly composed in the south of India, and later the activity of writing additional scriptures was continued in the north.

Some of the earliest Mahāyāna Sūtras were translated by the Kushan monk Lokakṣema, who came to China from the kingdom of Gandhāra. His first translations to Chinese were made in the Eastern Han capital of Luoyang between 178 and 189 CE. The editors of the Taishō Tripiṭaka attribute twelve texts to Lokakṣema. These attributions have been studied in detail by Erik Zürcher, Paul Harrison and Jan Nattier, and some have been called into question. Zürcher considers it reasonably certain that Lokakṣema translated the following:

* T224. &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot; (&quot;The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines&quot;; 道行般若經)
* T280. &quot;The Scripture on the Tusita Heaven&quot; (佛說兜沙經.), part of the proto-Avatamsaka Sutra
* T313. &quot;Akṣobhya-vyūha&quot; (阿閦佛國經)
* T350. &quot;Kaśyapa-parivarta&quot; (&quot;The Kāśyapa Chapter&quot;; 說遺日摩尼寶經)
* T418. &quot;Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sūtra&quot; (般舟三昧經)
* T458. &quot;Mañjuśrī&#x27;s Inquiry Concerning the Bodhisattva Career&quot; (文殊師利問菩薩署經)
* T626. &quot;Ajātaśatru Kaukṛtya Vinodana Sūtra&quot; (阿闍世王經)
* T807. &quot;The Hundred Jewels of the Inner Treasury&quot; (佛說內藏百寶經)

Harrison is doubtful about T626, and considers that T418 is the product of revision and does not date from Lokakṣema&#x27;s time. Conversely, Harrison considers that T624 &quot;Druma-kinnara-rāja-paripṛcchā-sūtra&quot; (伅真陀羅所問如來三昧經) ought to be considered genuine.

=== Kumārajīva translations ===
Another set of Mahayana sutras, which gives an indication of which Mahayana sources were widespread in Central Asia, are those translated by the Indian-Kuchan translator Kumārajīva (344–413 CE) and his team (probably from Kuchan target sources) in Chang&#x27;an. The main sutras they translated are:

* &quot;Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot; (&quot;Diamond Sutra&quot;)
* &quot;Smaller Sukhāvatī-vyūha&quot; (T 366)
* &quot;Saddharma Puṇḍarīka Sūtra (Lotus Sutra)&quot; (T 263—62)
* &quot;Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra&quot; (T 475)
* &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot;, (T 227, 408 CE)
* &quot;Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra (&quot;T 223, 403-404 CE)
* &quot;Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra&quot; (T 642)
* &quot;Daśabhūmikā Sūtra&quot; (T 286) in collaboration with Buddhayaśas.
* &quot;Acintyaprabhāsa-nirdeśa-sūtra&quot; (T 484)
* &quot;Viśeṣacintā-brahma-paripṛcchā&quot; (T 585—86)
* &quot;Bhadrakalpa&quot; (T 425)
* &quot;Vasudhara-sūtra&quot; (T 481—82)
* &quot;Pūrṇa-paripṛcchā&quot; ( T 310, 17)
* &quot;Ratnajāli-paripṛcchā&quot; (T 433)
* &quot;Vidhi-hṛdaya-vyūha&quot; (T 307)
* &quot;Sarva-puṇya-samuccaya-samādhi-sūtra&quot; (T 381—82)

=== The &quot;Sūtrasamuccaya&quot; ===
The &quot;Sūtrasamuccaya&quot; is a compendium of sūtra quotations which survives in Tibetan and Chinese translation. It is sometimes attributed to Nagarjuna, but is likely to be from a later period (possibly 4th century CE or later). This anthology gives us an idea of some of the important Mahāyāna Sūtras that were being studied and quoted in Indian Mahāyāna Buddhism at this time. The &quot;Sūtrasamuccaya&quot; quotes from some early Buddhist texts, but mainly focuses on Mahāyāna Sūtras.

The following Mahāyāna Sūtras are quoted in the &quot;Sūtrasamuccaya&quot;:
* Saddharmapundarika-sutra (Lotus Sutra)
* Nirnaya-raja-sutra
* Bodhisattva-pitaka
* Bhagavajjnana-vaipulya-sutra
* Candra-garbha-parivarta
* Gandavyuha-sutra
* Bhadrakalpika-sutra
* Tathagata-guhya-sutra
* Vimatisamudghata-sutra 
* Sraddha-bala-dhana-sutra
* Sagara-naga-raja-pariprccha
* Tathagataguna-jñanacintyavis-ayavatara-nirdesa-sutra
* Astasahasrika Prajñaparamita
* Astadasasahasrika Prajñaparamita
* Pancavimsatisahasrika Prajñaparamita
* Simhasutejo&#x27;vadana
* Prasenajit-pariprccha
* Prasanta-viniscaya-pratiharya-sutra
* Ajatasatru-parivarta
* Ratnarasi-sutra
* Kasyapaparivarta
* Pitaputrasamagamana-sutra

* Dharmasamgiti-sutra
* Aksayamati-nirdesa-sutra
* Upayakausalya-sutra
* Viradattagrhapati-pariprcchda
* Ratnamegha-sutra 
* Dharani-svararaja-pariprccha
* Maitreya-simhanada-sutra
* Mañjusri-vikridita-sutra
* Candrapradipa (=Samadhiraja, Candraprabhaparivarta) sutra
* Niyataniyatavataramudrasutra
* Mañjusri-vikurvana-parivarta
* Sagaramati-pariprccha-sutra
* Ugra-pariprccha-sutra
* Pravrajyantaraya-sutra
* Udayanavatsaraja-pariprccha
* Saddharma-smrtyupasthana-sutra
* Vimalakirti-nirdesa
* Satyaka-parivarta
* Vicikitsasudhvamsa-sutra (&quot;possibly identical to Vimatisamudghata-sutra&quot;)
* Suryagarbha-parivarta
* Akasagarbha-parivarta

* Ksitigarbha-sutra
* Adhyasayasamcodana-sutra
* Brahma-pariprccha
* Puspakuta-sutra
* Mahakaruna-(pundarika)-sutra
* Tathagata-bimba-parivarta
* Anupurva-samudgata-sutra
* Tathagatotpattisambhava-sutra
* Lokottara-parivarta
* Lankavatara-sutra
* Mahasamnipata-parivarta
* Avaivartacakra-sutra
* Srimalasimhanada-sutra
* Bhadramayakara-sutra
* Buddhavatamsaka-sutra
* Brahma-visesacinti-pariprccha
* Saptasatika Prajñaparamita
* Ratnasamnicaya-nirdesa-sutra
* Trisatika Prajñaparamita
* Ratnadattamanava-sutra 
* Tathagata-kosa-sutra
* Maradamana-parivarta
* Dasabhumika-sutra
=== Madhyamaka school ===
According to David Seyfort Ruegg, the main sutra sources of the madhyamaka tradition are the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot;, &quot;Ratnakūṭa&quot; and &quot;Avataṃsaka&quot; sutras. Other sutras which were widely cited by Indian madhamika philosophers are: &quot;Vimalakīrtinirdeṣa&quot;, the &quot;Śuraṃgamasamādhi,&quot; the &quot;Saddharmapuṇḍarīka&quot;, the &quot;Daśabhūmika&quot;, the &quot;Akṣayamatinirdeśa&quot;, the &quot;Tathāgataguhyaka&quot;, and the &quot;Kāśyapaparivarta&quot;.

Ruegg also notes that the later madhyamaka Candrakīrti (c. 600 – c. 650) cites the &quot;Prajñāpāramitā sutras&quot; as well as: the &quot;Akṣayamatinirdeśa, Anavataptahradāpasaṃkramaṇa, Upāliparipṛcchā, Kāśyapaparivarta, Gaganagañja, Tathāgataguhya, Daśabhūmika, Dṛḍhādhyāśaya, Dhāraṇīśvararāja, Pitāputrasamāgama, Mañjuśrīparipṛcchā, Ratnakūṭa, Ratnacūḍaparipṛcchā, Ratnamegha, Ratnākara, Laṅkāvatāra, Lalitavistara, Vimalakirtinirdesa, Śālistamba, Satyadvayāvatāra&quot;, &quot;Saddharmapuṇḍarīka&quot;, &quot;Samādhirāja&quot; (&quot;Candrapradīpa&quot;), and &quot;Hastikakṣya&quot;.
&quot;The Compendium of Training&quot; (&quot;Śikṣāsamuccaya&quot;) by the eighth-century madhyamaka scholar Śāntideva, cites a total of ninety-seven Mahāyāna sūtras, some of which are now lost. According to Donald Lopez:Śāntideva cites three passages from the &quot;Lotus Sūtra&quot;, compared, for example, with two from the &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā&quot; and two from the &quot;Laṅkāvatārasūtra&quot;. Among the most cited sūtras are the &quot;Akṣayamatinirdeśa&quot; (eighteen citations), the &quot;Ugraparipṛcchā&quot; (twenty citations), the &quot;Dharmasaṃgīti&quot; (eighteen citations), and the &quot;Ratnamegha&quot; (twenty-four citations).

===In the Chinese canon===

Though there are various editions of the Chinese Buddhist canon (大藏經; pinyin: &quot;Dàzàngjīng&quot;), one of the most widespread modern editions is the Japanese Taisho Tripitaka, redacted during the 1920s. It consists of eighty-five volumes.

The Mahāyāna Sūtras are contained in various sections of the canon:

* &quot;Prajñapāramitā&quot; Section
* &quot;Saddharma Puṇḍarīka&quot; Section
* &quot;Avataṃsaka&quot; Section
* &quot;Ratnakūṭa&quot; Section
* &quot;Mahāparinirvāṇa&quot; Section
* &quot;Mahāsannipāta&quot; Section
* Sutra Collection Section

=== In the Tibetan Canon ===
In the Tibetan Buddhist Canon, Mahāyāna Sūtra translations are found in the Kangyur (Wylie: &quot;bka&#x27;-&#x27;gyur&quot;). They are traditionally divided into four divisions:

* &quot;Prajñāpāramitā&quot; (&quot;sher phyin&quot;), 23 Sūtras.
* &quot;Buddhāvataṃsaka&quot; (&quot;phal chen&quot;), a single long text which is actually a composite work.
* &quot;Ratnakūta&quot; (&quot;dkon brtsegs&quot;), 49 Sūtras.
* &quot;General Sūtra collection&quot; (&quot;mdo sde&quot;), 266 sūtras, varied in length, subject, interlocutors and origins. Most are Mahāyāna works, but a few are non-Mahāyāna texts.

=== Newar Buddhism ===
Newar Buddhism has a group of nine Sanskrit Mahayana sutras that are considered the key texts of the tradition. They are:

# &quot;Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra&quot;
# &quot;Saddharma Puṇḍarīka Sūtra&quot;
# &quot;Suvarṇaprabhāsa Sūtra&quot;
# &quot;Samādhirāja Sūtra&quot;
# &quot;Gandavyūha Sūtra&quot;
# &quot;Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra&quot;
# &quot;Daśabhūmika Sūtra&quot;
# &quot;Lalitavistara Sūtra&quot;
# &quot;Tathāgataguhya Sūtra&quot; (actually replaced by the &quot;Guhyasamaja&quot; since the tradition lost the &quot;Tathāgataguhya&quot;)

==See also==
* Buddhist texts
* Sutra
* Buddhist Tantras
* Tripitaka
* List of suttas
* Pali Canon
* Sanskrit Buddhist literature

== Notes ==
===Bibliography===
* Dutt, Nalinaksha (1978). &quot;Buddhist Sects in India&quot;, Motilal Banararsidass, Delhi, 2nd Edition
* Kanno, Hiroshi (2003). Chinese Sutra Commentaries from the Early Period, Annual Report of The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University, IRIAB, vol VI, 301-320
* &quot;Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism&quot;, Macmillan, 2004.
* Nakamura, Hajime (1980). &quot;Indian Buddhism: A Survey with Bibliographical Notes&quot;. 1st edition: Japan, 1980. 1st Indian Edition: Delhi, 1987. 
* 
* 
* Pfand, Peter (1986). &quot;Māhāyana Texts Translated into Western Languages – A Bibliographical Guide&quot;. E.J. Brill, Köln, 
* 
* Walser, Joseph. Genealogies of Mahāyāna Buddhism: Emptiness, Power and the question of Origin. Routledge.
* Walser, Joseph (2012), &quot;Nagarjuna in Context Mahayana Buddhism and Early Indian Culture.&quot; Columbia University Press.
* Warder, A. K. (1999). &quot;Indian Buddhism&quot;. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi. 3rd revised edition
* Williams, Paul (2008). &quot;Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations&quot;. Taylor &amp; Francis

== External links ==
*Bingenheimer, Marcus (2014). Bibliography of Translations from the Chinese Buddhist Canon into Western Languages 
*Buddhist Scriptures in Multiple Languages (Taisho Tripitaka)
*Mahayana Canonical Text Titles and Translations in English
*Mahayana Sutras
*Digital Sanskrit Buddhist Canon
*Mahayana Buddhist Sutras in English
*BuddhaNet&#x27;s eBook Library (English pdfs)
*Complete English translation and analysis of the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra or PDF
*Bhadra-kalpika Sūtra Bhadra-kalpika Sutra {s = sahasra; l = laks Bhadra-kalpika Sutra, Manu-antara-s 3-4 Bhadra-kalpika Sutra, Manu-antara-s 5 &amp; Bhadra-kalpika Sutra, Manu-antara-s 7 &amp; 8
*Sūtras</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1191035" start="4" end="19" title="Mahayana sutras" label="Mahāyāna sūtras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="41" end="59" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209680" start="67" end="72" title="Sutra" label="sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="108" end="132" title="Buddhist texts" label="&amp;quot;buddhavacana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="185" end="202" title="Mahayana" label="Mahāyāna Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="234" end="242" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q385530" start="280" end="302" title="Tibetan Buddhist canon" label="Tibetan Buddhist canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023673" start="307" end="329" title="Chinese Buddhist canon" label="Chinese Buddhist canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q379905" start="548" end="554" title="Asanga" label="Asaṅga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="619" end="625" title="Tripiṭaka" label="Piṭaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="665" end="676" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000976" start="699" end="715" title="Buddhist studies" label="Buddhist studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630269" start="885" end="921" title="Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent" label="decline of Buddhism in ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="993" end="1005" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="1013" end="1022" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="1087" end="1098" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Lotus Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q751147" start="1116" end="1143" title="Prajnaparamita" label="Perfection of Wisdom Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="1161" end="1177" title="Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra" label="Avatamsaka Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q543126" start="1195" end="1212" title="Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra" label="Lankavatara Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q262244" start="1230" end="1246" title="Pure Land sutras" label="Pure Land Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q375539" start="1268" end="1281" title="Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra" label="Nirvana Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="1381" end="1398" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Shakyamuni Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q28988" start="1464" end="1470" title="Ananda" label="Ananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882403" start="1559" end="1571" title="Bodhisattvas of the Earth" label="bodhisattvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="1577" end="1585" title="Manjushri" label="Mañjuśrī"/>
<link wikidata="Q193849" start="1590" end="1604" title="Avalokiteśvara" label="Avalokiteśvara"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="1799" end="1803" title="Nāga" label="Nāga"/>
<link wikidata="Q744589" start="1975" end="1998" title="Early Buddhist schools" label="Indian Buddhist schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="2135" end="2153" title="Theravada" label="Theravāda Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12900505" start="2486" end="2500" title="Jean Przyluski" label="Jean Przyluski"/>
<link wikidata="Q166103" start="2522" end="2537" title="Étienne Lamotte" label="Étienne Lamotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068293" start="2570" end="2580" title="Upāsaka and Upāsikā" label="laypersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q110646" start="2699" end="2716" title="Vimalakirti Sutra" label="Vimalakirti Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150429" start="2873" end="2885" title="Mahāsāṃghika" label="Mahāsāṃghika"/>
<link wikidata="Q52004734" start="3321" end="3332" title="Jan Nattier" label="Jan Nattier"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906382" start="3388" end="3408" title="Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra" label="Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776573" start="3838" end="3853" title="Gregory Schopen" label="Gregory Schopen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="4080" end="4085" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135303" start="4943" end="4958" title="Hajime Nakamura" label="Hajime Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q193814" start="5003" end="5011" title="Hinayana" label="Hīnayāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q848764" start="5749" end="5755" title="Vinaya" label="Vinaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q744589" start="5781" end="5803" title="early Buddhist schools" label="early Buddhist schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q457629" start="5822" end="5828" title="Yijing (monk)" label="Yijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149600" start="6104" end="6120" title="Richard Gombrich" label="Richard Gombrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q132126893" start="7032" end="7045" title="dharmabhāṇaka" label="dharmabhāṇaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7308" end="7313" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q370115" start="7317" end="7326" title="Lokaksema (Buddhist monk)" label="Lokakṣema"/>
<link wikidata="Q214495" start="7558" end="7565" title="Bamyan" label="Bamiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312978" start="7708" end="7714" title="Faxian" label="Faxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q457629" start="7716" end="7722" title="Yijing (monk)" label="Yijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="7728" end="7736" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4125044" start="8228" end="8240" title="A. K. Warder" label="A. K. Warder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062909" start="8577" end="8586" title="Taranatha" label="Tāranātha"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="8729" end="8734" title="Nāga" label="nagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="9912" end="9922" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712809" start="10236" end="10243" title="śrāvaka" label="śrāvaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150429" start="10623" end="10635" title="Mahāsāṃghika" label="Mahāsāṃghika"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="10674" end="10683" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q542107" start="10787" end="10797" title="Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya" label="Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638029" start="10942" end="10951" title="Pudgalavada" label="Saṃmitīya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062909" start="11057" end="11066" title="Taranatha" label="Tāranātha"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="11068" end="11076" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638029" start="11092" end="11101" title="Pudgalavada" label="Saṃmitīya"/>
<link wikidata="Q320142" start="11417" end="11426" title="Śāriputra" label="Sariputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712809" start="11489" end="11496" title="śrāvaka" label="śrāvaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="12012" end="12016" title="nāga" label="nāga"/>
<link wikidata="Q171195" start="12098" end="12107" title="Nagarjuna" label="Nāgārjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="12196" end="12204" title="Manjushri" label="Mañjuśrī"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311072" start="12221" end="12231" title="Vajradhara" label="Vajradhāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029801" start="12565" end="12579" title="Sukhāvatīvyūhasūtra" label="Sukhāvatīvyūha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089509" start="12889" end="12894" title="Deva (Buddhism)" label="devas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="13401" end="13407" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q711861" start="13839" end="13848" title="Hsuan Hua" label="Hsuan Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089509" start="13956" end="13960" title="Deva (Buddhism)" label="deva"/>
<link wikidata="Q755990" start="13981" end="13984" title="Rishi" label="ṛṣi"/>
<link wikidata="Q445460" start="14160" end="14170" title="Shantideva" label="Shantideva"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="14685" end="14695" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44847" start="14889" end="14901" title="D. T. Suzuki" label="D. T. Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="15720" end="15731" title="Bodhisattva" label="Bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q838339" start="16094" end="16104" title="bodhicitta" label="bodhicitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906382" start="16459" end="16473" title="Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra" label="Ugraparipṛcchā"/>
<link wikidata="Q225932" start="16631" end="16636" title="arhat" label="arhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712809" start="16642" end="16650" title="Śrāvaka" label="sravakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193814" start="16754" end="16762" title="Hinayana" label="hīnayāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120986" start="17026" end="17040" title="pratyekabuddha" label="pratyekabuddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906382" start="17268" end="17288" title="Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra" label="Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906454" start="17309" end="17324" title="Ajitasena Sutra" label="Ajitasena sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q225932" start="17397" end="17402" title="arhat" label="arhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="17524" end="17535" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q262244" start="17613" end="17622" title="Pure Land Buddhism" label="purelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="17656" end="17663" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="17668" end="17679" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q236242" start="17928" end="17936" title="Amitābha" label="Amitabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q265911" start="17938" end="17947" title="Five Wisdom Buddhas" label="Akshobhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q239847" start="17952" end="17961" title="Vairocana" label="Vairocana"/>
<link wikidata="Q193461" start="17984" end="17992" title="Maitreya" label="Maitreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="17994" end="18002" title="Mañjusri" label="Mañjusri"/>
<link wikidata="Q604687" start="18004" end="18015" title="Ksitigarbha" label="Ksitigarbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q193849" start="18021" end="18036" title="Avalokiteśvara" label="Avalokiteshvara"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="18116" end="18126" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddhahood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="18605" end="18621" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Buddha Sakyamuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q207674" start="18680" end="18691" title="Docetism" label="docetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113904" start="18967" end="18981" title="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra" label="Prajñāpāramitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q828201" start="19062" end="19070" title="pāramitā" label="pāramitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="19101" end="19111" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddhahood"/>
<link wikidata="Q838339" start="19262" end="19272" title="bodhicitta" label="bodhicitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406348" start="19473" end="19478" title="Merit (Buddhism)" label="merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936546" start="19954" end="19974" title="Bodhisattva Precepts" label="bodhisattva precepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q732344" start="20279" end="20288" title="Pure land" label="Pure Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q236242" start="20348" end="20356" title="Amitābha" label="Amitabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q756612" start="20361" end="20369" title="Akshobhya" label="Aksobhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q732344" start="20406" end="20419" title="Pure land" label="Buddha fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905453" start="20872" end="20891" title="East Asian Buddhism" label="East Asian Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q510547" start="21005" end="21012" title="Shastra" label="śāstras"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="21253" end="21257" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="21319" end="21336" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21398" end="21405" title="pustaka" label="pustaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406348" start="21507" end="21512" title="Merit (Buddhism)" label="merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="21517" end="21527" title="Apotropaic magic" label="apotropaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209680" start="21591" end="21597" title="Sutra" label="sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="22303" end="22309" title="Stupa" label="stupas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156436" start="22311" end="22324" title="Śarīra" label="Buddha relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="23176" end="23182" title="Chaitya" label="caitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172811" start="23367" end="23375" title="Nirmāṇakāya" label="rūpakāya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191427" start="23446" end="23456" title="dharmakāya" label="dharmakāya"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="23477" end="23483" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q123424992" start="24693" end="24712" title="Prajñāpāramitā Devi" label="Prajñāpāramitā Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655926" start="24780" end="24794" title="Newar Buddhism" label="Newar Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="24796" end="24812" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905453" start="24817" end="24836" title="East Asian Buddhism" label="East Asian Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="25043" end="25049" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="25177" end="25188" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Lotus Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057510" start="25207" end="25214" title="Namu Myōhō Renge Kyō" label="Daimoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q871371" start="25243" end="25260" title="Nichiren Buddhism" label="Nichiren Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198075" start="25335" end="25341" title="Huayan" label="Huayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="25425" end="25441" title="Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra" label="Avatamsaka Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906454" start="25578" end="25593" title="Ajitasena Sutra" label="Ajitasena Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712809" start="25753" end="25761" title="Shravaka" label="śravakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q225932" start="25772" end="25790" title="Arhat" label="&amp;quot;arhats&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110646" start="25845" end="25870" title="Vimalakirti Nirdesha" label="Vimalakīrti-nirdeśa Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329565" start="26108" end="26117" title="Sukhavati" label="Sukhavati"/>
<link wikidata="Q320616" start="26122" end="26130" title="Abhirati" label="Abhirati"/>
<link wikidata="Q47116555" start="26165" end="26181" title="Salistamba Sutra" label="Salistamba Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727619" start="26628" end="26648" title="early Buddhist texts" label="early Buddhist texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q751147" start="26699" end="26713" title="Prajnaparamita" label="Prajñāpāramitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113904" start="26841" end="26875" title="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra" label="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q494235" start="26952" end="26986" title="Diamond Sutra" label="Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113904" start="27195" end="27229" title="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra" label="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="27510" end="27521" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q828201" start="27531" end="27551" title="Pāramitā" label="transcendent virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q546054" start="28093" end="28101" title="Śūnyatā" label="shunyata"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256466" start="28211" end="28218" title="Nirvana (Buddhism)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="28713" end="28738" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Saddharma-pundarīka-sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528" start="28764" end="28775" title="Nelumbo nucifera" label="White Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q668188" start="28942" end="28949" title="Tiantai" label="Tiantai"/>
<link wikidata="Q871371" start="28954" end="28962" title="Nichiren Buddhism" label="Nichiren"/>
<link wikidata="Q15489667" start="29077" end="29081" title="yana (Buddhism)" label="yāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082045" start="29096" end="29107" title="śrāvakayāna" label="śrāvakayāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120986" start="29121" end="29139" title="pratyekabuddhayāna" label="pratyekabuddhayāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="29156" end="29171" title="bodhisattvayāna" label="bodhisattvayāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q668298" start="29248" end="29266" title="Ekayāna" label="one path (ekayāna)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="29284" end="29294" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddhahood"/>
<link wikidata="Q581473" start="29422" end="29435" title="Upaya" label="skilful means"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036420" start="30033" end="30059" title="Innumerable Meanings Sutra" label="Innumerable Meanings Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017770" start="30080" end="30110" title="Samantabhadra Meditation Sutra" label="Samantabhadra Meditation Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q236242" start="30511" end="30526" title="Amitābha Buddha" label="Amitābha Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329565" start="30535" end="30544" title="Sukhavati" label="Sukhāvatī"/>
<link wikidata="Q262244" start="30624" end="30642" title="Pure Land Buddhism" label="Pure Land Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q490548" start="30708" end="30726" title="Other power" label="salvific vow-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029801" start="30945" end="30964" title="Longer Sukhāvatīvyūha Sūtra" label="Long Sukhāvatīvyūha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661817" start="31038" end="31058" title="Shorter Sukhāvatīvyūha Sūtra" label="Short Sukhāvatīvyūha"/>
<link wikidata="Q842226" start="31134" end="31162" title="Amitāyus Contemplation Sūtra" label="Amitāyus Contemplation Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q854773" start="31410" end="31423" title="Bhaisajyaguru" label="Bhaiṣajyaguru"/>
<link wikidata="Q756612" start="31578" end="31586" title="Akshobhya" label="Akṣobhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q320616" start="31608" end="31616" title="Abhirati" label="Abhirati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217023" start="31902" end="31909" title="Samadhi" label="samādhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123855" start="32218" end="32231" title="Contemplation" label="contemplative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217023" start="32246" end="32253" title="Samadhi" label="Samādhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238822" start="32316" end="32365" title="Pratyutpanna Sutra" label="Pratyutpannabuddha Saṃmukhāvasthita Samādhi Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632203" start="32473" end="32490" title="Samadhiraja-Sutra" label="Samādhirāja-sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005610" start="32530" end="32553" title="Suramgamasamadhi sutra" label="Śūraṅgama-samādhi-sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48728621" start="32929" end="32949" title="Visualization sutras" label="Visualization Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="32951" end="32958" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q842226" start="33169" end="33242" title="Amitayurdhyana Sutra" label="&amp;quot;Sutra on the Contemplation of the Buddha of Immeasurable Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017770" start="33474" end="33487" title="Samantabhadra Meditation Sutra" label="Samantabhadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840053" start="33650" end="33663" title="Dhyāna sutras" label="Dhyāna Sūtras"/>
<link wikidata="Q335293" start="33715" end="33726" title="Kumārajīva" label="Kumarajiva."/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="34001" end="34022" title="Avatamsaka Sutra" label="Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234449" start="34313" end="34330" title="Dasabhumika Sutra" label="Daśabhūmika Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520618" start="34351" end="34367" title="Gandavyuha Sutra" label="Gaṇḍavyūha Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q239847" start="35181" end="35194" title="Vairocana" label="Mahāvairocana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="35342" end="35359" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Shakyamuni Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198075" start="35436" end="35442" title="Huayan school" label="Huayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198075" start="35448" end="35453" title="Kegon" label="Kegon"/>
<link wikidata="Q940709" start="35516" end="35529" title="Chan Buddhism" label="Chan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q262244" start="35534" end="35552" title="Pure Land Buddhism" label="Pure Land Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088031" start="35745" end="35764" title="Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra" label="Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733437" start="35861" end="35880" title="Mahasamnipata Sutra" label="Mahāsamnipāta Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36035" end="36052" title="Bodhisattvapiṭaka" label="Bodhisattvapiṭaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046397" start="36058" end="36085" title="Śrīmālādevī Sūtra" label="Śrīmālādevī Siṃhanāda Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029801" start="36091" end="36119" title="Infinite Life Sutra" label="Longer Sukhāvatī-vyūha Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906382" start="36141" end="36161" title="Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra" label="Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q112672951" start="36266" end="36286" title="Tathāgataguhya Sūtra" label="Tathāgataguhya Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q110269367" start="36435" end="36453" title="Akṣayamatinirdeśa Sūtra" label="Akṣayamati-nirdeśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="36748" end="36767" title="Lalitavistara Sūtra" label="Lalitavistara Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245362" start="37105" end="37124" title="Bhadrakalpika Sūtra" label="Bhadrakalpika Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="37419" end="37427" title="Mañjusri" label="Mañjuśrī"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462232" start="37692" end="37708" title="Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva Pūrvapraṇidhāna Sūtra" label="Kṣitigarbhasūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q604687" start="37749" end="37760" title="Ksitigarbha" label="Kṣitigarbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q416174" start="37802" end="37813" title="Ākāśagarbha" label="Ākāśagarbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q193461" start="37839" end="37847" title="Maitreya" label="Maitreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017770" start="38020" end="38050" title="Samantabhadra Meditation Sutra" label="Samantabhadra Meditation Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q847493" start="38142" end="38150" title="Yogacara" label="Yogācāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041774" start="38432" end="38459" title="Sandhinirmocana Sutra" label="Ārya-saṃdhi-nirmocana-Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235905" start="38706" end="38743" title="Three Turnings of the Wheel of Dharma" label="three turnings of the wheel of Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17191166" start="38795" end="38801" title="Āgama Section" label="Āgamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082045" start="38821" end="38829" title="Śrāvakayāna" label="śravakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18868326" start="39294" end="39311" title="Buddhabhūmi Sūtra" label="Buddhabhūmi Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482722" start="39452" end="39469" title="Śīlabhadra" label="Śīlabhadra&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39476" end="39487" title="Buddhabhūmisūtra" label="Buddhabhūmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q543126" start="39658" end="39675" title="Lankavatara Sutra" label="Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952751" start="39716" end="39732" title="Ghanavyūha Sūtra" label="Ghanavyūha Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q640962" start="39898" end="39911" title="buddha-nature" label="buddha-nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q683128" start="40063" end="40075" title="Eight Consciousnesses" label="alayavijñāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q940709" start="40151" end="40164" title="Chan Buddhism" label="Chan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110646" start="40224" end="40242" title="Vimalakirti sutra" label="Vimalakirtinirdeśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502143" start="40326" end="40337" title="Vimalakīrti" label="Vimalakīrti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505322" start="40508" end="40519" title="Nonduality (spirituality)" label="non-dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068293" start="40742" end="40758" title="Upāsaka and Upāsikā" label="lay practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q225932" start="40800" end="40805" title="arhat" label="arhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="40811" end="40822" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q546054" start="40851" end="40858" title="śūnyatā" label="śūnyatā"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="40988" end="40993" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="40998" end="41003" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516029" start="41067" end="41089" title="Tathāgatagarbha sūtras" label="Tathāgatagarbha sūtras"/>
<link wikidata="Q640962" start="41143" end="41158" title="Buddha-nature" label="Tathāgatagarbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981490" start="41167" end="41176" title="Tathagatagarbha Sutra" label="Tathāgata"/>
<link wikidata="Q375539" start="41716" end="41746" title="Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra" label="Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="41782" end="41786" title="Pāli" label="Pāli"/>
<link wikidata="Q374326" start="41793" end="41814" title="Mahaparinibbana Sutta" label="Mahaparinibbana Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981490" start="41854" end="41875" title="Tathagatagarbha Sutra" label="Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046397" start="42009" end="42022" title="Srimala Sutra" label="Śrīmālā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764034" start="42040" end="42058" title="Aṅgulimālīya Sūtra" label="Aṅgulimālīya Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777797" start="42076" end="42099" title="Anunatva-Apurnatva-Nirdesa" label="Anūnatvāpurnatvanirdeśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18832401" start="42172" end="42187" title="Mahābheri Sūtra" label="Mahābherī Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q124466160" start="42234" end="42249" title="Mahāmegha Sūtra" label="Mahāmegha Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q550068" start="42391" end="42395" title="Buddhist ethics" label="Śīla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936546" start="42427" end="42447" title="Bodhisattva Precepts" label="bodhisattva precepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955537" start="42671" end="42687" title="Brahmajāla Sūtra" label="Brahmajāla Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886832" start="42786" end="42812" title="Bequeathed Teachings Sutra" label="Bequeathed Teachings Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635543" start="43285" end="43309" title="Thirty-five Confession Buddhas" label="Sutra of the Three Heaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q391694" start="43376" end="43394" title="Golden Light Sutra" label="Golden Light Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068367" start="43621" end="43640" title="Four Heavenly Kings" label="Four Heavenly Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207590" start="43930" end="43938" title="Dharani" label="dhāraṇīs"/>
<link wikidata="Q248758" start="44017" end="44041" title="Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit" label="Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812769" start="44473" end="44488" title="Atanatiya Sutra" label="Atanatiya Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="44641" end="44647" title="Tripiṭaka" label="Piṭaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445824" start="44779" end="44792" title="Dharmaguptaka" label="Dharmaguptaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207590" start="44845" end="44852" title="Dhāraṇī" label="Dhāraṇī"/>
<link wikidata="Q131353779" start="45617" end="45644" title="Usnisa Vijaya Dharani Sutra" label="Uṣṇīṣa Vijaya Dhāraṇī Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q131353779" start="45657" end="45674" title="Usnisavijaya" label="Victorious Uṣṇīṣa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310317" start="45690" end="45708" title="Nīlakaṇṭha Dhāraṇī" label="Nīlakaṇṭha Dhāraṇī"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007546" start="45756" end="45775" title="Cundi (Buddhism)" label="Cundī Dhāraṇī Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359737" start="45785" end="45844" title="Eleven-Faced Avalokitesvara Heart Dharani Sutra" label="&amp;quot;Eleven-Faced Avalokitesvara Heart Dharani Sūtra&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q58133312" start="46040" end="46050" title="Pañcarakṣā" label="Pañcarakṣā"/>
<link wikidata="Q11070164" start="46117" end="46142" title="Amitabha Pure Land Rebirth Mantra" label="Pure Land Rebirth Dhāraṇī"/>
<link wikidata="Q236242" start="46217" end="46225" title="Amitābha" label="Amitayus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="46424" end="46439" title="Woodblock printing" label="woodblock print"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46465" end="46493" title="Cintāmaṇicakra#Dhāraṇī and mantras" label="Cintāmaṇicakra Dhāraṇī Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324914" start="46567" end="46576" title="Bodhiruci" label="Bodhiruci"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922707" start="47022" end="47028" title="Chinese Esoteric Buddhism" label="Mìjiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q336102" start="47056" end="47062" title="Mikkyō" label="Mikkyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="47142" end="47149" title="Mantra" label="mantric"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="47154" end="47171" title="Vajrayana" label="esoteric Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561131" start="47351" end="47365" title="Homa (ritual)" label="fire offerings"/>
<link wikidata="Q191431" start="47553" end="47561" title="Mandala" label="mandalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208030" start="47563" end="47569" title="Mudra" label="mudras"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="47904" end="47911" title="Tantra" label="tantric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154472" start="48141" end="48167" title="Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sūtra" label="Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="48339" end="48348" title="Vajrayana" label="Vajrayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451306" start="48463" end="48470" title="Tantras (Buddhism)" label="tantras"/>
<link wikidata="Q391694" start="48570" end="48588" title="Golden Light Sutra" label="Golden Light Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q265911" start="48671" end="48683" title="Five Tathāgatas" label="five Buddhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176806" start="48788" end="48803" title="Śūraṅgama Sūtra" label="Śūraṅgama Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454282" start="48966" end="48984" title="Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra" label="Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193849" start="49032" end="49046" title="Avalokiteśvara" label="Avalokiteśvara"/>
<link wikidata="Q241652" start="49054" end="49071" title="Om mani padme hum" label="Om mani padme hum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047244" start="49281" end="49296" title="Mantra of Light" label="Mantra of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154472" start="49493" end="49519" title="Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sūtra" label="Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="49551" end="49561" title="Vajrayana" label="Mantrayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922707" start="49585" end="49610" title="Chinese Esoteric Buddhism" label="Chinese Esoteric Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q550182" start="49615" end="49622" title="Shingon Buddhism" label="Shingon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688483" start="49633" end="49661" title="Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra" label="Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041650" start="49689" end="49707" title="Vajrasekhara Sutra" label="Vajraśekhara Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q751147" start="49726" end="49740" title="Prajnaparamita" label="Prajñaparamita"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="49975" end="49982" title="Mantra" label="mantras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207590" start="49990" end="49998" title="Dharani" label="dhāraṇīs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="50037" end="50047" title="Vajrayana" label="Mantrayana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50230" end="50266" title="Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā" label="Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q622868" start="50303" end="50314" title="Heart Sutra" label="Heart Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="50826" end="50835" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="50839" end="50851" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q372474" start="50882" end="50891" title="Colophon (publishing)" label="colophons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="50986" end="50996" title="Apocrypha" label="apocryphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="51032" end="51048" title="biblical studies" label="biblical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="51242" end="51251" title="Heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065574" start="51275" end="51289" title="A. Charles Muller" label="Charles Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q842226" start="52075" end="52103" title="Amitayurdhyana Sutra" label="Amitāyus Contemplation Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q262244" start="52241" end="52259" title="Pure Land Buddhism" label="Pure Land Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955537" start="52357" end="52380" title="Brahmajāla Sūtra" label="Brahma&amp;#x27;s Net Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674330" start="52512" end="52528" title="Blood Bowl Sutra" label="Blood Bowl Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908952" start="52586" end="52628" title="Vajrasamadhi-sutra" label="&amp;quot;Vajrasamadhi&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Sūtra&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036420" start="52792" end="52818" title="Innumerable Meanings Sutra" label="Innumerable Meanings Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121475" start="52877" end="52907" title="Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment" label="Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939265" start="52962" end="52979" title="Humane King Sutra" label="Humane King Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176806" start="53027" end="53042" title="Śūraṅgama Sūtra" label="Śūraṅgama Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11549377" start="53131" end="53143" title="Kogen Mizuno" label="Kogen Mizuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q494235" start="53882" end="53895" title="Diamond Sutra" label="Diamond Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q379905" start="53905" end="53911" title="Asanga" label="Asanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q316343" start="53916" end="53926" title="Vasubandhu" label="Vasubandhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661817" start="53974" end="53988" title="Shorter Sukhāvatīvyūha Sūtra" label="Amitabha sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="54047" end="54058" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Lotus Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q316343" start="54178" end="54188" title="Vasubandhu" label="Vasubandhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367772" start="54217" end="54227" title="Da zhidu lun" label="Dazhidulun"/>
<link wikidata="Q335293" start="54361" end="54371" title="Kumārajīva" label="Kumārajīva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234449" start="54418" end="54435" title="Ten Stages Sutra" label="Daśabhūmika sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q316343" start="54531" end="54541" title="Vasubandhu" label="Vasubandhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041398" start="54571" end="54581" title="Sthiramati" label="Sthiramati"/>
<link wikidata="Q110269367" start="54694" end="54718" title="Akṣayamatinirdeśa Sūtra" label="Exposition of Akṣayamati"/>
<link wikidata="Q558272" start="54765" end="54779" title="Dignāga" label="Dignāga&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="54990" end="55018" title="Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra" label="&amp;quot;Gaṇḍavyūha Sutra&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110646" start="55192" end="55209" title="Vimalakirti Sutra" label="Vimalakirti sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q47116555" start="55318" end="55334" title="Salistamba Sutra" label="Śālistamba sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q636959" start="55466" end="55477" title="Kamalaśīla" label="Kamalashila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058425" start="55512" end="55529" title="Abhisamayalankara" label="Abhisamayālaṅkāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657290" start="55563" end="55573" title="Haribhadra (Buddhist philosopher)" label="Haribhadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q375539" start="55774" end="55795" title="Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra" label="Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069868" start="55861" end="55874" title="Liang dynasty" label="Liang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041774" start="55920" end="55952" title="Sandhinirmocana Sutra" label="&amp;quot;Saṃdhinirmocanasutra&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17993229" start="56244" end="56255" title="Jñānagarbha" label="Jñānagarbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632203" start="56452" end="56469" title="Samadhiraja Sutra" label="Samādhirāja Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15381332" start="56529" end="56543" title="Ratnākaraśānti" label="Ratnākaraśānti"/>
<link wikidata="Q543126" start="56664" end="56681" title="Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra" label="Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="56805" end="56812" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349949" start="56845" end="56851" title="Fazang" label="Fazang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952751" start="57000" end="57016" title="Ghanavyūha Sūtra" label="Ghanavyūha sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955537" start="57050" end="57066" title="Brahmajāla Sūtra" label="Brahmajala sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q543126" start="57167" end="57184" title="Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra" label="Lankavatara sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q197778" start="57194" end="57206" title="Zhiyi" label="Zhiyi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445824" start="57923" end="57936" title="Dharmaguptaka" label="Dharmaguptaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164543" start="57953" end="57964" title="Bahuśrutīya" label="Bahuśrutīya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362598" start="57996" end="58015" title="Tattvasiddhi" label="Tattvasiddhi-Śāstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q370115" start="58050" end="58059" title="Lokaksema (Buddhist monk)" label="Lokaksema"/>
<link wikidata="Q612405" start="58164" end="58174" title="abhidharma" label="abhidharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943414" start="58186" end="58205" title="Abhidharma-samuccaya" label="Abhidharmasamuccaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q379905" start="58213" end="58219" title="Asanga" label="Asaṅga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712809" start="58332" end="58339" title="śrāvaka" label="śrāvaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120986" start="58345" end="58359" title="pratyekabuddha" label="pratyekabuddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="58648" end="58663" title="Classical Chinese" label="ancient Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128314" start="58669" end="58686" title="Classical Tibetan" label="Classical Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q248758" start="58735" end="58759" title="Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit" label="Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="58771" end="58778" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124623" start="58797" end="58805" title="Gandhari language" label="Gandhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q592980" start="58853" end="58860" title="Kangyur" label="Kangyur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023673" start="58869" end="58886" title="Chinese Buddhist canon" label="Chinese Tripiṭaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16164739" start="58912" end="58932" title="Sanskrit Buddhist literature" label="Sanskrit manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q276864" start="58977" end="58985" title="Dunhuang manuscripts" label="Dunhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="59017" end="59022" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q751147" start="59113" end="59127" title="Prajñāpāramitā" label="Prajñāpāramitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q622868" start="59156" end="59167" title="Heart Sutra" label="Heart Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q494235" start="59188" end="59201" title="Diamond Sutra" label="Diamond Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q756612" start="59521" end="59530" title="Akshobhya" label="Akshobhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4125044" start="59620" end="59631" title="A. K. Warder" label="A.K. Warder"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="59876" end="59882" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q370115" start="59888" end="59897" title="Lokaksema (Buddhist monk)" label="Lokakṣema"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="59937" end="59945" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="59998" end="60009" title="Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="60021" end="60028" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q329174" start="60072" end="60078" title="Taishō" label="Taishō"/>
<link wikidata="Q645696" start="60176" end="60188" title="Erik Zürcher" label="Erik Zürcher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60190" end="60203" title="Paul Harrison (Buddhist scholar)" label="Paul Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q52004734" start="60208" end="60219" title="Jan Nattier" label="Jan Nattier"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113904" start="60358" end="60392" title="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra" label="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="60552" end="60568" title="Avatamsaka Sutra" label="Avatamsaka Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q756612" start="60583" end="60591" title="Akshobhya" label="Akṣobhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238822" start="60707" end="60733" title="Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sūtra" label="Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="61374" end="61386" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335293" start="61441" end="61451" title="Kumārajīva" label="Kumārajīva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328546" start="61493" end="61499" title="Kucha" label="Kuchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="61519" end="61532" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q494235" start="61580" end="61614" title="Diamond Sutra" label="Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661817" start="61657" end="61680" title="Amitabha Sutra" label="Smaller Sukhāvatī-vyūha"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="61703" end="61728" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Saddharma Puṇḍarīka Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q110646" start="61768" end="61793" title="Vimalakirti Sutra" label="Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113904" start="61816" end="61850" title="Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita Sutra" label="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005610" start="61959" end="61982" title="Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra" label="Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234449" start="61999" end="62028" title="Ten Stages Sutra" label="&amp;quot;Daśabhūmikā Sūtra&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q171195" start="62631" end="62640" title="Nagarjuna" label="Nagarjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727619" start="62916" end="62936" title="early Buddhist texts" label="early Buddhist texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455946" start="64944" end="64963" title="David Seyfort Ruegg" label="David Seyfort Ruegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q844421" start="64995" end="65005" title="madhyamaka" label="madhyamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088031" start="65052" end="65073" title="Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra" label="&amp;quot;Ratnakūṭa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="65078" end="65100" title="Avatamsaka Sutra" label="&amp;quot;Avataṃsaka&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110646" start="65190" end="65208" title="Vimalakirti Sutra" label="Vimalakīrtinirdeṣa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005610" start="65226" end="65242" title="Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra" label="Śuraṃgamasamādhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="65260" end="65278" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Saddharmapuṇḍarīka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234449" start="65296" end="65307" title="Ten Stages Sutra" label="Daśabhūmika"/>
<link wikidata="Q110269367" start="65325" end="65342" title="Akṣayamatinirdeśa Sūtra" label="Akṣayamatinirdeśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q112672951" start="65360" end="65376" title="Tathāgataguhyaka Sūtra" label="Tathāgataguhyaka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65398" end="65414" title="Kāśyapaparivarta" label="Kāśyapaparivarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q456963" start="65466" end="65477" title="Chandrakirti" label="Candrakīrti"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="65904" end="65922" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Saddharmapuṇḍarīka"/>
<link wikidata="Q445460" start="66121" end="66130" title="Shantideva" label="Śāntideva"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113904" start="66345" end="66372" title="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra" label="Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q543126" start="66402" end="66418" title="Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra" label="Laṅkāvatārasūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q110269367" start="66468" end="66485" title="Akṣayamatinirdeśa Sūtra" label="Akṣayamatinirdeśa"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906382" start="66524" end="66538" title="Ugraparipṛcchā Sūtra" label="Ugraparipṛcchā"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023673" start="66743" end="66765" title="Chinese Buddhist canon" label="Chinese Buddhist canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="66772" end="66778" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q837315" start="66864" end="66880" title="Taisho Tripitaka" label="Taisho Tripitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q751147" start="67023" end="67037" title="Prajnaparamita" label="Prajñapāramitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="67060" end="67079" title="Saddharma Puṇḍarīka" label="Saddharma Puṇḍarīka"/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="67102" end="67112" title="Avatamsaka Sutra" label="Avataṃsaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088031" start="67135" end="67144" title="Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra" label="Ratnakūṭa"/>
<link wikidata="Q375539" start="67167" end="67182" title="Mahaparinirvana Sutra" label="Mahāparinirvāṇa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733437" start="67199" end="67232" title="Mahasamnipata Sutra" label="&amp;quot;Mahāsannipāta&amp;quot; Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q385530" start="67297" end="67319" title="Tibetan Buddhist canon" label="Tibetan Buddhist Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q592980" start="67366" end="67373" title="Kangyur" label="Kangyur"/>
<link wikidata="Q844833" start="67375" end="67380" title="Wylie transliteration" label="Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655926" start="67920" end="67934" title="Newar Buddhism" label="Newar Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113904" start="68051" end="68085" title="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra" label="Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="68100" end="68125" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Saddharma Puṇḍarīka Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q391694" start="68140" end="68161" title="Golden Light Sutra" label="Suvarṇaprabhāsa Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632203" start="68176" end="68193" title="Samadhiraja Sutra" label="Samādhirāja Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q790258" start="68208" end="68224" title="Avatamsaka Sutra" label="Gandavyūha Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q543126" start="68239" end="68256" title="Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra" label="Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234449" start="68271" end="68288" title="Ten Stages Sutra" label="Daśabhūmika Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="68303" end="68322" title="Lalitavistara Sūtra" label="Lalitavistara Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q112672951" start="68337" end="68351" title="Tathāgataguhyaka Sūtra" label="Tathāgataguhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400398" start="68390" end="68413" title="Guhyasamāja Tantra" label="&amp;quot;Guhyasamaja&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q112672951" start="68443" end="68469" title="Tathāgataguhyaka Sūtra" label="&amp;quot;Tathāgataguhya&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="68487" end="68501" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q209680" start="68504" end="68509" title="Sutra" label="Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451306" start="68512" end="68528" title="Tantras (Buddhism)" label="Buddhist Tantras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="68531" end="68540" title="Tripiṭaka" label="Tripitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642004" start="68543" end="68557" title="List of suttas" label="List of suttas"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="68560" end="68570" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16164739" start="68573" end="68601" title="Sanskrit Buddhist literature" label="Sanskrit Buddhist literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294640" wikidata="Q4984208" url="?curid=294640" title="Buddhism and science">
<text>The relationship between Buddhism and science is a subject of contemporary discussion and debate among Buddhists, scientists, and scholars of Buddhism. Historically, Buddhism encompasses many types of beliefs, traditions and practices, so it is difficult to assert any single &quot;Buddhism&quot; in relation to science. Similarly, the issue of what &quot;science&quot; refers to remains a subject of debate, and there is no single view on this issue. Those who compare science with Buddhism may use &quot;science&quot; to refer to &quot;a method of sober and rational investigation&quot; or may refer to specific scientific theories, methods or technologies.

There are many examples throughout Buddhism of beliefs such as dogmatism, fundamentalism, clericalism, and devotion to supernatural spirits and deities. Nevertheless, since the 19th century, numerous modern figures have argued that Buddhism is rational and uniquely compatible with science. Some have even argued that Buddhism is &quot;scientific&quot; (a kind of &quot;science of the mind&quot; or an &quot;inner science&quot;). Those who argue that Buddhism is aligned with science point out certain commonalities between the scientific method and Buddhist thought. The 14th Dalai Lama, for example, in a speech to the Society for Neuroscience, listed a &quot;suspicion of absolutes&quot; and a reliance on causality and empiricism as common philosophical principles shared by Buddhism and science.

Buddhists also point to various statements in the Buddhist scriptures that promote rational and empirical investigation and invite people to put the teachings of the Buddha to the test before accepting them. Furthermore, Buddhist doctrines such as impermanence and emptiness have been compared to the scientific understanding of the natural world. However, some scholars have criticized the idea that Buddhism is uniquely rational and science friendly, seeing these ideas as a minor element of traditional Buddhism. Scholars like Donald Lopez Jr. have also argued that this narrative of Buddhism as rationalistic developed recently, as a part of a Buddhist modernism that arose from the encounter between Buddhism and western thought.

Furthermore, while some have compared Buddhist ideas to modern theories of evolution, quantum theory, and cosmology, other figures such as the 14th Dalai Lama have also highlighted the methodological and metaphysical differences between these traditions. For the Dalai Lama, Buddhism mainly focuses on studying consciousness from the first-person or phenomenological perspective, while science focuses on studying the objective world.

== Pre-modern Buddhism ==

=== Rational inquiry in Buddhist texts ===

Some modern commentators assert that Buddhist texts contain ideas which share commonalities with modern scientific methods, such as encouraging an impartial investigation of nature (an activity referred to as &quot;dhamma-vicaya&quot; in the Pali Canon) — the principal object of study being the nature of one&#x27;s mind or self.

Several passages from the Buddhist scriptures have been seen as indicating the importance of free thinking and empirical inquiry to Buddhism. Perhaps the most popular Buddhist discourse used in this way is the &quot;Kālāma Sutta&quot; (AN 3.65). In this discourse, the Buddha is speaking to a number of villagers that are unsure of which ideas to believe. The key passage which is widely quoted states:Come, Kālāmas, do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a collection of scriptures, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reasoned cogitation, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence of a speaker, or because you think: &#x27;The ascetic is our guru.&#x27; But when, Kālāmas, you know for yourselves: &#x27;These things are unwholesome; these things are blameworthy; these things are censured by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to harm and suffering,&#x27; then you should abandon them.The exact meaning of this passage has been widely debated and interpreted. Buddhist modernists consider this passage to show that the Buddha promoted a skeptical empirical investigation which rejected faith, dogma, scripture, Revelations and even rationalistic metaphysical speculations. Buddhist philosophers like K.N. Jayatilleke argue that this and other passages from the Buddhist scriptures indicate that early Buddhism promotes an &quot;honest, impartial search for truth&quot; as well as &quot;critical investigation and personal verification&quot; which is compatible with a scientific outlook. However, Bhikkhu Bodhi notes that this sutra does not rule out faith as an important component of the path. Another discourse, the &quot;Vīmaṃsaka Sutta&quot; (MN 47, with a Chinese parallel at MA 186) has been called &quot;a remarkable advocacy of free inquiry&quot; by Bhikkhu Analayo.

=== Reason and logic in Buddhist scholasticism ===
Buddhist texts contain exhortations to examine the teachings of the Buddha through reason and experience. Śāntarakṣita&#x27;s (725–788 CE) &quot;Tattvasaṃgraha&quot; cites a well known scriptural passage that is also cited by the 14th Dalai Lama and other Buddhists:&quot;O monks, like gold that is heated, cut, and rubbed, my words should be analyzed by the wise and then accepted; they should not do so out of reverence.&quot; – &quot;A Sutra on Pure Realms Spread Out in a Dense Array&quot;

Buddhism also has a long tradition of epistemology and logic. Buddhist philosophers in this tradition, such as Dignāga and Dharmakīrti, developed complex theories of knowledge which held that there were only two &quot;instruments of knowledge&quot; or &quot;epistemic tools&quot; (&quot;pramana&quot;): perception and inference.

According to Cristian Coseru, Dignāga&#x27;s theory of knowledge is strongly grounded on perception. Furthermore, unlike other Indian theories of knowledge, Indian Buddhist philosophers like Dharmakīrti (fl. c. 6th or 7th century) generally rejected scripture as a major epistemic instrument. Dharmakīrti held that one should not rely on scripture to decide issues that can be discovered through rational means and that one could reject unreasonable parts of scripture. However, he did argue that when it came to &quot;radically inaccessible things&quot; (such as karma), one could turn to scripture (which was an uncertain and fallible source).

=== Natural philosophy and proto-scientific practices ===

The early Buddhist texts contain various ideas about the nature of the world and the universe. However, they also warn against certain speculative questions regarding about the universe. In various early discourses, the Buddha rejects certain questions about the world as &quot;unfathomable&quot; or &quot;unexplainable&quot; (Skt. &quot;avyākṛta&quot;). These include questions about the eternity and the infinity of the universe. In the &quot;Cūḷamālukya Sutta,&quot; the Buddha uses the parable of a poisoned arrow to explain his approach to these questions, his teaching is focused on how to remove the arrow of suffering, not on the particular details about the arrow and who shot the arrow (and so forth). As Paul David Numrich writes, there are thus certain questions about the world that the Buddha sees as &quot;irrelevant to the ultimate religious goal of liberation from the human condition.&quot;

In spite of this warning found in the Buddhist texts, Indian Buddhists developed complex theories about the physical world, including atomic theories, theories of sense perception, theories of time and space and Buddhist cosmology. Apart from teaching Buddhist philosophy, medieval Buddhist universities such as Nālandā (in modern day Bihar) were important centers for the study of natural philosophy and applied sciences such as cosmology, medicine and astronomy. Ancient Buddhist philosophy explored key questions about the natural world such as the nature of space and time, the nature and existence of atoms (and their indivisibility), the origin of the world and the relationship between mind and matter. It explored these questions through philosophical analysis and Thought experiments.

Medicine was a particularly important concern for ancient Buddhists, and references to it can be in all historical layers of Buddhist literature. Nālandā University was also said to have been the site of the composition of the &quot;Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya-saṃhitā&quot;, an influential medical work by the physician Vāgbhaṭa. According to Pierce Salguero &quot;Buddhist texts mentioning various aspects of medicine proliferated across the Buddhist world throughout the first millenium.&quot; Because of this, Buddhism was &quot;one of the most important vehicles for the cross-cultural diffusion of Indian Medicine in pre-modern Asia.&quot; Closely related with this ancient medicine was the practice of Indian alchemy or rasaśāstra. Practitioners of rasaśāstra experimented with various substances and metals. Rasāyana is also an important part of some of the Buddhist tantras.

The Buddhist tradition of worldly sciences continued to develop in outside of India and today survives as part of Tibetan Medicine and Tibetan astrology (which includes astronomical and astrological elements). Traditional Buddhist cosmology taught that there were multiple world systems and that the universe goes through cycles of formation, endurance and destruction. It also holds that the universe has no absolute beginning (and thus rejects creationism and theism, but also the idea that the universe arose without a cause).

== Buddhism as scientific or as compatible with science ==

=== History of the Buddhist modernist discourse ===

==== 19th century modernism ====

A commonly held modern view is that Buddhism is exceptionally compatible with science and reason, or even that it is a kind of science (perhaps a &quot;science of the mind&quot; or a &quot;scientific religion&quot;). This view arose in the modern era, as part of what has been called &quot;Buddhist modernism,&quot; and was defended by figures such as Migettuwatte Gunananda, Anagarika Dharmapala, Paul Carus, Shaku Sōen, D.T. Suzuki, Henry Olcott, and Edwin Arnold. These modernists accepted and promoted modern scientific theories such as evolution and held that they were consistent with the Buddhist understanding of Dharma (sometimes interpreted as a &quot;natural law&quot;).

They also held that Buddhism was a rationalist religion that did not require faith in revelation, a God, superstition and religious ritual but was based on an understanding of causality and empiricism. According to Geoffrey Samuel, some of these modernists even &quot;suggested that Buddhism was barely a religion at all in the Western sense, but a scientifically-based philosophy in its own right.&quot; Some of these figures also dismissed the &quot;irrational&quot; elements of Buddhism as folk superstition. According to Martin J. Verhoeven, Buddhist modernists downplay mythic and religious elements such as traditional Indic cosmology, belief in Miracles and rituals in favor of the rational and psychological aspects of Buddhism.

Paul Carus for example, wrote that Buddha was &quot;the first positivist, the first humanitarian, the first radical freethinker,&quot; while D.T. Suzuki held that the Buddhist view of karma can be seen as &quot;an application in our ethical realm of the theory of the conservation of energy&quot;. Similarly, both Anagarika Dharmapala&#x27;s and Shaku Sōen&#x27;s presentations at the World&#x27;s Parliament of Religions in 1893 presented Buddhism as being founded on the law of cause and effect (associating scientific ideas of causality with the Buddhist doctrine of dependent origination). Carus and other Buddhist modernists saw Buddhism as having certain advantages over Christianity. They held that Buddhism accepted the scientific ideal of a universe ordered by natural laws and did not require belief in a God or any being that could alter natural laws. For many Asian Buddhists, the narrative of Buddhism as rational and scientific was a useful strategy used to counter Christian and colonial attacks on Buddhism as backward. Others like Shaku Sōen, sought to create a more rational westernized Buddhism, or as he put it, to &quot;wed the Great Vehicle [Mahayana Buddhism] to Western thought.&quot;

The idea that the Buddhist worldview was rational and scientific is also seen in the popular &quot;Buddhist Catechism&quot;, written by Henry Olcott. This book contained a chapter on Buddhism and science that rejected miracles as an explanation for the Buddha&#x27;s supposedly supernatural feats and instead offered natural explanations for them (such as hypnotism and theosophical occult science). This modernist view was also promoted by early Buddhist societies in the West, such as Karl Seidenstücker and George Grimm&#x27;s Society for the Buddhist Mission in Leipzig and the British Buddhist Society. George Grimm&#x27;s (1868–1945) &quot;The teaching of the Buddha, the Religion of Reason&quot; (&quot;Die Lehre des Buddho, die Religion der Vernunft&quot;) is an important exposition of this rationalistic Buddhism. According to McMahan, western commentators on this topic were responding to &quot;the Victorian crisis of faith and the emergence of the immense symbolic capital of scientific discourse.&quot; José Ignacio Cabezón notes that there were different opinions among American Buddhist modernists during the late 19th century. Some were happy to note the similarities between science and Buddhism and believed Buddhism was more compatible with science than Christianity (which was more likely to die out due to scientific findings). Other Buddhist modernists like Carus saw Buddhism as the &quot;Religion of Science,&quot; which would make scientific truth &quot;the last guide of a religious conception of mankind.&quot;

==== 20th and 21st centuries ====
As noted by David McMahan, the modernist idea of Buddhism as being compatible with science continued into the 20th century and remains strong today, having become &quot;not only more voluminous but far more sophisticated throughout the late twentieth century and is now at its productive and creative zenith.&quot; The Buddhist modernist view has also been expounded by a variety of western intellectuals, including Nobel Prize–winning philosopher Bertrand Russell, who described Buddhism as &quot;a speculative and scientific philosophy.&quot;

In the late 20th century and the early 21st, numerous publications discussing Buddhist ideas and science were released (such as James H. Austin&#x27;s &quot;Zen and the Brain&quot; and works by Francisco Varela and Daniel Goleman). Furthermore, according to McMahan &quot;the compatibility of Buddhism and modern science has not only become a staple of popular Buddhist literature, it has also become a hypothesis in a large number of quite sophisticated experimental studies.&quot; The Mind and Life Institute is at the forefront of such studies. The Institute hosts conferences on Buddhism and science and sponsors research on Buddhist meditation. McMahan also argues that &quot;perhaps no major tradition has attempted to adopt scientific discourse more vigorously than Buddhism.&quot; Geoffrey Samuel remarks that these dialogues point to the fact that westerners (including scientists) have come to take Buddhist ideas much more seriously as a valuable system of knowledge. The Mind and Life Institute has also influenced how Tibetan Buddhism is presented to western audiences, and it is also closely connected to the 14th Dalai Lama&#x27;s promotion of scientific education among Tibetan Buddhist monks.

José Ignacio Cabezón argues that modern Buddhists have at times discussed the relationship between Buddhism and science in three main ways: conflict/ambivalence, identity/similarity, and complementarity. Cabezón outlines various kinds of views regarding complementarity. One of these ideas is that there is a &quot;similarity in method, and difference in the object of study&quot;. This sees Buddhism as mainly a science of the subjective world, while science is mainly concerned with the external and material world. In this view, both disciplines can learn from each other regarding these fields. Another view &quot;stresses difference in method and similarity in content.&quot; This view sees Buddhism as using &quot;nonconceptual modes of intuitive understanding that emerge as the result of the practice of meditation&quot; which is different from the objective and conceptual scientific method and leads to self transformation.

The discourse of complementarity often seeks to unify these different disciplines, which focus on different aspects (the exterior and interior worlds, the quantitative and the qualitative, reason and intuition, etc.). This discourse generally argues that there should be a balance and harmony between these elements. Cabezon singles out Fritjof Capra&#x27;s &quot;The Tao of Physics&quot; as one of the most influential examples of the discourse of complementarity. According to Capra, none other than the great physicist Werner Heisenberg said that he was in &quot;complete agreement&quot; with the main idea of the book, mainly that the &quot;two basic themes&quot; found in modern physics (&quot;the fundamental interrelatedness and interdependence of all phenomena and the intrinsically dynamic nature of reality&quot;) are also found in eastern thought.

The discourse of complementary can also be found in the work of Daniel Goleman, who writes regarding Buddhism and psychotherapy that &quot;when you put the two psychologies together, you get a more complete spectrum of human development.&quot; Another publication which argues for the complementarity of science and Buddhist thought is &quot;The Embodied Mind&quot; (1991, Varela, Thompson &amp; Rosch). This book argues that Buddhism can provide a sophisticated phenomenology of embodied experience.

=== Views of Theravada Buddhists ===
Since the Buddhist modernist revival in Southeast Asia, Theravada Buddhist intellectuals (such as Anagarika Dharmapala) have generally embraced science and have seen Buddhism as compatible with its findings.

For example, K.N. Jayatilleke (1920–1970), a Sinhalese Buddhist philosopher, writes that the Pali Canon, &quot;emphasizes the importance of the scientific outlook in dealing with the problems of morality and religion. Its specific &#x27;dogmas&#x27; are said to be capable of verification. And its general account of the nature of man and the universe is one that accords with the findings of science rather than being at variance with them.&quot; Jayatilleke points to the early Buddhist idea that there are many worlds, suns and &quot;world systems&quot; (&quot;lokadhatu&quot;) as an example. He also argues that the Buddhist idea that humans and nature are constantly changing according to causal laws is easily compatible with biological evolution and therefore, modern findings do not threaten the Buddhist worldview. Furthermore, Jayatilleke points out that Buddhism holds that the law of cause and effect applies even when it comes to moral and religious phenomena. Because of this, Jayatilleke writes that &quot;Buddhism is not likely to be at variance with science so long as scientists confine themselves to their methodology and their respective fields without making a dogma of materialism.&quot;

In a similar fashion, Buddhadasa P. Kirthisinghe, a Theravada Buddhist and a microbiologist, argues that Buddhism and science are compatible because Buddhism is based on a similar method of empirical inquiry, observation and careful analysis which is &quot;in conformity with and in the spirit of science.&quot; Bhikkhu Ñanajivako, citing Bertrand Russell&#x27;s &quot;An Outline of Philosophy,&quot; writes that modern science&#x27;s rejection of substance theory in favor of processes or events is commensurate with the Buddhist impermanence (&quot;anicca&quot;) doctrine, which sees the world made up of transient dhammas.

=== Views of East Asians ===
Erik J. Hammerstrom has written a study of the reception of modern science in 19th and 20th century Chinese Buddhism. According to Hammerstrom, during the 1920s and 30s, &quot;dozens of articles and monographs devoted to the topic of science and Buddhism appeared in the rapidly growing Buddhist press of China.&quot; Chinese Buddhists like Taixu, Yang Wenhui, Wang Hui and Wang Xiaoxu (an electrical engineer and lay Buddhist) were some of the leading figures in this discourse. According to Hammerstrom, 20th century Chinese Buddhists championed the scientific method and its findings such as heliocentrism and evolution and generally did not question the findings of science. However, Chinese Buddhists also rejected certain ideas associated with science at the time, such as scientism, materialism and Social Darwinism (and they participated in public debates about such ideas). They also sought to carve out a space for Buddhism as a &quot;philosophy of life&quot; (人生觀, &quot;renshengguan&quot;) which they saw as a separate field of inquiry.

Not all Buddhist modernists thought that Buddhism could stand on a rationalist scientific framework alone. D.T. Suzuki initially accepted the idea that Buddhism could be founded on scientific principles, writing that karma &quot;may be regarded as an application in our ethical realm of the theory of the conservation of energy (&quot;Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism&quot;, 1907). However, Suzuki later changed his mind about this, writing in 1959 that &quot;a religion based solely on science is not enough.&quot;

Similarly, the Chinese Buddhist modernist Taixu (1890–1947) held that while scientific study might help prove Buddhist doctrines, &quot;it cannot ascertain the realities&quot; of Buddhism and therefore it &quot;does not go far enough into the mysteries of nature, and that if she went further the Buddhist doctrine would be even more evident.&quot; Thus, while for Taixu, &quot;the Buddhist scholar is aided in his research&quot; by the use of scientific methods, they must ultimately go beyond such methods to understand the true nature of reality. Taixu wrote that &quot;the reality of the Buddhist doctrine is only to be grasped by those who are in the sphere of supreme and universal perception, in which they can behold the true nature of the Universe, but for this they must have attained the wisdom of Buddha himself, and it is not by the use of science or logic that we can expect to acquire such wisdom. Science therefore is only a stepping stone in such matters&quot;

Trịnh Xuân Thuận, a Vietnamese-American astrophysicist, has also written about Buddhism and science, which he sees as &quot;two complementary modes of knowledge.&quot; Thuận disagrees with Stephen Jay Gould, who held the view that science and religion examine two &quot;non-overlapping magisteria.&quot; Instead, Thuận thinks they do overlap (since Buddhism is a kind of contemplative science) and as such, there can be &quot;a fruitful and illuminating dialogue&quot; between them.

=== Views of Tibetan Buddhists ===
Similar views of the complementarity of science and Buddhism remain popular in modern Tibetan Buddhism. Gendun Chopel was the first Tibetan Buddhist to write about science and he urged his countrymen to accept the methods of science, which were based on empirical observation and was therefore seen by him as compatible with the epistemic methods of Buddhism (i.e. the pramana of direct perception or &quot;pratyakṣa&quot;). Chopel writes that science even confirms central Buddhist doctrines such as impermanence and dependent origination, though it can also disprove certain Buddhist views, such as the insentience of plants (and therefore, Buddhists should not stubbornly cling to their doctrine). Chopel argued that Buddhism can only survive as an ally of science and prayed that science and the teachings of the Buddha &quot;may abide together for tens of thousands of years.&quot;

More recently, contemporary Tibetan Buddhists like the 14th Dalai Lama, B. Alan Wallace, and Robert Thurman have also argued for the compatibility of Buddhism and science. According to Lopez, &quot;the Fourteenth Dalai Lama of Tibet has been the most visible and influential Buddhist teacher to embrace the discourse of Buddhism and Science.&quot; The Dalai Lama is known for his interest in science and has written a book on the relationship between science and Buddhism, &quot;The Universe in a Single Atom&quot; (2005), where he discusses various topics, including physics and evolution. The Dalai Lama argues that science and Buddhism share the same commitment &quot;to keep searching for reality by empirical means and to be willing to discard accepted or long-held positions if our search finds that the truth is different.&quot;

B. Alan Wallace (who has studied physics and Buddhism formally in Western institutions) sees Buddhism as an &quot;organized, systematic enterprise aimed at understanding reality, and it presents a wide range of testable laws and principles,&quot; as well as a &quot;time-tested discipline of rational and empirical inquiry.&quot; Wallace argues that Buddhism is a mainly pragmatic enterprise aimed at &quot;the pursuit of eudaimonic well-being&quot;, and as such, it focuses on the subjective and on qualitative states of consciousness (unlike science, which focuses on the quantifiable and the objective), discussing issues such as mental training and ethics. Wallace also argues that Buddhist insights are roughly empirical, since they are based on direct experiences (of a subjective, first-person character) which are also replicable.

However, the Dalai Lama, Thurman and Wallace all note that Buddhism rejects a materialistic (or physicalist) interpretation of science which sees consciousness as something that arises from physical causes alone. For Wallace, scientific materialism is a metaphysical assumption, a dogma which goes beyond the domain of empirical science and &quot;presents formidable obstacles to any meaningful collaboration between Buddhism and science.&quot; Similarly, Robert Thurman criticizes the physicalist interpretation of neuroscience and sees Buddhist meditation as a kind of &quot;inner science&quot; with &quot;a vast array of mental technologies&quot;. Thurman also thinks that the materialist worldview has led to an imbalance in the world where &quot;our powers to effect the outer reality have outstripped our powers over ourselves,&quot; and sees Buddhist practice as a corrective to this.

The 14th Dalai Lama has explicitly rejected any kind of scientism which would argue that only science can discover truths about the world (and that those truths ultimately reduce to the physical world alone) and thus that anything which is not proven by science is false or insignificant. However, he also argues that &quot;spirituality must be tempered by the insights and discoveries of science. If as spiritual practitioners we ignore the discoveries of science, our practice is also impoverished, as this mind-set can lead to fundamentalism.&quot; For the 14th Dalai Lama, science is concerned with conventional truth and understanding the nature of the mundane world, while Buddhism offers &quot;a real under-standing of the true nature of the mind,&quot; and the ultimate truth of liberation. Lopez compares this view with the view of Gould&#x27;s &quot;non-overlapping magisteria.&quot;

=== Views of scholars of Buddhism ===
According to one scholar of Buddhism, John Dunne, &quot;Buddhism endorses the notion that if we want to prove something, we need to use empirical evidence.&quot; Dunne argues that this principle trumps what the Buddhist scriptures say, since the Buddhist tradition considers direct experience (Sanskrit: &quot;pratyakṣa&quot;) as a higher source of knowledge than scripture (which is secondary). However, Dunne also notes that Buddhist theories do not undergo constant revision throughout the centuries (as a result of new observations) as they have done in science, though he notes that more recently the 14th Dalai Lama has been interested in learning from science in this regard.

David McMahan has written about the modernist scientific Buddhism discourse. According to McMahan, this discourse should not be dismissed entirely, since modern Buddhist traditions have gone through &quot;a concrete and highly significant transformation&quot;, which includes adapting to the scientific worldview and creating new forms of Buddhism. McMahan writes that this:
is not just a western orientalist representation of the eastern Other, nor is it just a native strategy of legitimation for Asian Buddhists, though it does involve both. It is rather a part of the ongoing hybridization of certain forms of Buddhism with distinctively modern cultural formations and intellectual practices. The historical question regarding contemporary Buddhism, then, is not &quot;Is Buddhism scientific?&quot; but &quot;How is Buddhism transforming itself through its engagement with science?&quot; Rather than telling us &quot;what Buddhism is,&quot; this discourse is itself constitutive of novel forms of Buddhism with shifting epistemic structures and criteria for authority and legitimacy.
However, McMahan also thinks that there is also the danger of Buddhism losing &quot;a great deal of its diversity&quot; if the adaptation process is taken too far and that &quot;too much adaptation and accommodation may in fact blur the distinctions between the epistemic claims of Buddhism and those of current Western traditions.&quot; This could lead to the loss of Buddhist distinctiveness and to the making of Buddhism into an impotent tradition that has nothing to offer to modernity.

According to Geoffrey Samuel, while the dialogue between Buddhism and science has generally focused on ways in which Buddhism can adapt to science or how science can study the efficacy of Buddhist practices, &quot;the more significant developments are arguably elsewhere, in the potential of Buddhist thought to provoke genuine rethinking and transformation within science itself.&quot; Similarly, Martin J. Verhoeven thinks that &quot;we might better advance the discussion not by highlighting where Buddhism and science see eye-to-eye, but precisely where they do not, perhaps forcing each to confront its own contradictions and shortcomings.&quot; Verhoeven argues that Buddhism and science see reality in different ways. The central focus of Buddhism is on one&#x27;s conscious experience and its conditioned nature. This includes the external world, which seems separate, but is actually &quot;inescapably conditioned by and of a piece with oneself&quot; and &quot;depends on our position, our interpretations, our intentions, and our desires.&quot;

José Ignacio Cabezón writes that there has been an increasing sophistication in the dialogue between science and Buddhism, which he sees as due to the advances in both science and Buddhist studies as well as due to the &quot;increased accessibility of information about these two traditions.&quot; Regarding the discourse on complementarity, Cabezón thinks that it may be useful if understood &quot;as a fluid metaphor&quot;. However, if understood as a literal and strict binary opposition, it could lead to a stunted dialogue, since both traditions discuss numerous elements that are of interest to the other (for example, Buddhism often discusses physical events and science has much to say about the mind). As such, the &quot;segregationist metaphors&quot; which are often used in the complementarity discourse are ultimately artificial &quot;because scientific claims impinge, and sometimes impinge negatively, upon Buddhist ones, and vice versa.&quot; Because of this, Cabezón argues that Buddhism and science are &quot;complete systems that resist dichotomizing: systems that can both support and challenge each other at a variety of different levels.&quot;

Professor P. L. Dhar claims that the practice of Buddhism, Dharma, is compatible with the practice of scientific discoveries, as both reflects human tendency to inquire into things. On one hand, in scientific practices we ask questions about the external physical world, and gain knowledge about the facts of the world. On the other hand, in practicing Dharma we inquire about the essence of our own beings, and gain wisdom about our existence.

Gary Zukav points out a new perspective of understanding the significance of science. He writes: 
[The laws of Science] are the reflection in physical reality...of a larger non-physical dynamic at work in non-physical domains. When Science and its discoveries are understood with the higher order of logic and understanding of the multisensory human, they reveal the same richness that Life itself displays everywhere and endlessly.
According to Zukav, the significance of science lies in its reflection of the relationship between our own being and the external world. This point can be illustrated with specific branches of science. For example, Newtonian physics - a classical notion of physical world characterised by axiomatic equations and general laws of motion, reflects our desire and assertiveness not only to discover physical facts about the world by scientific induction, but also to make use of our discoveries in a constructive way. There are many ways to further clarify this example, and here is one such way. As a founding figure of modern science, Francis Bacon contributed towards the enlightenment movement by popularizing the term &quot;knowledge is power&quot;, which implicitly sanctions not only the manipulation, but also potentially the exploitation, of the natural world. This shows the potential that conventional modern science can be overpowering and lack balance; meanwhile, the practice of Buddhism can act as a counter-balance to science: &quot;Science without Dharma is blind and Dharma without Science is lame. &quot; 

==== Criticism of the Buddhist modernist discourse ====
Several contemporary scholars of Buddhism have argued against the idea that Buddhism is a science or &quot;scientific&quot;. According to Donald S. Lopez Jr., the traditional Buddhist worldview understands the Buddha&#x27;s ancient understanding of reality as complete, and thus &quot;nothing beyond that reality has been discovered since.&quot; Lopez argues that attempts to make Buddhism compatible with science severely restrict Buddhism, &quot;eliminating much of what has been deemed essential, whatever that might be, to the exalted monks and ordinary lay-people who have gone for refuge to the Buddha over the course of more than two thousand years.&quot; Lopez argues that in traditional Buddhism, the truth is something that the Buddha has already discovered, making Buddhism a deeply conservative tradition which is wary of innovation and deviation. This is different from the scientific worldview, in which the complete truth of the universe has not been fully discovered yet.

Lopez has also described the historical development which led to the idea that Buddhism was compatible with science, which began in the Victorian era, with the European study of Buddhist literature in Indian languages (Sanskrit and Pali). Western scholars often saw the historical Buddha as a rational humanist, critical of Brahmanical superstition. This idea was then taken up by Asians and theosophists and widely promoted as a counter to missionary Christianity. Lopez thinks that the &quot;scientific&quot; Buddhism discourse is outdated, especially since the colonial and missionary threats to Buddhism in Asia have subsided. Lopez argues it is best to see Buddhism as radically incompatible with science, as seeking to transcend all biological life, to go totally beyond the world and thus as being at odds with the world and with science. However, Lopez also notes that disputes between Buddhists and scientists over the bare facts of science &quot;have occurred only rarely in the history of Buddhism and science.&quot;

Evan Thompson has also criticized the narrative of Buddhism as being uniquely scientific in his &quot;Why I am Not a Buddhist&quot; (2020).

== Buddhism and specific scientific fields ==
===Biology===
Modern Buddhists have generally accepted and embraced modern theories of biology, such as evolution, as being compatible with Buddhist thought. According to a 2009 survey by the Pew Research Center, eighty one percent of Buddhists accept the theory of evolution as the &quot;best explanation for the origins of human life on earth&quot; (the highest among all religions surveyed).

Robin Cooper&#x27;s &quot;The Evolving Mind&quot; (1996) is one publication which discusses Buddhism and the field of biology. Cooper argues that Buddhism is compatible with evolutionary thought, but he also argues that the Buddhist view also sees a role for the mind in the evolution of living beings. Cooper writes that mind-led adaptations also play a role in evolution, along with random genetic mutation. He attempts to harmonize biological theories of evolution with Buddhist views of the transformation of the mind.

William S. Waldron cites the &quot;Agañña sutta&quot; as a text which affirms that sentient beings, including humans, change over time. However this discourse describes a process in which heavenly beings (devas) devolve into a lower form of life on earth as a result of mental afflictions or kleshas (such as greed and desire) and the actions fueled by these afflictions. As such, Buddhism sees our physical existence as being caused by past actions (done in our previous lives). Waldron thinks that this view is roughly compatible (but clearly not the same as) the theory of evolution, which holds that our current physical form is based on the past actions of our ancestors. According to Waldron, &quot;the Buddhists and biologists thus largely concur that the very forms and structures of human life result from the accumulative actions of innumerable beings over countless generations.&quot;

David P. Barash (who describes himself as a Buddhist atheist) has written a book about Buddhism and biology, which according to him, &quot;complement each other like a pair of powerful searchlights illuminating the same thing from different angles&quot;. Barash argues that modern biology is commensurate with the Buddhist view of impermanence and not-self, since both see sentient beings (individuals or groups) as a product of constantly changing and interrelated processes, and thus sees them as being without a fixed and separate identity.

==== Key differences ====

Donald Lopez argues that the naturalistic theory of evolution is at odds with the traditional Buddhist view of karma. This is because the basic Buddhist understanding of how sentient beings undergo change is based on the rebirth of their consciousness, which could be into any form of existence (animal, human, god realms etc.), while the Darwinian view is strictly based on genetic mutation and natural selection which are physical phenomena. According to Lopez, the main reason these views are at odds is that Buddhism reserves a central place for consciousness and volition in the production of all sentient life, while this is not the case with modern biology.

In &quot;The Universe in a Single Atom&quot; (2005), the 14th Dalai Lama similarly points outs that while biological theories generally attempts to explain things solely from the perspective of physical causes (and are often reductive), Buddhist thought focuses on the role of consciousness. As such, the Dalai Lama finds theories which focus only on physical causes &quot;deeply unsatisfying&quot;, since it seems difficult to explain how conscious beings can arise from an unconscious basis (i.e. emergentism). He also points out that this difference might be due to the different methods and goals of Buddhism and science. Therefore, while the Dalai Lama thinks that evolution &quot;gives us a fairly coherent account of the evolution of human life on earth,&quot; he also holds that karma and consciousness have central roles in nature and therefore biology cannot explain all aspects of life (such as consciousness, religious experience or morality).

=== Physics ===
According to Matthieu Ricard, Buddhist thought asks some of the same questions that physicists ask about reality, time, matter and space, and uses rational analysis and thought experiments (which are also used by physicists). However, unlike physics which focuses on measuring the physical world to better understand it, the Buddhist tradition focuses on inner contemplation and its goal is mainly therapeutic.

Some of the metaphysical doctrines of Buddhism have sometimes been compared favorably with the insights of modern physics. The 14th Dalai Lama writes in &quot;The Universe in a Single Atom&quot; (2005) that &quot;there is an unmistakable resonance between the notion of emptiness and the new physics. If on the quantum level, matter is revealed as less solid and definable than it appears, then it seems to me that science is coming closer to the Buddhist contemplative insights of emptiness and interdependence [&quot;pratītyasamputpāda&quot;].&quot;

The Dalai Lama cites his conversations with David Bohm and Anton Zeilinger, both physicists who supported the idea that the Buddhist view of emptiness (the lack of any independent and fixed essence) was consistent with the insights of modern quantum physics. The Dalai Lama has also been part of various dialogues with physicists such as Arthur Zajonc (who was also president of the Mind and Life Institute) and Anton Zeilinger. Some of these discussions on the nature of physics have been published.

==== Comparisons by physicists ====
Astrophysicist Trịnh Xuân Thuận argues that the Buddhist idea of &quot;subtle impermanence&quot;, which refers to the idea that everything is constantly changing extremely rapidly is consistent with &quot;our modern scientific conception of the universe&quot; which holds that everything is in constant motion. He also compares the Buddhist doctrine of emptiness (the idea that nothing has an intrinsic nature) with the findings of quantum physics, which understands that sub-atomic particles cannot be understood as being real solid entities with fixed properties such as momentum and position (this is one understanding of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle). Thuận cites Erwin Schrödinger who said that &quot;it is better not to view a particle as a permanent entity, but rather as an instantaneous event. Sometimes these events link together to create the illusion of permanent entities.&quot; Thuận sees this understanding of sub-atomic particles as similar to the understanding of reality in Buddhist metaphysics.

Thuận and Matthieu Ricard also discuss the similarities between Buddhist views of interdependence and phenomena such as quantum nonlocality and Mach&#x27;s principle in &quot;The quantum and the lotus.&quot; According to Thuận, the views of Bohr and Heisenberg seem to support the Buddhist view that physical particles do not exist as independent phenomena, but can only be said to exist in dependence on our conceptual designations and the process of observation. This view of the quantum world is sometimes called the Copenhagen interpretation.

The Italian theoretical physicist Carlo Rovelli cites Nagarjuna in his book &quot;Helgoland&quot;, a defense of the relational interpretation of quantum mechanics, which understands quantum properties as arising from the relations between quantum phenomena. According to Rovelli, &quot;properties of an object are the way in which it acts upon other objects; reality is this web of interactions.&quot; Rovelli thinks that the Madhyamaka philosophy of Nāgārjuna resonates with the relational view of Quantum Mechanics and provides a conceptual understanding of reality that does not need a metaphysical foundation. Rovelli writes that &quot;Nāgārjuna has given us a formidable conceptual tool for thinking about the relationality of quanta: we can think of interdependence without autonomous essence entering the equation.&quot;

Oxford physicist Vlatko Vedral, in his &quot;Decoding Reality&quot;, mentions the Buddhist theory of emptiness as an ancient example of the philosophy of &quot;relationalism.&quot; Vedral, who argues for an interpretation of quantum physics based on information theory, states that &quot;Quantum physics is indeed very much in agreement with Buddhistic emptiness.&quot; He states that &quot;we will never arrive at &#x27;the thing in itself&#x27; by any kind of means. Everything that exists, exists by convention and labelling and is therefore dependent on other things.&quot; This is similar to some forms of Buddhist philosophy (such as Madhyamaka) which hold that everything is merely conceptual.

Physics professor Vic Mansfield has also written on the similarities between the modern understanding of time and special relativity and Madhyamaka thought. According to Mansfield, an appreciation of how these two traditions understand time as a relative phenomenon can aid a deeper understanding of both and that &quot;a nontrivial synergy between these two very different disciplines is possible.&quot; Mansfield also argues that this kind of dialogue is important for Buddhism because &quot;if Buddhism is to come to the West, in the best and fullest sense of the term, then interaction with science is both inevitable and necessary for a real transplant to take place.&quot;

=== Cosmology ===
In his discussion of cosmology, the 14th Dalai Lama notes that &quot;Buddhism and science share a fundamental reluctance to postulate a transcendent being as the origin of all things.&quot; Furthermore, Buddhists like the Dalai Lama have no problem accepting the Big Bang theory (since ancient Buddhist views about the cosmos accept that there are periods of expansion). However, Trịnh Xuân Thuận and the Dalai Lama both argue that from the Buddhist point of view, there is no &quot;absolute&quot; beginning to the universe. This would be more compatible with certain cosmogonic theories of the universe, such as those that posit a Cyclic model of the universe or those that argue for a multiverse.

There are different Buddhist cosmologies. The cosmology of the Kalachakra system popular in Tibetan Buddhism holds that the material world arises out of the supportive element of space, which is made up of &quot;space particles&quot;, the other four elements arise from this medium. The Dalai Lama believes this is compatible with the idea that the universe arose from a quantum vacuum state.

The Dalai Lama also notes that in Buddhist cosmology, there is a role for consciousness and karma, since Buddhist systems hold that the nature of a world system is connected with the karmic propensities of sentient beings. However, the Dalai Lama points out that this does not mean everything is due to karma, since many things merely arise due to the works of natural laws. As such, the Dalai Lama argues that &quot;the entire process of the unfolding of a universe system is a matter of the natural law of causality&quot; but that karma also influences its very beginning and that when a universe is able to support life &quot;its fate becomes entangled with the karma of the beings who will inhabit it.&quot; Because Buddhist thought sees consciousness as being interconnected with the physical world, Buddhists like the Dalai Lama hold that &quot;even the laws of physics are entangled with the karma of the sentient beings that will arise in that universe.&quot;
==== Traditional cosmography ====
Certain traditional Buddhist ideas about the world are also incompatible with modern science, and have been abandoned by numerous modern Buddhists. Perhaps one of the most well known of these ideas is the view of the world found in various classic Buddhist texts which holds there is a giant mountain at the center of the world called Mount Meru (or &quot;Sumeru&quot;). According to Lopez, &quot;the human realm that Buddhist texts describe is a flat earth, or perhaps more accurately a flat ocean, its waters contained by a ring of iron mountains. In that ocean is a great central mountain, surrounded in the four cardinal directions by island continents.&quot;

As Lopez notes, as early as the 18th century, Buddhist scholars like Tominaga Nakamoto (1715–1746) began to question this classical Buddhist cosmography, holding that they were adopted by the Buddha from Indian theories, but that they were incidental and thus not at the heart of Buddha&#x27;s teaching. While some traditional Buddhists did defend the traditional cosmology, others like Shimaji Mokurai (1838–1911) argued that it was not foundational to Buddhism and was merely an element of Indian mythology. Others like Kimura Taiken (1881–1930), went further and argued that this traditional cosmography was not part of original Buddhism.

The issue of Mount Meru was also discussed by modern Buddhist intellectuals like Gendun Chopel and the 14th Dalai Lama. According to Choepel, the Meru cosmology is a provisional teaching taught in accord with the ideas of ancient India, but not appropriate for the modern era. Similarly, the 14th Dalai Lama writes that &quot;my own view is that Buddhism must abandon many aspects of the Abhidharma cosmology&quot;. The Dalai Lama sees the falsehood of this traditional cosmology as not affecting the core of Buddhism (the teaching of the Four Noble Truths and liberation) since it is &quot;secondary to the account of the nature and origins of sentient beings&quot;.

=== Psychology ===
In the 20th century, Buddhism has been in close contact with the field of psychology and has often been interpreted as a kind of psychology in its own right. In America, William James often drew on Buddhist ideas (which he saw as the psychology of the future). Influenced by Buddhism, James promoted meditation and coined the term &quot;stream of consciousness&quot;. Another 20th century defender of Buddhism was Gerald Du Pre, who saw Buddhism as a &quot;scientific psychology&quot;.

Various modern therapists have written on the relationship between Buddhism and psychotherapy. These include Mark Epstein (&quot;Thoughts Without a Thinker&quot; 1995, &quot;Psychotherapy Without the Self&quot;, 2008), Jeffrey B. Rubin, Andrew Olendzki and Nina Coltart (1927–1997).

Various authors such as William S. Waldron and David Galin have also written about the Buddhist theory of not-self (&quot;anatman&quot;) and how it can provide insights to the development of a more dynamic, conditional and constructivist views of personality, personal identity and the self. Daniel Goleman has argued that the Buddhist view of the emptiness of the self &quot;may turn out to fit the data far better than the notions that have dominated Psychological thinking for the last century.&quot;

Robert Wright has argued (in his 2017 &quot;Why Buddhism Is True&quot;) that the Buddhist analysis of human suffering and delusion is fundamentally correct and that this is backed up by evolutionary psychology, which helps explain how natural selection hardwired humans with powerful but distorted cognitions and emotions which are effective at getting us to survive and pass on our genes in a pre-historic environment. These cognitive modules do not depict reality as it is, and do not often lead to well being. Wright also thinks that the Buddhist view of not-self (&quot;anatta&quot;) is compatible with modern psychological understandings of the mind. He cites various modern studies and psychological theories (such as the modular view of the mind defended by Michael Gazzaniga) to back up the idea that there is no &quot;CEO&quot; in control of the mind. Wright argues that Buddhist mindfulness meditation can provide a way to gain personal insights into these delusions and may help weaken their hold on us.

The field of Transpersonal psychology has also been influenced by Buddhist ideas and various figures in this field see Buddhism and western psychology as complementary, since each provides a structure of human development that is not found in other (contemplative development and developmental psychology respectively). According to José Ignacio Cabezón, this idea &quot;has been put forward most clearly and forcefully&quot; in &quot;Transformations of Consciousness&quot; (Wilber, Engler, and Brown 1986), a collection of essays from t&quot;he Journal of Transpersonal Psychology&quot;. However, Cabezón is unconvinced by the attempts of these figures to present a single and unified structure of meditative development (which they source from various traditions, including Buddhism).

=== Mindfulness and meditation research ===
Buddhist spiritual practices like meditation have also been compared to cognitive behavioral therapy techniques. During the late 20th century, numerous studies were conducted on the psychological effects of certain Buddhist meditation practices (such as vipassana and zazen). Furthermore, Buddhist mindfulness practices influenced the development of new forms of cognitive therapies, which are known as mindfulness-based cognitive therapies. One of the most influential of these therapies is Jon Kabat-Zinn&#x27;s Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR).

The growing popularity of Buddhist meditation and Buddhist influenced mindfulness meditation has also led to research on the physiological and neurological effects of meditation practices (carried out by figures such as Richard Davidson) as well as to dialogues on the nature of the human mind, which have been enthusiastically encouraged by the present Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso. One of the first westerners to study the neurology of meditation was James H. Austin, the author of &quot;Zen and the Brain&quot; (1998). A more recent overview of related research findings can be found in Davidson and Goleman&#x27;s &quot;Altered Traits,&quot; which discusses studies done with the aid of Buddhist monks like Matthieu Ricard and Mingyur Rinpoche. The number of studies on Buddhist and Buddhist-derived meditation techniques skyrocketed in the 21st century (in 2015, there were 674 such studies) and their results were widely reported in the popular press. This also led to a cottage industry of popular books on Buddhist and mindfulness meditation and the adoption of secularized meditation in major corporations.

William Edelglass has argued that the modern study of meditation and happiness is implicitly founded on a Western notion of happiness as positive affect or pleasure (which are most often measured through experience sampling and self-reporting). Edelglass contrasts this notion of happiness with the Buddhist view found in the work of Śāntideva and other ancient Buddhist sources that sees meditation (and other virtues, such as the six perfections) as ways to develop wisdom and transform oneself in a radical, highly ethical fashion by letting go of all attachments. The Buddhist perspective also rejects sensual pleasures as worthless and is opposed to the maximization of positive affect for its own sake (indeed, it sees this as counterproductive).

=== Cognitive science ===
Various studies have shown that Buddhist and mindfulness meditators experience long term transformations in cognitive function and neural activity. However, as Jay L. Garfield notes, this should not be surprising (to scientists or to Buddhists), since meditation is one kind of cognitive expertise and it is therefore normal that it should have neural correlates. Similarly, for Buddhists, the interdependence of mind and body is an ancient view.

Garfield also argues that cognitive science might have much to contribute to the development of Buddhist philosophy, since ancient Buddhist thinkers do not discuss important issues related to attention, memory and perception (such as inattentional blindness). Furthermore, the Buddhist epistemic focus on an empirical understanding of causal processes &quot;commits Buddhists theorists of mind to attend to contemporary scientific results concerning the mind.&quot; Garfield thinks that the greatest contribution that Buddhism can make lies in the field of moral psychology and positive psychology, which is highly sophisticated in Buddhist thought.

Evan Thompson writes that the neuroscientific study of mindfulness tends to view mindfulness a private inner observation (or meta-awareness) which is then conceptualized as neural networks that are studied in brain imaging tools. Thompson thinks this confuses the biological markers for mindfulness (such as decreased amygdala reactivity, relative deactivation of the default-mode network, and slower baseline respiration rate) for mindfulness itself, which is actually &quot;a host of cognitive, affective, and bodily skills&quot; which are situated in an ethical way of life and in a particular socio-cultural setting. Thompson thinks that applying insights from embodied cognition, such as the &quot;enactive approach to cognition&quot;, can help Buddhist scholars understand better how mindfulness functions as an aspect of the entire embodied person and how it relates to the study of mediation, which would more effectively be done through the perspective of cognitive ecology.

Similarly, David McMahan thinks that Buddhist meditation practices are situated in specific religious, conceptual and socio-cultural contexts, that is, ways of being-in-the-world (referring to &quot;Lifeworlds&quot; and &quot;social imaginaries&quot;). These ways of being are altered, secularized, modernized and abstracted out when Buddhist meditation is studied in a clinical setting and viewed in terms of an individual&#x27;s internal states that are caused by the meditation technique. According to McMahan, the general assumption of those who study meditation is that meditation techniques can be studied in isolation, but this is likely to be mistaken since &quot;meditation &quot;works&quot; as a systemic part of the ecology of a sociocultural system.&quot; A similar contextual critique has been put forth by Robert H. Sharf.

==== The problem of scientific materialism ====
Buddhism rejects all materialistic theories which attempt to reduce consciousness to the functions of physical properties. The 14th Dalai Lama states that &quot;from the Buddhist perspective, the mental realm cannot be reduced to the world of matter, though it may depend upon that world to function.&quot; Because of this, while Buddhists like the Dalai Lama embrace the findings and methods of neuroscience, they do not accept the assumptions of some neuroscientists that consciousness can be fully explained as a function of the brain (which is a metaphysical assumption). He further argues that &quot;there is as yet no scientific basis for such a categorical claim,&quot; since neuroscience mainly studies correlations between brain states and first person pare &quot;grounded in the phenomenology of experience&quot; and &quot;include the contemplative techniques of meditation&quot; could assist in the development of a more holistic cognitive science that makes use of introspection. The Dalai Lama sees these methods as first person empirical processes.

This idea is also supported by B. Alan Wallace, who argues that modern cognitive science is held back by materialist assumptions and its desire to study consciousness (which is subjective and qualitative) through quantitative measuring of its physical correlates. However, since Wallace argues that the correlates of consciousness are not equivalent to &quot;consciousness itself&quot;, this method creates a blind spot in cognitive science (which also ignores the hard problem of consciousness). Wallace argues that the contemplative skills found in traditions like Buddhism can aid in the development of a rigorous form of introspection which could be used in cognitive science to deliver a better understanding of the mind.

Geoffrey Samuel notes how the Buddhist point of view has often clashed with the reductionist and materialistic assumptions of many modern neuroscientists. He suggests that the question of personal identity and the self &quot;might provide an important starting point&quot; for a critical revision of the assumptions of modern science which focuses on the study of individual brains. He points to the &#x27;enactive&#x27; and &#x27;ecological&#x27; approach to consciousness by figures like Francisco Varela and Gregory Bateson as a more fruitful ground for the dialogue between Buddhism and science, since these theories &quot;see cognition, and consciousness in general, as part of an ongoing process in which both &#x27;world&#x27; and &#x27;mind&#x27; are constituted through mutual interaction&quot;. According to Samuel, Varela &quot;argued that the upwards causation of conventional neuroscience, in which consciousness is seen as derivative of the body, needs to be complemented by a downwards causation from the emergent structures of the self, which develop within the neural system as part of the process of maturation of each human being&quot;.

== Buddhism and other related fields ==

=== History of science ===
José Ignacio Cabezón has discussed how historians of science seek to understand the origins of science and why its rise was much more successful in Europe. Some of these figures such as Stanley Jaki have argued that it is because Europe was dominated by the Christian worldview (with its linear view of time and de-animized view of nature) that it gave rise to modern science, while this could not have happened in Buddhist Asia (which generally held a cyclic view of time and accepted polytheism/animism).

However, Cabezón notes that India and China &quot;did give rise to forms of empirically derived sciences that can be recognized as such even in Western terms.&quot; He points to the work of Joseph Needham (author of the long running series of books called &quot;Science and Civilisation in China&quot;) as an example. Furthermore, Cabezón also notes that neither animism nor a cyclic theory of time &quot;acted as deterrents to the acceptance of science in these various cultures since its movement east, something that would be expected were Jaki&#x27;s thesis true.&quot; On the contrary, these religious cultures embraced science rapidly.

=== Philosophy of science ===
B. Alan Wallace&#x27;s &quot;Choosing Reality&quot; (1996) is one work which discusses Buddhism in regards to the philosophy of science. Wallace argues that science is not metaphysically neutral, and that the two main metaphysical views in the philosophy of science have been scientific realism and instrumentalism. Wallace thinks these two theories fail to provide a proper philosophical foundation for science and instead argues in favor of the Buddhism Madhyamaka philosophy. Wallace also argues that Buddhism can complement science by providing a spirit of responsibility and service for others, a spirit that has been lost as science became separated from religion and philosophy.

In &quot;Hidden Dimensions&quot; (2007), Wallace also cites the ideas of some modern physicists which have argued for alternative ontologies to materialism or physicalism. These figures include Bohm (and his &quot;implicate order&quot;), Wolfgang Pauli&#x27;s idea (developed along with Jung) of the unus mundus, George Ellis&#x27; fourfold model of reality (matter and forces, consciousness, physical and biological possibilities, and mathematical reality) as well as the views of Eugene Wigner and Bernard d&#x27;Espagnat.

Wallace has also compared John Archibald Wheeler&#x27;s participatory anthropic principle (which sees scientific concepts like matter, mass and so on as &quot;creations of the human mind, not discovered in the pre-existing, objective world of nature&quot;) to the Madhyamaka view which sees a deep interdependence between subjects and objects. Wallace thinks that &quot;such parallels suggest that meaningful theoretical collaboration could take place between physicists and Buddhist philosophers and contemplatives.&quot;

Mark T. Unno sees the ontology of David Bohm as being similar to the Mahayana Buddhist philosophy of the twofold truth (of form and emptiness). According to Unno, David Bohm &quot;suggests that mind and matter, thought and thing, are mutually implicit, as are all other phenomena, such that there is a wholeness to the universe in which all distinctions ultimately dissolve.&quot; Since, for Bohm, &quot;there is no definable divide between mind and matter,&quot; there is a kind of wholeness to the universe which cannot be understood conceptually or discursively, but &quot;can only be ultimately realized in the present moment, inseparable from the subject.&quot; According to Unno, the same is true for the Buddhist view of emptiness. This is not surprising, since according to Unno, Bohm was &quot;influenced by Indian philosopher Jiddu Krishnamurti and Buddhist thinkers such as the Dalai Lama.&quot;

==== Philosophy of physics ====
Michel Bitbol has argued that Buddhist Madhyamaka philosophy can help provide a useful philosophical framework for quantum mechanics. According to Bitbol, there isa thorough and detailed structural analogy between quantum contextuality and Buddhist Śūnyatā (emptiness of own-being); and between quantum entanglement and Buddhist Pratîtyasamutpâda (dependent origination). But this twofold analogy does not show that there is a single essence of reality which can be disclosed by our reason irrespective of whether we rely on an experimental approach or a contemplative approach. The analogy rather shows that, at a sufficiently accurate level of analysis and careful attention, the negative conclusions of experimental physicists and contemplative Buddhists are bound to be similar: both realize the approximative status of the reified entities of everyday life, and both must cope with the high amount of instability and lack of self-sufficient existence (Śūnyatā) of phenomena. Then, if thoroughly applied, the critical concept of Śūnyatā can be seen to underpin the anti-metaphysical stances of both Buddhism and certain trends in the contemporary philosophy of science. The American physicist David Ritz Finkelstein developed a theory of &quot;universal relativity,&quot; influenced by Madhyamaka philosophy and his discussions at the Mind and Life dialogues. Finkelstein believes that &quot;a philosophical argument for a universal relativity could be a useful guide for future physics,&quot; since &quot;the major changes in physics in this century have been extensions of relativity at one level or another, and I think a further extension is due.&quot; Finkelstein&#x27;s theory is based on the view that all laws of nature are ultimately relative and non-absolute. In this theory, doing (change) and knowing (attempting to fix a process in place) are relative elements.

==== Anthropic principle ====
Matthieu Ricard, commenting on the question of the anthropic principle and fine-tuning (which states that life is dependent on certain fundamental physical constants whose exact values are improbable), states that:As far as Buddhism is concerned, the idea that there is some principle of organization that is supposed to have tuned the universe perfectly so that the conscious mind could evolve is fundamentally misguided. The apparently amazing fine-tuning is explained simply by the fact that the physical constants and consciousness have always coexisted in a universe that has no beginning and no end... The universe has not been adjusted by a great watchmaker so that consciousness can exist. The universe and consciousness have always coexisted and so cannot exclude each other. To coexist, phenomena must be mutually suitable. The problem with the anthropic principle, or any other teleological theory, is that it puts the constants before consciousness and thus claims that the constants exist only so that they can create consciousness.

=== Artificial intelligence ===
== Modern reception ==
=== Modern scientists on Buddhism ===
Niels Bohr, who developed the Bohr Model of the atom, said,
The American physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer made an analogy to Buddhism when describing the Heisenberg uncertainty principle:
Nobel Prize–winning physicist Albert Einstein, who developed the general theory of relativity and the special theory of relativity, also known for his mass–energy equivalence, described Buddhism as containing a strong cosmic element:
=== Modern Buddhists on science ===
The 14th Dalai Lama is known for his interest in science and has gone on record to say that Buddhism must conform to proven scientific findings:My confidence in venturing into science lies in my basic belief that as in science so in Buddhism, understanding the nature of reality is pursued by means of critical investigation: if scientific analysis were conclusively to demonstrate certain claims in Buddhism to be false, then we must accept the findings of science and abandon those claims.The Dalai Lama argues that science and spirituality are related, though they work on different levels:The great benefit of science is that it can contribute tremendously to the alleviation of suffering at the physical level, but it is only through the cultivation of the qualities of the human heart and the transformation of our attitudes that we can begin to address and overcome mental suffering. In other words, the enhancement of fundamental human values is indispensable to our basic quest for happiness. Therefore, from the perspective of human well-being, science and spirituality are not unrelated. We need both, since the alleviation of suffering must take place at both the physical and psychological levels.

==See also==
* Buddhism and evolution
* Buddhism and Western Philosophy
* Buddhist philosophy
* Index of Buddhism-related articles
* &quot;Issues in Science and Religion&quot;
* Quantum mysticism
* Relationship between religion and science
* Religious Science
* Secular Buddhism
==Notes==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* De Silva, Padmasiri (2005) &quot;An Introduction to Buddhist Psychology&quot;, 4th edition, Palgrave Macmillan.
* Clayton, Philip (editor) (2006). &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Religion and Science.&quot; Oxford University Press.
* Goleman, Daniel (in collaboration with The Dalai Lama), &quot;Destructive Emotions,&quot; Bloomsbury (London UK 2003)
* Gyatso, Tenzin (The 14th Dalai Lama) (2005). &quot;The Universe in a Single Atom: The Convergence of Science and Spirituality.&quot; Morgan Road Books. 
* Hammerstrom, Erik J. (2015). &quot;The Science of Chinese Buddhism: Early Twentieth-Century Engagements.&quot; Columbia University Press.
* Kirthisinghe, Buddhadasa P. (editor) (1993) &quot;Buddhism and Science.&quot; Motilal Banarsidass.
* McMahan, David, &quot;Modernity and the Discourse of Scientific Buddhism.&quot; Journal of the American Academy of Religion, Vol. 72, No. 4 (2004), 897–933.
* McMahan, David L.; Braun, Erik (2017). &quot;Meditation, Buddhism, and Science.&quot; Oxford University Press.
* Numrich, Paul David. (2008). &quot;The Boundaries of Knowledge in Buddhism, Christianity, and Science.&quot; Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht.
* Lopez Jr., Donald S. (2009). &quot;Buddhism and Science: A Guide for the Perplexed&quot;. University of Chicago Press.
* Lopez Jr., Donald S. (2012). &quot;The Scientific Buddha: His Short and Happy Life.&quot; Yale University Press.
* Rapgay L, Rinpoche VL, Jessum R, &quot;Exploring the nature and functions of the mind: a Tibetan Buddhist meditative perspective,&quot; Prog. Brain Res. 2000 vol 122 pp 507–15
* Ricard, Matthieu; Trinh Xuan Thuan (2009). &quot;The Quantum and the Lotus: A Journey to the Frontiers Where Science and Buddhism Meet,&quot; Crown Publishers, New York.
* Robin Cooper, &quot;The Evolving Mind: Buddhism, Biology and Consciousness,&quot; Windhorse (Birmingham UK 1996)
* Sarunya Prasopchingchana &amp; Dana Sugu, &quot;&#x27;Distinctiveness of the Unseen Buddhist Identity&quot;&#x27; (International Journal of Humanistic Ideology, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, vol. 4, 2010)
* Sharf, Robert H. &quot;Buddhist Modernism and the Rhetoric of Meditative Experience.&quot; &quot;Numen&quot; 42, no. 3 (1995a): 228–83.
* Wallace, B. Alan (2007). &quot;Hidden Dimensions: The Unification of Physics and Consciousness&quot; (Columbia Univ Press)
* Wallace, B. Alan (2003) (ed), &quot;Buddhism and Science: breaking new ground&quot; (Columbia University Press) 
* Wallace, B. Alan (1996), &quot;Choosing Reality: A Buddhist Perspective of Physics and the Mind,&quot; (Snow Lion 1996)
* Wright, Robert (2017). &quot;Why Buddhism is True: The Science and Philosophy of Meditation and Enlightenment.&quot; Simon and Schuster.
* Zajonc, Arthur (editor) (2004). &quot;The New Physics and Cosmology: Dialogues with the Dalai Lama.&quot; Oxford University Press

== External links ==
* https://www.lionsroar.com/monastic-scholars-journey/ How Buddhism Met Science: A Monastic Scholar’s Journey
* The Mind and Life Conferences
* Buddha on the Brain – Dalai Lama on the Society for Neuroscience&#x27;s annual conference
* Dalai Lama joining discussions on &quot;Robotics, Telepresence and Artificial Intelligence&quot; and &quot;Sickness, Aging and Health&quot; at De Nieuwe Kerk in Amsterdam, Netherlands</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4984208" start="25" end="33" title="Buddhism and science" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984208" start="38" end="45" title="Buddhism and science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="142" end="150" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239681" start="625" end="633" title="Scientific theory" label="theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="724" end="733" title="dogmatism" label="dogmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149" start="735" end="749" title="Buddhist fundamentalism" label="fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747439" start="751" end="762" title="clericalism" label="clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204780" start="768" end="776" title="Buddhist devotion" label="devotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="780" end="792" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011093" start="793" end="800" title="Yaksha" label="spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122124" start="805" end="812" title="Buddhist deities" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="1189" end="1206" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001079" start="1211" end="1227" title="Buddhist philosophy" label="Buddhist thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="1233" end="1248" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="14th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127934" start="1282" end="1306" title="Society for Neuroscience" label="Society for Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q481201" start="1336" end="1345" title="Absolute (philosophy)" label="absolutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="1370" end="1379" title="causality" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="1384" end="1394" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="1513" end="1532" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q220797" start="1711" end="1723" title="impermanence" label="impermanence"/>
<link wikidata="Q546054" start="1728" end="1737" title="Śūnyatā" label="emptiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240353" start="1993" end="2009" title="Donald S. Lopez Jr." label="Donald Lopez Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1001043" start="2111" end="2129" title="Buddhist modernism" label="Buddhist modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="2274" end="2283" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238797" start="2285" end="2299" title="Introduction to quantum mechanics" label="quantum theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="2305" end="2314" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="2342" end="2357" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="14th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="2384" end="2398" title="Methodology" label="methodological"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="2403" end="2415" title="Metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="2510" end="2523" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="2549" end="2565" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="2743" end="2757" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q902200" start="2915" end="2940" title="Dhamma vicaya" label="&amp;quot;dhamma-vicaya&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="2948" end="2958" title="Pali Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="3064" end="3083" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q427142" start="3254" end="3266" title="Kesamutti Sutta" label="Kālāma Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q544764" start="3274" end="3276" title="Aṅguttara Nikāya" label="AN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="4225" end="4230" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="4232" end="4237" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="4250" end="4260" title="Revelation" label="Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="4271" end="4284" title="Rationalism" label="rationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323644" start="4339" end="4355" title="K. N. Jayatilleke" label="K.N. Jayatilleke"/>
<link wikidata="Q744589" start="4434" end="4448" title="Early Buddhist schools" label="early Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q854944" start="4636" end="4649" title="Bhikkhu Bodhi" label="Bhikkhu Bodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068303" start="4690" end="4695" title="Faith in Buddhism" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896881" start="4764" end="4779" title="Vīmaṃsaka Sutta" label="Vīmaṃsaka Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901708" start="4898" end="4913" title="Bhikkhu Analayo" label="Bhikkhu Analayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="5050" end="5056" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q553722" start="5073" end="5085" title="Śāntarakṣita" label="Śāntarakṣita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688480" start="5112" end="5126" title="Tattvasamgraha" label="Tattvasaṃgraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925603" start="5487" end="5522" title="Buddhist logico-epistemology" label="tradition of epistemology and logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q558272" start="5573" end="5580" title="Dignāga" label="Dignāga"/>
<link wikidata="Q457990" start="5585" end="5596" title="Dharmakirti" label="Dharmakīrti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714540" start="5749" end="5756" title="pramana" label="pramana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727619" start="6502" end="6522" title="early Buddhist texts" label="early Buddhist texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q865962" start="6733" end="6766" title="The unanswered questions" label="certain questions about the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133712" start="6988" end="7015" title="Parable of the Poisoned Arrow" label="parable of a poisoned arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="7516" end="7530" title="Universe" label="physical world"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="7542" end="7548" title="Atomism" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308653" start="7620" end="7638" title="Buddhist cosmology" label="Buddhist cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q216243" start="7720" end="7727" title="Nalanda" label="Nālandā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="7743" end="7748" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="7790" end="7808" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="7838" end="7847" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292962" start="7862" end="7871" title="Indian astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="8181" end="8199" title="Thought experiment" label="Thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134684" start="8510" end="8518" title="Vagbhata" label="Vāgbhaṭa"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="8793" end="8808" title="Ayurveda" label="Indian Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="8905" end="8912" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294698" start="8916" end="8926" title="Rasashastra" label="rasaśāstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451306" start="9055" end="9071" title="Tantras (Buddhism)" label="Buddhist tantras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567507" start="9188" end="9204" title="Traditional Tibetan medicine" label="Tibetan Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814156" start="9209" end="9226" title="Tibetan astrology" label="Tibetan astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="9243" end="9255" title="Astronomy" label="astronomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="9260" end="9272" title="Astrology" label="astrological"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="9520" end="9531" title="creationism" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620805" start="9536" end="9542" title="theism" label="theism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001043" start="10042" end="10060" title="Buddhist modernism" label="Buddhist modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396988" start="10104" end="10126" title="Migettuwatte Gunananda Thera" label="Migettuwatte Gunananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518574" start="10128" end="10148" title="Anagarika Dharmapala" label="Anagarika Dharmapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q729885" start="10150" end="10160" title="Paul Carus" label="Paul Carus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481283" start="10162" end="10172" title="Soyen Shaku" label="Shaku Sōen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44847" start="10174" end="10185" title="D. T. Suzuki" label="D.T. Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q442617" start="10187" end="10199" title="Henry Steel Olcott" label="Henry Olcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q115371" start="10205" end="10217" title="Edwin Arnold" label="Edwin Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="10293" end="10302" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="10373" end="10379" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="10414" end="10425" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="10470" end="10490" title="Rationalism" label="rationalist religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="10512" end="10517" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="10521" end="10531" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="10540" end="10552" title="superstition" label="superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="10567" end="10573" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="10611" end="10620" title="causality" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="10625" end="10635" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q54131218" start="10650" end="10665" title="Geoffrey Samuel" label="Geoffrey Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="10933" end="10945" title="superstition" label="superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q100724097" start="10960" end="10979" title="Martin Verhoeven" label="Martin J. Verhoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="11087" end="11094" title="Miracle" label="Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="11235" end="11245" title="Positivism" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="11289" end="11300" title="Freethought" label="freethinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="11441" end="11463" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752626" start="11558" end="11594" title="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions" label="World&amp;#x27;s Parliament of Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="11653" end="11669" title="Causality" label="cause and effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="11743" end="11764" title="Pratītyasamutpāda" label="dependent origination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12336" end="12345" title="[Mahayana" label="[Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q442617" start="12519" end="12531" title="Henry Steel Olcott" label="Henry Olcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="12739" end="12748" title="Hypnosis" label="hypnotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="12753" end="12765" title="Theosophy" label="theosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="12949" end="12956" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000919" start="12973" end="12989" title="Buddhist Society" label="Buddhist Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="13293" end="13302" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="14405" end="14421" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135076" start="14631" end="14646" title="James H. Austin" label="James H. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068975" start="14660" end="14677" title="Zen and the Brain" label="Zen and the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q923582" start="14697" end="14713" title="Francisco Varela" label="Francisco Varela"/>
<link wikidata="Q351701" start="14718" end="14732" title="Daniel Goleman" label="Daniel Goleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q462154" start="14990" end="15013" title="Mind and Life Institute" label="Mind and Life Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="15534" end="15550" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q84258" start="16986" end="16999" title="Fritjof Capra" label="Fritjof Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q583328" start="17013" end="17031" title="The Tao of Physics" label="The Tao of Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="17171" end="17188" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q307043" start="17491" end="17506" title="Eastern philosophy" label="eastern thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q351701" start="17573" end="17587" title="Daniel Goleman" label="Daniel Goleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="17623" end="17636" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335050" start="17989" end="18008" title="Embodied cognition" label="embodied experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="18104" end="18113" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323644" start="18270" end="18286" title="K. N. Jayatilleke" label="K.N. Jayatilleke"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="18302" end="18311" title="Sinhalese people" label="Sinhalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="18350" end="18360" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="19448" end="19459" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779582" start="19545" end="19559" title="microbiologist" label="microbiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="19807" end="19823" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="19916" end="19932" title="substance theory" label="substance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="20224" end="20240" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Chinese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q795292" start="20465" end="20470" title="Taixu" label="Taixu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464653" start="20472" end="20483" title="Yang Wenhui" label="Yang Wenhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="20719" end="20732" title="heliocentrism" label="heliocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193626" start="20903" end="20912" title="scientism" label="scientism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="20914" end="20925" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="20930" end="20946" title="Social Darwinism" label="Social Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="21479" end="21501" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q795292" start="21730" end="21735" title="Taixu" label="Taixu"/>
<link wikidata="Q348235" start="22667" end="22683" title="Trinh Xuan Thuan" label="Trịnh Xuân Thuận"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="22707" end="22721" title="astrophysicist" label="astrophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="22856" end="22873" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q974490" start="22937" end="22963" title="non-overlapping magisteria" label="non-overlapping magisteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="23272" end="23288" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501372" start="23290" end="23303" title="Gendün Chöphel" label="Gendun Chopel"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="23704" end="23725" title="Pratītyasamutpāda" label="dependent origination"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="24129" end="24144" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="14th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688724" start="24146" end="24161" title="B. Alan Wallace" label="B. Alan Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377791" start="24167" end="24181" title="Robert Thurman" label="Robert Thurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239960" start="24553" end="24582" title="The Universe in a Single Atom" label="The Universe in a Single Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771260" start="25333" end="25343" title="Eudaimonia" label="eudaimonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="25344" end="25354" title="well-being" label="well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="25829" end="25842" title="Materialism" label="materialistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="25847" end="25858" title="Physicalism" label="physicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="26005" end="26017" title="Metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="26032" end="26037" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="26237" end="26248" title="Physicalism" label="physicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193626" start="26700" end="26709" title="scientism" label="scientism"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="26816" end="26850" title="Reductive physicalism" label="reduce to the physical world alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="26968" end="26980" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q100724097" start="30239" end="30258" title="Martin Verhoeven" label="Martin J. Verhoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000976" start="31077" end="31093" title="Buddhist studies" label="Buddhist studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="33157" end="33174" title="Classical mechanics" label="Newtonian physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="33560" end="33574" title="History of science" label="modern science"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="33576" end="33589" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="33614" end="33627" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812788" start="33668" end="33686" title="Scientia potentia est" label="knowledge is power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240353" start="34259" end="34278" title="Donald S. Lopez Jr." label="Donald S. Lopez Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="35329" end="35337" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="35342" end="35346" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="35434" end="35445" title="Historical Vedic religion" label="Brahmanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="35446" end="35458" title="superstition" label="superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="35502" end="35514" title="Theosophy" label="theosophists"/>
<link wikidata="Q329249" start="36139" end="36152" title="Evan Thompson" label="Evan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="36413" end="36420" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="36430" end="36439" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="36518" end="36537" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692184" start="37281" end="37293" title="Aggañña Sutta" label="Agañña sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969527" start="37538" end="37545" title="Kleshas (Buddhism)" label="kleshas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176016" start="38143" end="38158" title="David P. Barash" label="David P. Barash"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="38243" end="38250" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673416" start="38826" end="38831" title="Karma in Buddhism" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="39054" end="39063" title="Darwinism" label="Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="39090" end="39106" title="Mutation" label="genetic mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="39111" end="39128" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="39606" end="39615" title="Reductionism" label="reductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="39658" end="39671" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724133" start="39880" end="39891" title="emergentism" label="emergentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="40287" end="40300" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q143210" start="40302" end="40322" title="religious experience" label="religious experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="40326" end="40334" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q732418" start="40367" end="40382" title="Matthieu Ricard" label="Matthieu Ricard"/>
<link wikidata="Q658544" start="40873" end="40887" title="modern physics" label="modern physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46344" start="41077" end="41084" title="quantum" label="quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q546054" start="41248" end="41257" title="Śūnyatā" label="emptiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="41285" end="41303" title="Pratītyasamutpāda" label="pratītyasamputpāda"/>
<link wikidata="Q310765" start="41363" end="41373" title="David Bohm" label="David Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q78610" start="41378" end="41393" title="Anton Zeilinger" label="Anton Zeilinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="41561" end="41576" title="Quantum mechanics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865390" start="41657" end="41670" title="Arthur Zajonc" label="Arthur Zajonc"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="41857" end="41871" title="Astrophysicist" label="Astrophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q348235" start="41872" end="41888" title="Trinh Xuan Thuan" label="Trịnh Xuân Thuận"/>
<link wikidata="Q622629" start="42250" end="42266" title="Svabhava" label="intrinsic nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="42289" end="42304" title="Quantum mechanics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="42486" end="42518" title="Uncertainty principle" label="Heisenberg uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9130" start="42533" end="42550" title="Erwin Schrödinger" label="Erwin Schrödinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269079" start="43000" end="43019" title="quantum nonlocality" label="quantum nonlocality"/>
<link wikidata="Q917909" start="43024" end="43045" title="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Mach&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="43121" end="43125" title="Niels Bohr" label="Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="43130" end="43140" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46079" start="43400" end="43425" title="Copenhagen interpretation" label="Copenhagen interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042470" start="43462" end="43475" title="Carlo Rovelli" label="Carlo Rovelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q171195" start="43482" end="43491" title="Nagarjuna" label="Nagarjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q106451708" start="43504" end="43525" title="Helgoland (book)" label="&amp;quot;Helgoland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105475" start="43544" end="43590" title="Relational quantum mechanics" label="relational interpretation of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q844421" start="43854" end="43864" title="Madhyamaka" label="Madhyamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q171195" start="43879" end="43888" title="Nagarjuna" label="Nāgārjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774361" start="44006" end="44040" title="Anti-foundationalism" label="not need a metaphysical foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939060" start="44274" end="44287" title="Vlatko Vedral" label="Vlatko Vedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249546" start="44302" end="44318" title="Decoding Reality" label="Decoding Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142479" start="44417" end="44430" title="relationalism" label="relationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12359813" start="44678" end="44697" title="Thing-in-itself" label="the thing in itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="45073" end="45091" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="45678" end="45687" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="45793" end="45811" title="God" label="transcendent being"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="45920" end="45928" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="46225" end="46235" title="Cosmogony" label="cosmogonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304023" start="46289" end="46301" title="Cyclic model" label="Cyclic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327819" start="46344" end="46354" title="multiverse" label="multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q831837" start="46420" end="46430" title="Kalachakra" label="Kalachakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q766202" start="46728" end="46748" title="quantum vacuum state" label="quantum vacuum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q652550" start="48088" end="48098" title="Mount Meru" label="Mount Meru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389511" start="48487" end="48504" title="Tominaga Nakamoto" label="Tominaga Nakamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q169010" start="49600" end="49617" title="Four Noble Truths" label="Four Noble Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="49823" end="49833" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q125249" start="49919" end="49932" title="William James" label="William James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622668" start="50086" end="50109" title="Stream of consciousness (psychology)" label="stream of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="50316" end="50329" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767528" start="50345" end="50357" title="Mark Epstein" label="Mark Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485781" start="50493" end="50505" title="Nina Coltart" label="Nina Coltart"/>
<link wikidata="Q488506" start="50626" end="50634" title="Anattā" label="not-self"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254571" start="50780" end="50797" title="personal identity" label="personal identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236990" start="50802" end="50810" title="Self" label="the self"/>
<link wikidata="Q351701" start="50812" end="50826" title="Daniel Goleman" label="Daniel Goleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123126" start="51025" end="51038" title="Robert Wright (journalist)" label="Robert Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q48726642" start="51069" end="51089" title="Why Buddhism Is True" label="Why Buddhism Is True"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="51211" end="51234" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317963" start="51753" end="51777" title="Modularity of mind" label="modular view of the mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q738789" start="51790" end="51807" title="Michael Gazzaniga" label="Michael Gazzaniga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326691" start="52054" end="52078" title="Transpersonal psychology" label="Transpersonal psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164943" start="52291" end="52304" title="Contemplative psychology" label="contemplative"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="52321" end="52345" title="developmental psychology" label="developmental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="52907" end="52917" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="52945" end="52973" title="cognitive behavioral therapy" label="cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207203" start="53088" end="53107" title="Buddhist meditation" label="Buddhist meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569252" start="53127" end="53136" title="Vipassanā" label="vipassana"/>
<link wikidata="Q167894" start="53141" end="53146" title="zazen" label="zazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q341045" start="53171" end="53182" title="mindfulness" label="mindfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693745" start="53236" end="53255" title="Cognitive therapy" label="cognitive therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q341031" start="53276" end="53313" title="Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy" label="mindfulness-based cognitive therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381788" start="53365" end="53379" title="Jon Kabat-Zinn" label="Jon Kabat-Zinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q341036" start="53387" end="53421" title="Mindfulness-based stress reduction" label="Mindfulness-based stress reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207203" start="53457" end="53476" title="Buddhist meditation" label="Buddhist meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q341045" start="53501" end="53523" title="mindfulness meditation" label="mindfulness meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="53574" end="53586" title="Neurology" label="neurological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149302" start="53651" end="53667" title="Richard Davidson" label="Richard Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="53720" end="53724" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="53785" end="53795" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="53797" end="53810" title="Tenzin Gyatso" label="Tenzin Gyatso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135076" start="53881" end="53896" title="James H. Austin" label="James H. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068975" start="53918" end="53935" title="Zen and the Brain" label="Zen and the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q351701" start="54031" end="54038" title="Daniel Goleman" label="Goleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q85741039" start="54052" end="54066" title="Altered Traits" label="Altered Traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q732418" start="54139" end="54154" title="Matthieu Ricard" label="Matthieu Ricard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314967" start="54159" end="54175" title="Yongey Mingyur Rinpoche" label="Mingyur Rinpoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q208195" start="54701" end="54709" title="pleasure" label="pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421061" start="54749" end="54768" title="Experience sampling method" label="experience sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090540" start="54773" end="54787" title="Self-report inventory" label="self-reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q445460" start="54879" end="54888" title="Shantideva" label="Śāntideva"/>
<link wikidata="Q828201" start="54977" end="54992" title="Pāramitā" label="six perfections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233261" start="55220" end="55235" title="Positive affectivity" label="positive affect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304026" start="55325" end="55340" title="Research on meditation" label="Various studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28018074" start="55485" end="55500" title="Jay L. Garfield" label="Jay L. Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="55965" end="55974" title="attention" label="attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="55976" end="55982" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="55987" end="55997" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q287827" start="56007" end="56030" title="inattentional blindness" label="inattentional blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355306" start="56330" end="56346" title="moral psychology" label="moral psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q718809" start="56351" end="56370" title="positive psychology" label="positive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q329249" start="56424" end="56437" title="Evan Thompson" label="Evan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126970" start="56549" end="56563" title="Metacognition" label="meta-awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="56742" end="56750" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182555" start="56792" end="56812" title="Default mode network" label="default-mode network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335050" start="57089" end="57107" title="embodied cognition" label="embodied cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313543" start="57389" end="57406" title="cognitive ecology" label="cognitive ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="57569" end="57587" title="being-in-the-world" label="being-in-the-world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502991" start="57608" end="57617" title="Lifeworld" label="Lifeworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518716" start="57635" end="57653" title="Imaginary (sociology)" label="social imaginaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178207" start="59824" end="59853" title="hard problem of consciousness" label="hard problem of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q210501" start="59984" end="59997" title="introspection" label="introspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q923582" start="60577" end="60593" title="Francisco Varela" label="Francisco Varela"/>
<link wikidata="Q314252" start="60598" end="60613" title="Gregory Bateson" label="Gregory Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="61351" end="61372" title="History of science" label="historians of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q918438" start="61498" end="61510" title="Stanley Jaki" label="Stanley Jaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="61627" end="61635" title="Animism" label="animized"/>
<link wikidata="Q318054" start="62010" end="62024" title="Joseph Needham" label="Joseph Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433621" start="62082" end="62115" title="Science and Civilisation in China" label="Science and Civilisation in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="62183" end="62190" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224928" start="62197" end="62218" title="Cyclic time" label="cyclic theory of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="62607" end="62628" title="philosophy of science" label="philosophy of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q431354" start="62769" end="62787" title="scientific realism" label="scientific realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856063" start="62792" end="62807" title="instrumentalism" label="instrumentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844421" start="62949" end="62959" title="Madhyamaka" label="Madhyamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="63310" end="63320" title="Ontology" label="ontologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q310765" start="63374" end="63378" title="David Bohm" label="Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218648" start="63394" end="63409" title="Implicate and explicate order" label="implicate order"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="63418" end="63432" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116490" start="63480" end="63491" title="unus mundus" label="unus mundus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387629" start="63493" end="63505" title="George F. R. Ellis" label="George Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155790" start="63662" end="63675" title="Eugene Wigner" label="Eugene Wigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q822820" start="63680" end="63703" title="Bernard d&amp;#x27;Espagnat" label="Bernard d&amp;#x27;Espagnat"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="63732" end="63754" title="John Archibald Wheeler" label="John Archibald Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218648" start="64252" end="64274" title="Implicate and explicate order" label="ontology of David Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q310765" start="64393" end="64403" title="David Bohm" label="David Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q179266" start="65066" end="65084" title="Jiddu Krishnamurti" label="Jiddu Krishnamurti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="65119" end="65129" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309032" start="65170" end="65183" title="Michel Bitbol" label="Michel Bitbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q844421" start="65209" end="65219" title="Madhyamaka" label="Madhyamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269024" start="65384" end="65405" title="quantum contextuality" label="quantum contextuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q546054" start="65419" end="65426" title="Śūnyatā" label="Śūnyatā"/>
<link wikidata="Q215675" start="65465" end="65485" title="quantum entanglement" label="quantum entanglement"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="65499" end="65516" title="Pratītyasamutpāda" label="Pratîtyasamutpâda"/>
<link wikidata="Q370157" start="66367" end="66389" title="David Finkelstein" label="David Ritz Finkelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q240581" start="67131" end="67150" title="anthropic principle" label="anthropic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401749" start="67155" end="67166" title="Fine-tuned universe" label="fine-tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994934" start="67215" end="67245" title="Dimensionless physical constant" label="fundamental physical constants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854518" start="67728" end="67744" title="Watchmaker analogy" label="great watchmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q729193" start="67969" end="67988" title="Teleological argument" label="teleological theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="68220" end="68230" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q172948" start="68250" end="68260" title="Bohr Model" label="Bohr Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="68303" end="68324" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="68373" end="68405" title="Heisenberg uncertainty principle" label="Heisenberg uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="68437" end="68452" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="68472" end="68500" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="68509" end="68537" title="special theory of relativity" label="special theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="68558" end="68581" title="mass–energy equivalence" label="mass–energy equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="68681" end="68696" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="14th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086141" start="69904" end="69926" title="Buddhism and evolution" label="Buddhism and evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006438" start="69929" end="69960" title="Buddhism and Western Philosophy" label="Buddhism and Western Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001079" start="69963" end="69982" title="Buddhist philosophy" label="Buddhist philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056345" start="69985" end="70019" title="Index of Buddhism-related articles" label="Index of Buddhism-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088422" start="70028" end="70058" title="Issues in Science and Religion" label="Issues in Science and Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953188" start="70067" end="70084" title="Quantum mysticism" label="Quantum mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q316752" start="70087" end="70128" title="Relationship between religion and science" label="Relationship between religion and science"/>
<link wikidata="Q764731" start="70131" end="70148" title="Science of Mind" label="Religious Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151242" start="70151" end="70167" title="Secular Buddhism" label="Secular Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q351701" start="70442" end="70457" title="Daniel Goleman" label="Goleman, Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="70562" end="70576" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="Gyatso, Tenzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240353" start="71369" end="71378" title="Donald S. Lopez Jr." label="Lopez Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1240353" start="71380" end="71389" title="Donald S. Lopez Jr." label="Donald S."/>
<link wikidata="Q732418" start="71783" end="71799" title="Matthieu Ricard" label="Ricard, Matthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944882" start="72366" end="72371" title="Numen (journal)" label="Numen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688724" start="72407" end="72414" title="B. Alan Wallace" label="Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688724" start="72416" end="72423" title="B. Alan Wallace" label="B. Alan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294644" wikidata="Q1238821" url="?curid=294644" title="Icknield Street">
<text>Icknield Street or Ryknild Street is a Roman road in England, with a route roughly south-west to north-east. It runs from the Fosse Way at Bourton on the Water in Gloucestershire () to Templeborough in South Yorkshire (). It passes through Alcester, Studley, Redditch, Metchley Fort, Birmingham, Sutton Coldfield, Lichfield, Burton upon Trent and Derby.

==Names==
Four Roman roads having the King&#x27;s protection are named in the Laws of Edward the Confessor: Watling Street, Ermine Street, the Fosse Way, and Hikenild or Icknield Street. Hikenild Strete is generally supposed to be connected with the country of the Iceni. Various forms of the name (the earliest in Anglo-Saxon charters are Icenhilde Weg or Icenilde Weg) designate other roads from the borders of Norfolk through Cambridgeshire, Bucks, Berks, Hants and Wilts into Dorset. These locations, however, would identify the route as Icknield Way an Iron Age trackway running from Norfolk to Dorset.

What is today referred to as the Icknield Street road acquired the name &quot;Ryknild Street&quot; during the 12th century, when it was named by Ranulf Higdon, a monk of Chester writing in 1344 in his &quot;Polychronicon&quot;. Higdon gives the name as Rikenild Strete, which, he says, tends from the south-west to the north, and begins at St David&#x27;s in Wales and continues across England to the mouth of the Tyne, passing Worcester, Droitwich, Birmingham, Lichfield, Derby, and Chesterfield. It has borne that name, or Rigning, Reenald or Rignall, from early times. In three of the four MSS of Higdon the name is given as Rikenilde or Rikenyldes, and in the fourth (which is said to be one of the earliest), Hikenil Street. Trevisa&#x27;s English translation (1387) calls it Rykeneldes Strete. Harverfield, writing in the Victoria County History of Warwickshire doubted whether the road had any real and original right to either name, preferring Ryknild as no less correct (or no more incorrect), and being able to distinguish it from Icknield Street in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. It is now called Icknield or Ryknild &quot;Street&quot; to distinguish it from the older Icknield Way. In the 19th century it is also referred to in antiquarian literature with the spelling &quot;Rykneld Street&quot;.

A preserved section of the Roman road can be seen at Sutton Park, now in the City of Birmingham.

==Route==
George William Collen&#x27;s book &quot;Britannia Saxonica&quot; (1833) concisely outlines the route, drawing on Leland&#x27;s &quot;Itinerary&quot;:

==Today&#x27;s route==

Much of the Midlands route of the Icknield Street is used by modern roads, most notably the A38 from Lichfield to Derby; and many sections retain the name &quot;Icknield Street&quot;, but not always accurately as in Hockley, Birmingham and in Redditch, Worcestershire where there is also a road called &quot;Icknield Street Drive&quot;&#x27; which stands near the course of the Roman road. &quot;Ryknild Street&quot; is still in use in Lichfield and &quot;Ryknild Road&quot; in Derby.

===Bourton-on-the-Water to Bidford-on-Avon===
The road appears to have joined the Fosse Way near Bourton-on‑the‑Water. Starting about two miles north of there, and two miles west of Stow-on-the-Wold, a lane (Condicott Lane) runs northwards in a straight line to Condicote and then Hinchwick. This lane appears to indicate the course of Icknield Street. It leads towards high ground, about on Bourton Down. It is not clear how the ascent of from Hinchwick to the Down was made, but on the Down a lane northwards from Springhill takes nearly the same line for to near the Evesham road , from which a parish boundary over Saintbury Hill seems to mark the course down the north side. On the west side of Weston Park, a line seems to be taken up lying between high ground , to the south, and Alcester, to the north. A road in this line, passing on the west of Weston-sub‑Edge, leads on to a highway with a parish boundary along it called Riknild or Icknield Street, which is crossed by the railway at Honeybourne Station. It continues northward under the name of Buckle Street to Staple Hill, one mile south of Bidford-on-Avon. This is probably the oldest version of the name being the modern form of a name Bucgan or Buggilde Street which appears in documents earlier than the Norman Conquest. As the road approaches Bidford there is a slight turn, and the modern road heads for the crossing point of the medieval bridge whereas the Roman ford is upstream of here and the road name preserved in a small road named Icknield Street on the northern bank. Evidence of a Roman causeway here confirms this as the Roman crossing point.

===Bidford-on-Avon to Birmingham===
From Bidford following the named Icknield Street the line of the road then follows Waterloo Road through Bidford and then across country as the B4085. At Wixford by the Three Horse Shoes Inn the modern road turns west whilst the line of the road continues north in a hollow way to Saint Milburga&#x27;s church where it becomes a track running along the ridge to the east of Ragley Hall heading towards Alcester. At Alcester the original crossing point has been lost due to changes in the course of the river and the development of the town but the line is recovered north of the town on the modern A435. Passing Coughton Court the road bears the local name of Headon or Haydon Way and proceeds through Studley and to one mile beyond, where the modern road turns off to the north-eastward. Heading north much of the route is lost, since Codrington wrote, in the development of Redditch, however Icknield Street Drive, Battens Drive approximates the route until a small road through the residential area of Churchill marked Ryknield Street on the modern 1:25,000 Ordnance Survey map, exactly in a line with Haydon Way, is reached. This line appears to point from Alcester to high ground about , one mile east of Rowney Green, and north of Beoley. Now the B4497 the road heads north through Beoley crossing under the M42 motorway just south of Alcott Farm. It retains the name Icknield Street, climbing the high ground of Swans Hill between the Coach and Horses Public House at Weatheroak Hill and the Peacock Inn at the junction with Lea End Lane. Here, a hedge line and footpath run directly up the hill while the modern road deviates slightly to the east to accommodate the incline before rejoining the original route and continuing north until it enters the suburbs of Birmingham at Kings Norton adjacent to the Romano British settlement of Longdales Road. It then follows the course of Walkers Heath Road over the traffic roundabout at Parsons Hill, to Broadmeadow Lane, Lifford Lane, Pershore Road and Hazelwell Street, finally disappearing into residential developments at Stirchley by the swimming baths.

===Across Birmingham===
The 7 miles from Stirchley in the south of Birmingham to Perry Bridge at Holford in the north is a serious problem. It has long vexed Birmingham antiquaries and is perhaps insoluble. Hutton gave the course as &quot;onwards by Stirchley Street, crossing the Bromsgrove road at Selly Oak, leaving Harborne a mile to the west, by the observatory in Lady Wood Lane, crossing the Dudley Road at Sandpits, and along Worstone Lane, passing five furlongs north of the Navigation Bridge in Great Charles Street, Birmingham. He saw the section of the road where the inhabitants attempted to pull it up for the sake of the materials, 20 yards wide, and one yard deep, filled up with stone cemented with coarse mortar,&quot; and he says that &quot;the course was discoverable by its barren track through uncultivated meadows.&quot; Icknield Street or Icknield Port Road are not old names and cannot be traced in the city prior to 1825 and may have been introduced as a result of Hutton&#x27;s theory. Birmingham and its suburbs now cover the old road. The line of Hazelwell Street sets the course of the road towards the next established point of the route at Metchley Fort in the grounds of the Queen Elizabeth Hospital. The fort was established about 48 AD by the Roman army as a base camp for its conquest of the Birmingham area and part of a network of forts across the Midlands linked by roads. It stood by Birmingham&#x27;s earliest known road junction at the point where Icknield Street was met by Roman roads coming in from Droitwich and Penkridge. From here the road runs north to another fort at Wall, Roman Etocetum near Lichfield. The Perry Bridge of 1711 stands at its crossing of the River Tame in Perry Barr. However, Walker cast doubts on this orthodox view of the road&#x27;s course in this area and resistivity surveys undertaken on sites either side of the crossing in 1992, showed that, although the line of the road is clearly indicated on old maps and aerial photographs, the site has been considerably altered this century by, among other things, the embankment of the M6. The one place where the road might have been detected proved inaccessible without considerable clearance of dense undergrowth (remnants of a hedge-line following the road?) and a 20-metre grid on adjacent open ground proved negative. The second site was on wasteland immediately south of the river. Here, the &quot;Walker&quot; road-line only shaved the top comer of this before disappearing under a modern industrial development (plot-holders in allotments to the south did not recall any finds during building work, nor were they able to identify any &quot;hard&quot; areas on their land, where the &quot;Walker&quot; line might be expected to continue). A series of complete and partial 20-metre grids laid down the fence line between the industrial estate and the wasteland and then right across the open area yielded nothing which could relate to the &quot;Walker&quot; line but did produce some low resistance features running parallel with the site&#x27;s east boundary.

===Birmingham to Lichfield===

From Perry Bridge the road heads North, Coddrington describes the route as following a county boundary for a quarter of a mile and then a road, now the B4138, Kingstanding Road, until it enters Sutton Park close to the old Royal Oak Inn, now the Toby Carvery and Lodge. The course is preserved as it crosses the Western edge of the park, where the ridge appears very plainly, of a rounded profile, eight or nine yards wide over all, and three to four feet high in the middle. It has been described as presenting one of the best examples of a Roman road, wide with a ditch on each side. It has little claim to be so considered, and the ditches where they occur appear to be connected with modern drainage. To the north of the park, about half-a‑mile through the private residential estate Little Aston Park where it is named Roman Road, a short length of road north of Little Aston, Forge Lane, and another length to the west of Shenstone, mark the course of the road in a straight line from Streetley Hill to high ground , on the north-east of Wall. From near Birmingham to Wall (Letocetum) for nine miles the road is not perceptibly out of a straight line, which may very well have been set out from intermediate points at Streetley Hill, and the high ground , south of the old Royal Oak Inn. Icknield Street would appear to have crossed Watling Street on the east of Letocetum at the point where Ashcroft Lane crosses the A5. There is then a considerable change of direction to the north-east, and a straight course for nine miles to near Barton-under-Needwood. The alignment was sighted from Knowle Farm, as there is a slight bend at this point. Knowle Lane then follows the course of the old road leading into Cricket Lane, Quarry Hills Lane and on to a preservation of the name as Ryknild Street. This in turn leads to Austin Cote Lane, which crosses the Brittania Enterprise Park onto the Old Burton Road, joining the A38 at Streethay.

===Lichfield to Derby===
The old road is still used, save a few local diversions, from the crossing with the main Birmingham-Lichfield road (A 38(T), to Littleover on the outskirts of Derby and here the highway is very straight and well raised, by two to three feet in places, a fine example of a Roman road still in use. William Stukeley wrote that &quot;part of Rigning Way north from Wall was very fair with a high straight bank&quot; and that &quot;upon the hill south of Littleover, Rigning is under the eye as far as Etocetum, and the hills beyond it.&quot; At Littleover the road turns to the east as the modern A5250, but named Rykneld Street and later Pastures Hill where a section of road has been examined adjacent to Derby High School and Pineview Gardens, 2 miles (4 km) south west of Derventio, the Roman fort at Little Chester. The buried remains of the Roman road are not visible above ground but include drainage features and construction pits flanked by shallow boundary ditches. Plough scars cutting the Roman road surface indicate that in the post-Roman period the site was used for arable land whilst in the 18th century, it formed part of the Birmingham to Derby turnpike but it is also possible that by this time, the main road had been diverted onto its present course at Pastures Hill. Archaeological excavation in 2003 by the Birmingham University Field Archaeology Unit identified the presence of a Bronze Age cremation cemetery in the area between the road and Pastures Hill. A Bronze Age cremation urn was recovered as well as evidence for Iron Age occupation indicating the area may have served as a long lived ritual landscape, including Bronze Age to Roman activity in the Roman road&#x27;s alignment. It has been suggested that the Bronze Age cremations could have been laid out along the line of a Bronze Age trackway which continued to use into, or was returned to use, during the Roman period.

The course appears to have been on the west side of Derby passing close to a Roman fort, occupied in 50 AD, at Strutts Park (some finds of pottery from the excavations of the fort are in the collection of Derby Museum). Swan doubts that Ryknild Street went to Strutts Park, which was replaced around 80 AD by the fort at Chester Green on the other side of the River Derwent, the construction of Ryknild Street being contemporary with that of the later fort. Stukeley traced the track of the wall at Chester Green all round enclosing an area, according to his plan, 120 paces from east to west, and 100 paces from north to south, the foundation of the bridge he said could be felt with a staff. and Bishop Bennet in 1817 said that the piers of the bridge could be felt in a dry summer.

===Derby to Chesterfield===
From Little Chester to the countryside north of Derby, the route has not been determined. It is certain that a road left Derventio to the east which led to Sawley on the River Trent, Icknield Street branching from this to the North East. The course is well marked beyond Breadsall, one and a half miles from Little Chester, but the intervening length has not yet been ascertained, however, there is a Ryknield Hill in Denby, which may be part of the route.

==See also==

* Roman Britain
* Roman roads in Britain

==References==
==External links==
*Birmingham Roman Roads Project (Hosted by the University of Birmingham)
*Metchley Fort, Birmingham
*Derby City Council list of Scheduled Ancient Monuments
*Full text of Roman Roads in Britain, Thomas Codrington</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1238821" start="0" end="15" title="Icknield Street" label="Icknield Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238821" start="19" end="33" title="Icknield Street" label="Ryknild Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179671" start="39" end="49" title="Roman roads in Britannia" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="53" end="60" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233334" start="126" end="135" title="Fosse Way" label="Fosse Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q895264" start="139" end="159" title="Bourton on the Water" label="Bourton on the Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="163" end="178" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698772" start="185" end="198" title="Templeborough" label="Templeborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q23095" start="202" end="217" title="South Yorkshire" label="South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012025" start="240" end="248" title="Alcester" label="Alcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076557" start="250" end="257" title="Studley, Warwickshire" label="Studley"/>
<link wikidata="Q865716" start="259" end="267" title="Redditch" label="Redditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823362" start="269" end="282" title="Metchley Fort" label="Metchley Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="284" end="294" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q868196" start="296" end="312" title="Sutton Coldfield" label="Sutton Coldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="314" end="323" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000597" start="325" end="342" title="Burton upon Trent" label="Burton upon Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="347" end="352" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796343" start="382" end="415" title="Peace (law)" label="having the King&amp;#x27;s protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518007" start="433" end="461" title="Leges Edwardi Confessoris" label="Laws of Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="463" end="477" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355961" start="479" end="492" title="Ermine Street" label="Ermine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q211678" start="620" end="625" title="Iceni" label="Iceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="768" end="775" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656432" start="897" end="909" title="Icknield Way" label="Icknield Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="913" end="921" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="944" end="951" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="955" end="961" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q770348" start="1109" end="1122" title="Ranulf Higdon" label="Ranulf Higdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1350" end="1357" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926668" start="1792" end="1815" title="Victoria County History" label="Victoria County History"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="2297" end="2307" title="Roman roads" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369961" start="2323" end="2334" title="Sutton Park, West Midlands" label="Sutton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="2355" end="2365" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649195" start="2645" end="2648" title="A38 road" label="A38"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486218" start="2769" end="2776" title="Hockley" label="Hockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="2778" end="2788" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q865716" start="2796" end="2804" title="Redditch" label="Redditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q895264" start="3136" end="3156" title="Bourton-on-the-Water" label="Bourton-on‑the‑Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026648" start="3221" end="3237" title="Stow-on-the-Wold" label="Stow-on-the-Wold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609311" start="3301" end="3310" title="Condicote" label="Condicote"/>
<link wikidata="Q967029" start="3320" end="3329" title="Hinchwick" label="Hinchwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q585963" start="3609" end="3616" title="Evesham" label="Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q20968424" start="3894" end="3909" title="Weston-Sub-Edge" label="Weston-sub‑Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373459" start="4035" end="4054" title="Honeybourne railway station" label="Honeybourne Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770280" start="4145" end="4160" title="Bidford-on-Avon" label="Bidford-on-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="4312" end="4327" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q591134" start="4855" end="4862" title="Wixford" label="Wixford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283125" start="5075" end="5086" title="Ragley Hall" label="Ragley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660971" start="5299" end="5303" title="A435" label="A435"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176083" start="5313" end="5327" title="Coughton Court" label="Coughton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076557" start="5403" end="5410" title="Studley, Warwickshire" label="Studley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372261" start="5911" end="5923" title="Rowney Green" label="Rowney Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601726" start="5938" end="5944" title="Beoley" label="Beoley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328487" start="6015" end="6027" title="M42 motorway" label="M42 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6176" end="6191" title="Weatheroak Hill" label="Weatheroak Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="6460" end="6467" title="suburbs" label="suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="6471" end="6481" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856469" start="6485" end="6497" title="Kings Norton" label="Kings Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142976" start="6514" end="6528" title="Romano-British culture" label="Romano British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617538" start="6778" end="6787" title="Stirchley, West Midlands" label="Stirchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568723" start="7019" end="7025" title="William Hutton (historian)" label="Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270344" start="8020" end="8044" title="Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham" label="Queen Elizabeth Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="8090" end="8100" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260116" start="8356" end="8365" title="Droitwich Spa" label="Droitwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194250" start="8370" end="8379" title="Penkridge" label="Penkridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230592" start="8442" end="8450" title="Letocetum" label="Etocetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169729" start="8471" end="8483" title="Perry Bridge" label="Perry Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q369528" start="8522" end="8532" title="River Tame (West Midlands)" label="River Tame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169723" start="8536" end="8546" title="Perry Barr" label="Perry Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="8916" end="8918" title="M6 motorway" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648959" start="10718" end="10735" title="Little Aston Park" label="Little Aston Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653027" start="12026" end="12036" title="Littleover" label="Littleover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381018" start="12195" end="12211" title="William Stukeley" label="William Stukeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241254" start="12671" end="12680" title="Derventio (Little Chester)" label="Derventio"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="13058" end="13066" title="Turnpike trust" label="turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="13299" end="13309" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="13442" end="13450" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q15117120" start="13514" end="13530" title="ritual landscape" label="ritual landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241270" start="13915" end="13927" title="Strutts Park Roman fort" label="Strutts Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012" start="14009" end="14021" title="Derby Museum and Art Gallery" label="Derby Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q62231582" start="14024" end="14028" title="Vivien Swan" label="Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649506" start="14125" end="14138" title="Chester Green" label="Chester Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q939664" start="14164" end="14177" title="River Derwent, Derbyshire" label="River Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005402" start="14502" end="14515" title="William Bennet (bishop)" label="Bishop Bennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648848" start="14774" end="14780" title="Sawley, Derbyshire" label="Sawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="14788" end="14799" title="River Trent" label="River Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458566" start="15036" end="15041" title="Denby" label="Denby"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="15092" end="15105" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179671" start="15108" end="15130" title="Roman roads in Britain" label="Roman roads in Britain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294646" wikidata="Q466308" url="?curid=294646" title="IBM System/38">
<text>The System/38 is a discontinued minicomputer and midrange computer manufactured and sold by
IBM. The system was announced in 1978. The System/38 has 48-bit addressing, which was unique for the time, and a novel integrated database system. It was oriented toward a multi-user system environment. At the time, the typical system handled from a dozen to several dozen terminals. Although the System/38 failed to displace the systems it was intended to replace, its architecture served as the basis of the much more successful IBM AS/400.

==History==
The System/38 was introduced on October 24, 1978 and delivered in 1980. Developed under the code-name &quot;Pacific&quot;, it was made commercially available in August 1979. The system was designed by a number of engineers including Frank Soltis and Glenn Henry and offered a number of innovative features. The architecture shared many similarities with the design of the failed IBM Future Systems project, including the single-level store, the use of microcode to implement operating system functionality, and the Machine Interface abstraction. It had been developed over eight years by IBM&#x27;s laboratory in Rochester, Minnesota. The president of IBM&#x27;s General Systems Division (GSD) said at the time: &quot;The System/38 is the largest program we&#x27;ve ever introduced in GSD and it is one of the top three or four largest programs ever introduced in IBM.&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;s/38-ibm-archives&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

The system was designed as a follow-on for the System/3, but it is not compatible with those computers. The predecessors to the System/38 include the System/3 (1969), System/32 (1975), and System/34 (1977). In 1983 the System/36 was released as a low-end business computer for users who found the System/38 too expensive for their needs. The System/38 was succeeded by the IBM AS/400 midrange computer family in 1988, which originally used a processor architecture similar to the System/38, before adopting PowerPC-based processors in 1995.

==Hardware characteristics==

The IBM 5381 System Unit contains processor, main memory, disk storage, a diskette magazine drive, and a system console with keyboard and a display. 5381 was available in Model 100 and Model 200.

The IBM 5382 System Unit is physically identical to 5381, but with more powerful processors, more memory, and more disk storage. 5382 was available in Models 300, 400, 500, 600, and 700.

Users typically interacted with the system through IBM 5250 series terminals. In 1984, IBM added the ability to attach graphics-oriented terminals that previously required a mainframe.

===Processing unit===
The system includes a central processing unit with 512K, 768K, 1024K, 1280K, or 1536K bytes of main storage. The processor is implemented across twenty-nine Schottky TTL LSI chips mounted on a 10x15&quot; circuit board. It includes a memory management unit supporting demand paging, used by the system software to implement a single-level store architecture.

The System/38 CPU features a 48-bit address space, which was selected as a compromise between 64-bit addressing, which certain IBM engineers wanted for the sake of future proofing, and 32-bit addressing, which other engineers wanted for cost saving purposes.

===System console keyboard/display===

The System/38 console incorporates a keyboard and a display screen with 16 lines of 64 characters, inconsistent with the locally attached 5250 terminals, which are either 12x40 or 24x80, depending on model. The keyboard is available to the system operator to enter Control Language commands.

===Diskette magazine drive===
The diskette magazine drive is standard on all models.

==Software architecture==

===Machine Interface===
The System/38 and its descendants use a machine interface architecture to isolate the application software and most of the operating system from hardware dependencies, including such details as address size and register size.

Compilers for System/38 and its successors generate code in a high-level instruction set known as the &quot;Machine Interface&quot;, or MI. MI is a virtual instruction set; it is not the instruction set of the underlying CPU. MI operates on &quot;objects&quot; instead of traditional memory addresses or registers.

Unlike some other virtual-machine architectures in which the virtual instructions are interpreted at runtime (see P-code machine), MI instructions are never interpreted. They constitute an intermediate compile time step and are translated into the processor&#x27;s instruction set as the final compilation step. The MI instructions are stored within the final program object, in addition to the executable machine instructions. If a program is moved from a processor with one native instruction set to a processor with another native instruction set, the MI instructions will be re-translated into the native instruction set of the new machine before the program is executed for the first time on the new machine.

The TIMI (Technology Independent Machine Interface) of OS/400 is a backwards compatible extension of the System/38 MI. As a result, it is possible for a program originally developed on a System/38 to run on current IBM i hardware without ever being recompiled.

===Microcode===

IBM referred to all code below the Machine Interface layer of the System/38 architecture as &quot;microcode&quot;, and treated it as part of the hardware. The term microcode was used to cover a wide array of low-level code, ranging from traditional microcode, up to functionality typically associated with the kernels of other operating systems, as well as the implementation of the integrated database. There were two levels of microcode in the System/38:

* &quot;Horizontal Microcode&quot; (HMC), which implemented a register-memory/memory-memory instruction set architecture known as the &quot;internal microprogramming (IMP) instruction set&quot; or the &quot;Internal Microprogrammed Interface&quot; (IMPI) using the native microcode of the System/38&#x27;s processor. Certain low-level and performance sensitive functionality such as task (i.e. process) scheduling and message passing were implemented directly in microcode as part of the Horizontal Microcode. The Horizontal Microcode resided in control store; it corresponded to traditional microcode.
* &quot;Vertical Microcode&quot; (VMC), which implemented the Machine Interface in terms of the IMPI architecture; this was implemented by translating MI code into IMPI code and executing it. It also implemented the integrated database, and other components of the operating system which could not be implemented in terms of MI instructions. This was implemented using a mixture of PL/MP and IMPI assembly. The Vertical Microcode resided in main memory.

The use of the term microcode stemmed from a 1969 antitrust case against IBM which resulted in IBM unbundling software from its hardware products (i.e. requiring software to be purchased separately from the hardware). By treating the low level code of the System/38 as part of the hardware, IBM was able to treat the MI as the native instruction set of the System/38, and thus have the freedom to change the IMPI and microcode as the underlying hardware evolved. Early AS/400 systems inherited the System/38 microcode structure, but the term microcode was dropped, leading IBM to rename the layers to the &quot;Vertical Licensed Internal Code&quot; and &quot;Horizontal Licensed Internal Code&quot;.

===Control Program Facility===

The operating system of the System/38 is the &quot;Control Program Facility&quot; (CPF). CPF is not related to the System Support Program operating system of the IBM System/34 and System/36. CPF objects are files, programs, message queues, user profiles, and libraries. While CPF is considered to be the operating system of the System/38, it sits on top of the System/38 Machine Interface layer, and consequently much of the traditional operating system functionality of the platform is implemented in the Horizontal and Vertical Microcode.

The System/38 also has the distinction of being the first commercially available IBM Midrange computer to have a database management system (DBMS) integrated into the operating system.

The operational control language of the System/38 is called &quot;CL&quot;, for Control Language. CL programs, similar in concept to shell scripts, can be compiled and executed natively.

The System/38 was designed with security built in as part of its architecture. Each object or library can have access controlled on a user-by-user basis. This has been continued and expanded throughout the AS/400 and iSeries computer lines.

==Successor system==

The System/38 was superseded by the AS/400, which also provided compatibility with System/36 data and software. S/38 programs with &#x27;observability&#x27; intact, that is source code embedded within the compiled binary executive at the expense of larger compiled object sizes, can still run on the AS/400 and successor systems as the restore option incorporates a recompile for the then back-version source. However, most proprietary vendor application libraries of objects were compiled without such &#x27;observability&#x27; and require original vendor replacement and consequent expense when upgrading to an AS/400. Pricing at the time was tiered, the same exact software, but priced based upon the model, its speed and capacity, of the system to be installed upon.

==Sales==
IBM sold an estimated 20,000 System/38s within the first five years of availability, according to articles published in industry magazines NEWS 34/38 and Midrange Computing. Although billed as a minicomputer, the S/38 was much more expensive than IBM&#x27;s established best-selling System/34, and its replacement, the System/36. Of equal importance was the difficulty of upgrading from a System/34 to a S/38. IBM tacitly acknowledged this by bringing out the System/36 – an upgraded System/34 – after the launch of the S/38. Although the System/38 did not sell in large numbers, it commanded a higher profit margin than IBM&#x27;s other midrange systems, and thus was a profitable product line for IBM.

In the marketplace, IBM thus found itself with three overlapping, but incompatible, ranges. The System/34, the System/38 and the mainframe System/370 architecture. Digital Equipment Corporation, at that time one of IBM&#x27;s main competitors, was able to exploit this by offering a wide range of products based on a single architecture - specifically the VAX architecture. IBM&#x27;s counter to this, the 9370, was a commercial failure, and at that time, &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote, sales of the System/36 and System/38 were &quot;lagging.&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q466308" start="4" end="13" title="IBM System/38" label="System/38"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="32" end="44" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q380104" start="49" end="66" title="midrange computer" label="midrange computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="92" end="95" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q959339" start="149" end="155" title="48-bit computing" label="48-bit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="211" end="230" title="database#Integrated approach" label="integrated database"/>
<link wikidata="Q876057" start="264" end="274" title="multi-user" label="multi-user"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="365" end="373" title="Computer terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137400" start="523" end="533" title="IBM AS/400" label="IBM AS/400"/>
<link wikidata="Q93130" start="781" end="793" title="Frank Soltis" label="Frank Soltis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105950" start="798" end="809" title="Glenn Henry (IT entrepreneur)" label="Glenn Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407192" start="927" end="953" title="IBM Future Systems project" label="IBM Future Systems project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523743" start="969" end="987" title="single-level store" label="single-level store"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="1000" end="1009" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969004" start="1136" end="1157" title="IBM Rochester" label="IBM&amp;#x27;s laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q486479" start="1161" end="1170" title="Rochester, Minnesota" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q750180" start="1529" end="1537" title="System/3" label="System/3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632504" start="1649" end="1658" title="System/32" label="System/32"/>
<link wikidata="Q268418" start="1671" end="1680" title="System/34" label="System/34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428568" start="1701" end="1710" title="System/36" label="System/36"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137400" start="1855" end="1865" title="IBM AS/400" label="IBM AS/400"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="1989" end="1996" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653074" start="2490" end="2498" title="IBM 5250" label="IBM 5250"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="2669" end="2692" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249323" start="2804" end="2816" title="Schottky TTL" label="Schottky TTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="2817" end="2820" title="Large-scale integration" label="LSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="2881" end="2903" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255045" start="2915" end="2928" title="demand paging" label="demand paging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523743" start="2973" end="2991" title="single-level store" label="single-level store"/>
<link wikidata="Q959339" start="3036" end="3042" title="48-bit computing" label="48-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="3101" end="3107" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="3192" end="3198" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="3320" end="3327" title="System console" label="console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653074" start="3444" end="3448" title="IBM 5250" label="5250"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="3822" end="3842" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q285614" start="4393" end="4407" title="P-code machine" label="P-code machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287075" start="4507" end="4559" title="binary translation" label="translated into the processor&amp;#x27;s instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637561" start="5209" end="5214" title="IBM i" label="IBM i"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="5522" end="5531" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="5583" end="5589" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309357" start="5793" end="5808" title="register–memory architecture" label="register-memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="5823" end="5851" title="instruction set architecture" label="instruction set architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q669106" start="6277" end="6290" title="control store" label="control store"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="6716" end="6721" title="PL/MP" label="PL/MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969041" start="7637" end="7659" title="System Support Program" label="System Support Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q380104" start="8149" end="8166" title="Midrange computer" label="Midrange computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="8177" end="8203" title="database management system" label="database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q263490" start="8330" end="8346" title="Control Language" label="Control Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="8383" end="8395" title="shell script" label="shell script"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="8405" end="8413" title="Compiler" label="compiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187908" start="8427" end="8435" title="Native mode" label="natively"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="9679" end="9691" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187906" start="10086" end="10099" title="profit margin" label="profit margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="10328" end="10338" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="10353" end="10382" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="10545" end="10548" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621448" start="10595" end="10599" title="IBM 9370" label="9370"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10651" end="10669" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294648" wikidata="Q93130" url="?curid=294648" title="Frank Soltis">
<text>Frank Gerald Soltis (born 1940), is an American computer scientist. He joined IBM Rochester in 1969, and is most well known for his contributions to the System/38 and IBM AS/400 architectures, in particular - the design of the single-level store used in those platforms, and the RS64 processor architecture. He retired from IBM in 2008 upon the merger of the System i and System p product lines into IBM Power Systems. Prior to his retirement, he held the title of Chief Scientist at IBM.

==Career==
In 1968, Soltis completed his PhD in electrical engineering from Iowa State University. His PhD dissertation was titled &quot;Automatic Allocation of Digital Computer Storage Resources for Time-sharing&quot;.

In November 1968, he took a position with IBM in Rochester, Minnesota. Soltis led the design of the &quot;Amazon&quot; instruction set architecture, an extended version of the 64-bit PowerPC architecture; the Amazon architecture is implemented by the RS64, POWER4, and POWER5 processors used in the IBM iSeries and pSeries computers.

In the 1990s and early 2000s, in addition to his IBM responsibilities, Soltis served as an adjunct professor of electrical engineering at the University of Minnesota where he taught graduate courses on high performance computer design.

Soltis retired from IBM on December 31, 2008 after 40 years with the company.

In February 2009, Vision Solutions announced that Soltis had joined their Technology Advisory Board.

Soltis&#x27; &quot;By Design&quot; column appears in iPro Developer magazine.
His books include &quot;Inside the AS/400&quot; and &quot;Fortress Rochester, The Inside Story of the IBM iSeries&quot;.

==Books==
*Soltis, Frank G. (1997). &quot;Inside the AS/400&quot;, Duke Press. 
*Soltis, Frank G. (2001). &quot;Fortress Rochester: the Inside Story of the IBM iSeries&quot;, NEWS/400 Books. 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93130" start="0" end="19" title="Frank Soltis" label="Frank Gerald Soltis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="48" end="66" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969004" start="78" end="91" title="IBM Rochester" label="IBM Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q466308" start="153" end="162" title="System/38" label="System/38"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137400" start="167" end="177" title="IBM AS/400" label="IBM AS/400"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523743" start="227" end="245" title="single-level store" label="single-level store"/>
<link wikidata="Q925376" start="279" end="283" title="RS64" label="RS64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928207" start="372" end="380" title="System p" label="System p"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040857" start="400" end="417" title="IBM Power Systems" label="IBM Power Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="531" end="534" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="566" end="587" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q486479" start="760" end="780" title="Rochester, Minnesota" label="Rochester, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="830" end="858" title="instruction set architecture" label="instruction set architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="887" end="893" title="64-bit" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="894" end="901" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q925376" start="962" end="966" title="RS64" label="RS64"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468681" start="968" end="974" title="POWER4" label="POWER4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291202" start="980" end="986" title="POWER5" label="POWER5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928207" start="1026" end="1033" title="pSeries" label="pSeries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1137" end="1154" title="Professors in the United States#Adjunct professor" label="adjunct professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="1158" end="1180" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="1188" end="1211" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294653" wikidata="Q361542" url="?curid=294653" title="Mengzi">
<text>Mengzi may refer to:

*Mencius (孟子), 372–289 BCE, Chinese philosopher
**Mencius (book), a collection of anecdotes and conversations of the philosopher Mencius
*Mengzi City (蒙自), Yunnan, China</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="23" end="30" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195444" start="72" end="86" title="Mencius (book)" label="Mencius (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201056" start="160" end="171" title="Mengzi City" label="Mengzi City"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294654" wikidata="Q200751" url="?curid=294654" title="Pixilation">
<text>Pixilation is a stop motion technique in which live actors are used as a frame-by-frame subject in an animated film, by repeatedly posing while one or more frame is taken and changing pose slightly before the next frame or frames. This technique is often used as a way to blend live actors with animated ones in a movie.

Early examples of this technique are included in Segundo de Chomón&#x27;s &quot;Cuisine magnétique&quot; and &quot;Hôtel électrique&quot;, both from 1908, and Émile Cohl&#x27;s 1911 movie &quot;Jobard ne peut pas voir les femmes travailler&quot; (&quot;Jobard cannot see the women working&quot;).

The term is widely credited to Grant Munro (although some say it was Norman McLaren) and he made an experimental movie named &quot;Pixillation&quot;, available in his DVD collection &quot;Cut Up – The Films of Grant Munro.&quot;

==Films==
* Norman McLaren&#x27;s Oscar-winner &quot;Neighbours&quot;, &quot;A Chairy Tale&quot; (1957) and &quot;Two Bagatelles&quot; 
* Chuck Menville and Len Janson&#x27;s trilogy of pixilated short films &quot;Stop Look and Listen&quot; – 1967, &quot;Blaze Glory&quot; (1968) and &quot;Sergeant Swell of the Mounties&quot; (1972), along with their sequence in &quot;Daffy Duck and Porky Pig Meet the Groovie Goolies&quot; (1972)
* Mike Jittlov&#x27;s short &quot;The Wizard of Speed and Time&quot; (1979). Jittlov made a feature film with many pixilation sequences, also titled &quot;The Wizard of Speed and Time&quot; (1989), based on the making of the original short.
* &quot;Monsieur Pointu&quot; (1975)
* Jan Kounen&#x27;s Gisele Kerozene (1989)
* &quot;&quot; (1989)
* Bolex Brothers&#x27; &quot;The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb&quot; (1993)
* Numerous Jan Švankmajer movies, but most notably &quot;Food&quot; (1992) and large sections of &quot;Conspirators of Pleasure&quot; (1996).
* Michael Langan&#x27;s &quot;Doxology&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Luminaris&quot;, a short film by Juan Pablo Zaramella (2011)
* &quot;Western Spaghetti&quot; and the Academy Award-nominated &quot;Fresh Guacamole&quot; (2012) by PES utilize pixilation.
* Glenn Barit&#x27;s &quot;Cleaners&quot; (2019) utilize pixilation in black-and-white with intrusion of colour through clothing.

==Television shows==
* &quot;Angry Kid&quot;
* &quot;Sesame Street&quot; (&quot;Milo Counting&quot;, &quot;Ordering a Pizza&quot;, &quot;George the Farmer&quot;)
* &quot;The Goodies&quot;
* &quot;Rex the Runt&quot;
* &quot;The Flash&quot; (1990 TV series)

==Music videos==
* &quot;All the Way to Heaven&quot; by Doug E. Fresh and The Get Fresh Crew
* &quot;And She Was&quot; by Talking Heads
* &quot;Baby C&#x27;mon&quot; by Stephen Malkmus
* &quot;Be Near Me&quot; by ABC
* &quot;Big Time&quot; by Peter Gabriel
* &quot;The Box&quot; by Orbital
* &quot;Bridge to Your Heart&quot; by Wax
* &quot;Cold&quot; by Tears for Fears
* &quot;Consolation Prizes&quot; by Phoenix
* &quot;End Love&quot; by OK Go
* &quot;The End of the World&quot; by The Cure
* &quot;Every Teardrop Is A Waterfall&quot; by Coldplay
* &quot;Fix&quot; by Jean-Paul De Roover
* &quot;The Hardest Button to Button&quot; by The White Stripes
* &quot;Heard &#x27;Em Say&quot; by Kanye West
* &quot;Hello Again&quot; by The Cars
* &quot;Her Morning Elegance&quot; by Oren Lavie
* &quot;I Stay Away&quot; by Alice in Chains
* &quot;In Your Arms&quot; by Kina Grannis
* &quot;Is That It&quot; by Katrina &amp; The Waves
* &quot;Lame Claim to Fame&quot; by &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic
* &quot;Last Dance&quot; by George Clinton
* &quot;Les Tartines&quot; by Sttellla
* &quot;Long Gone&quot; by Fat City Reprise
* &quot;Ma Che Discorsi&quot; by Daniele Silvestri
* &quot;Now You See Her&quot; by Crash Test Dummies
* &quot;Paralyzed&quot; by The Used
* &quot;Point of No Return&quot; by Nu Shooz
* &quot;Rhythm of Love&quot; by Yes
* &quot;Road to Nowhere&quot; by Talking Heads
* &quot;Sex Machine&quot; by The Fat Boys
* &quot;Shopping Trolley&quot; by Beth Orton
* &quot;Sledgehammer&quot; by Peter Gabriel 
* &quot;Strawberry Swing&quot; by Coldplay
* &quot;There There&quot; by Radiohead
* &quot;Time Won&#x27;t Let Me Go&quot; by The Bravery
* &quot;Vermilion&quot; by Slipknot

Quebec band Les Colocs and Michel Gondry used pixilation in many of their music videos.

Of note, &quot;Leave Me Alone&quot; by Michael Jackson utilises a variation on this technique by slowing down the frame rate of video and overlaying objects to achieve the distinctive pixilation look to great effect.

==Others==
The pixilation technique was also used for the opening of &quot;Claymation&quot;, Will Vinton&#x27;s 1978, 17-minute documentary about his animation studio&#x27;s production techniques, the first time the famous trademarked &quot;Claymation&quot; term was used, now a term synonymous with all clay animation.

The Czech animator Jan Švankmajer uses pixilation in most of his work; most notably &quot;Food&quot;.

Jan Kounen&#x27;s &quot;Gisele Kerozene&quot; (1989), a short film that shows witches riding around a city on broomsticks, is another influential example of this technique.

Pixilation is also used in Andrew Huang&#x27;s short video &quot;Fluxis&quot;.

An effect similar to pixilation can be achieved by dropping occasional frames from a conventionally recorded movie. While obviously easier than the stop-frame technique, this does not achieve the same quality.

==References==
==External links==
* Watch &quot;A Chairy Tale&quot;, &quot;Neighbours&quot;, and &quot;Monsieur Pointu&quot; at the National Film Board of Canada
* &quot;Spin&quot; award-winning pixilation short film by Dustball and André Nguyen (4:13)
* &quot;Fuerte&quot; Malacate&#x27;s pixilation music video by Sebastián Baptista (3:13)
* &quot;Paranoiaparadise&quot; some pixilation cut to house music (0:36)
* &quot;Leap Of Faith&quot; Voice of Apollo&#x27;s pixilation music video by the band (5:41)
* &quot;Mirage&quot; surreal animated dance utilizing the pixilation technique by Joel Fletcher and Mark Danel, 1981 (4:49)
* &#x27;The Hunter Pixilation Project&#x27;
* &quot;Two Gentlemen of Honour&quot; slapstick short film utilizing pixilation, 2012 (3:21)
* &quot;Giant Pencil Animation&quot; short video with pixilation of a woman drawing with an oversized pencil</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200751" start="0" end="10" title="Pixilation" label="Pixilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="16" end="27" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="102" end="110" title="animation" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q795160" start="156" end="161" title="Frame (film)" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q965654" start="371" end="388" title="Segundo de Chomón" label="Segundo de Chomón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248410" start="437" end="453" title="El hotel eléctrico" label="Hôtel électrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q275011" start="481" end="491" title="Émile Cohl" label="Émile Cohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596368" start="651" end="662" title="Grant Munro (filmmaker)" label="Grant Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q716552" start="689" end="703" title="Norman McLaren" label="Norman McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q716552" start="862" end="876" title="Norman McLaren" label="Norman McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562390" start="903" end="913" title="Neighbours (1952 film)" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148578" start="927" end="940" title="A Chairy Tale" label="A Chairy Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967602" start="988" end="1002" title="Chuck Menville" label="Chuck Menville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521832" start="1007" end="1017" title="Len Janson" label="Len Janson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15849346" start="1064" end="1084" title="Stop Look and Listen (film)" label="Stop Look and Listen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967602" start="1105" end="1116" title="Blaze Glory" label="Blaze Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453403" start="1140" end="1170" title="Sergeant Swell of the Mounties" label="Sergeant Swell of the Mounties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208333" start="1220" end="1269" title="Daffy Duck and Porky Pig Meet the Groovie Goolies" label="Daffy Duck and Porky Pig Meet the Groovie Goolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847402" start="1285" end="1297" title="Mike Jittlov" label="Mike Jittlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q121515150" start="1317" end="1345" title="The Wizard of Speed and Time" label="The Wizard of Speed and Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627858" start="1532" end="1547" title="Monsieur Pointu (film)" label="Monsieur Pointu"/>
<link wikidata="Q716398" start="1563" end="1573" title="Jan Kounen" label="Jan Kounen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939388" start="1628" end="1642" title="Bolex Brothers" label="Bolex Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450020" start="1655" end="1689" title="The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb" label="The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q316165" start="1714" end="1728" title="Jan Švankmajer" label="Jan Švankmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q626981" start="1760" end="1764" title="Food (film)" label="Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760571" start="1806" end="1830" title="Conspirators of Pleasure" label="Conspirators of Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223224" start="1847" end="1861" title="Michael Langan" label="Michael Langan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113258" start="1905" end="1914" title="Luminaris" label="Luminaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696668" start="2036" end="2051" title="Fresh Guacamole" label="Fresh Guacamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823988" start="2068" end="2071" title="PES (director)" label="PES"/>
<link wikidata="Q124816331" start="2119" end="2127" title="Cleaners (2019 film)" label="Cleaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="2163" end="2178" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q941012" start="2252" end="2261" title="Angry Kid" label="Angry Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="2276" end="2289" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987329" start="2393" end="2404" title="The Goodies (TV series)" label="The Goodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381964" start="2419" end="2431" title="Rex the Runt" label="Rex the Runt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031248" start="2440" end="2478" title="The Flash (1990 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Flash&amp;quot; (1990 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q269645" start="2536" end="2549" title="Doug E. Fresh" label="Doug E. Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753345" start="2581" end="2592" title="And She Was" label="And She Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="2602" end="2615" title="Talking Heads (band)" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q282877" start="2649" end="2664" title="Stephen Malkmus" label="Stephen Malkmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875558" start="2673" end="2683" title="Be Near Me" label="Be Near Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q287078" start="2693" end="2696" title="ABC (band)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q587020" start="2705" end="2713" title="Big Time (Peter Gabriel song)" label="Big Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="2723" end="2736" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719569" start="2745" end="2752" title="The Box (Orbital song)" label="The Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q515942" start="2762" end="2769" title="Orbital (band)" label="Orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966480" start="2778" end="2798" title="Bridge to Your Heart" label="Bridge to Your Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142178" start="2820" end="2824" title="Cold (Tears for Fears song)" label="Cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q269091" start="2834" end="2849" title="Tears for Fears" label="Tears for Fears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163242" start="2858" end="2876" title="Consolation Prizes" label="Consolation Prizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045752" start="2886" end="2893" title="Phoenix (band)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888689" start="2902" end="2910" title="End Love" label="End Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q736107" start="2920" end="2925" title="OK Go" label="OK Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715133" start="2934" end="2954" title="The End of the World (The Cure song)" label="The End of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="2964" end="2972" title="The Cure" label="The Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="3020" end="3028" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642226" start="3078" end="3106" title="The Hardest Button to Button" label="The Hardest Button to Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="3116" end="3133" title="The White Stripes" label="The White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446593" start="3142" end="3160" title="Heard &amp;#x27;Em Say" label="Heard &amp;#x27;Em Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="3170" end="3180" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708605" start="3189" end="3200" title="Hello Again (The Cars song)" label="Hello Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q858388" start="3210" end="3218" title="The Cars" label="The Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q532331" start="3227" end="3247" title="Her Morning Elegance" label="Her Morning Elegance"/>
<link wikidata="Q532331" start="3257" end="3267" title="Oren Lavie" label="Oren Lavie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324264" start="3276" end="3287" title="I Stay Away" label="I Stay Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="3297" end="3312" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q271893" start="3343" end="3355" title="Kina Grannis" label="Kina Grannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q934582" start="3384" end="3407" title="Katrina &amp;amp; The Waves" label="Katrina &amp;amp; The Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="3444" end="3473" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336272" start="3502" end="3516" title="George Clinton (funk musician)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500766" start="3547" end="3555" title="Sttellla" label="Sttellla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437184" start="3583" end="3599" title="Fat City Reprise" label="Fat City Reprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q743425" start="3633" end="3650" title="Daniele Silvestri" label="Daniele Silvestri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879119" start="3659" end="3674" title="Now You See Her" label="Now You See Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q277715" start="3684" end="3702" title="Crash Test Dummies" label="Crash Test Dummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296088" start="3711" end="3720" title="Paralyzed (The Used song)" label="Paralyzed"/>
<link wikidata="Q847970" start="3730" end="3738" title="The Used" label="The Used"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208237" start="3747" end="3765" title="Point of No Return (Nu Shooz song)" label="Point of No Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543967" start="3775" end="3783" title="Nu Shooz" label="Nu Shooz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248941" start="3792" end="3806" title="Rhythm of Love (Yes song)" label="Rhythm of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="3816" end="3819" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339545" start="3828" end="3843" title="Road to Nowhere" label="Road to Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="3853" end="3866" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3875" end="3886" title="Get Up (I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine#Covers" label="Sex Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q775830" start="3896" end="3908" title="The Fat Boys" label="The Fat Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501208" start="3917" end="3933" title="Shopping Trolley" label="Shopping Trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q465296" start="3943" end="3953" title="Beth Orton" label="Beth Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q593978" start="3962" end="3974" title="Sledgehammer (Peter Gabriel song)" label="Sledgehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="3984" end="3997" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004401" start="4007" end="4023" title="Strawberry Swing" label="Strawberry Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="4033" end="4041" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q728237" start="4050" end="4061" title="There There" label="There There"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="4071" end="4080" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805235" start="4089" end="4114" title="Time Won&amp;#x27;t Let Me Go" label="Time Won&amp;#x27;t Let Me Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q286364" start="4124" end="4135" title="The Bravery" label="The Bravery"/>
<link wikidata="Q428583" start="4144" end="4153" title="Vermilion (song)" label="Vermilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q254138" start="4163" end="4171" title="Slipknot (band)" label="Slipknot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143294" start="4185" end="4195" title="Les Colocs" label="Les Colocs"/>
<link wikidata="Q126098" start="4200" end="4213" title="Michel Gondry" label="Michel Gondry"/>
<link wikidata="Q750373" start="4277" end="4291" title="Leave Me Alone (Michael Jackson song)" label="Leave Me Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="4301" end="4316" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q973687" start="4573" end="4584" title="Will Vinton" label="Will Vinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="4784" end="4798" title="clay animation" label="clay animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="4805" end="4810" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q316165" start="4820" end="4834" title="Jan Švankmajer" label="Jan Švankmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q626981" start="4891" end="4895" title="Food (film)" label="Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q716398" start="4904" end="4914" title="Jan Kounen" label="Jan Kounen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125256" start="5105" end="5124" title="Andrew Huang (musician)" label="Andrew Huang&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="5501" end="5530" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="National Film Board of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294656" wikidata="Q335057" url="?curid=294656" title="Andrology">
<text>Andrology (from , &quot;anēr&quot;, genitive , &quot;andros&quot; &#x27;man&#x27; and , &quot;-logia&quot;) is a name for the medical specialty that deals with male health, particularly relating to the problems of the male reproductive system and urological problems that are unique to men. It is the parallel to gynecology, which deals with medical issues which are specific to female health, especially reproductive and urologic health.

== Process ==
Andrology covers anomalies in the connective tissues pertaining to the genitalia, as well as changes in the volume of cells, such as in genital hypertrophy or macrogenitosomia.

From reproductive and urologic viewpoints, male-specific medical and surgical procedures include vasectomy, vasovasostomy (one of the vasectomy reversal procedures), orchidopexy, circumcision, sperm/semen cryopreservation, surgical sperm retrieval, semen analysis (for fertility or post-vasectomy), sperm preparation for assisted reproductive technology (ART) as well as intervention to deal with male genitourinary disorders such as the following:
== History ==
Unlike gynaecology, which has a plethora of medical board certification programs worldwide, andrology has none. Andrology has only been studied as a distinct specialty since the late 1960s: the first specialist journal on the subject was the German periodical &quot;Andrologie&quot; (now called &quot;Andrologia&quot;), published from 1969 onwards. The next specialty journal covering both the basic and clinical andrology was the &quot;International Journal of Andrology&quot;, established in 1978, which became the official journal of the European Academy of Andrology in 1992. In 1980 the American Society of Andrology launched the &quot;Journal of Andrology&quot;. In 2012, these two society journals merged into one premier journal in the field, named &quot;Andrology&quot;, with the first issue published in January 2013.

== See also ==
* Men&#x27;s health
* Reproductive health
* Urology

== References ==
== External links ==
* American Society of Andrology
* European Academy of Andrology
* British Andrology Society
* International Society of Andrology
* Andrology Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335057" start="0" end="9" title="Andrology" label="Andrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="36" end="44" title="genitive" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q158653" start="94" end="100" title="-logy" label="-logia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="126" end="143" title="medicine" label="medical specialty"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="160" end="164" title="male" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q842083" start="218" end="242" title="male reproductive system" label="male reproductive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105650" start="247" end="257" title="urology" label="urological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8441" start="286" end="289" title="men" label="men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221899" start="313" end="323" title="gynecology" label="gynecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="701" end="720" title="surgery" label="surgical procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q690838" start="729" end="738" title="vasectomy" label="vasectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106091" start="740" end="753" title="vasovasostomy" label="vasovasostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759591" start="798" end="809" title="orchidopexy" label="orchidopexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="811" end="823" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449215" start="831" end="853" title="semen cryopreservation" label="semen cryopreservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25862" start="953" end="985" title="assisted reproductive technology" label="assisted reproductive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667990" start="1396" end="1406" title="Andrologia" label="Andrologia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141483" start="1941" end="1958" title="Men&amp;#x27;s health" label="Men&amp;#x27;s health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="1961" end="1980" title="Reproductive health" label="Reproductive health"/>
<link wikidata="Q105650" start="1983" end="1990" title="Urology" label="Urology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294664" wikidata="Q464650" url="?curid=294664" title="Faye Wong">
<text>Faye Wong (; pinyin: &quot;Wáng Fēi&quot;; born on 8 August 1969) is a Chinese singer-songwriter and actress. Early in her career she briefly used the stage name Shirley Wong (). Born in Beijing, she moved to British Hong Kong at the age of 18. She debuted with the Cantonese album &quot;Shirley Wong&quot; in 1989 and came to public attention by combining alternative music with mainstream Chinese pop. Later in her career, Wong has recorded mostly in her native Mandarin, with some songs in English, Japanese, and Sanskrit.

One of the biggest pop stars in the Chinese-speaking world, Wong has also gained followings in Japan and Southeast Asia. In the West she is perhaps best known for starring in Wong Kar-wai&#x27;s films &quot;Chungking Express&quot; (1994) and &quot;2046&quot; (2004). Upon her second marriage in 2005, she withdrew from the limelight, though she has sporadically returned to the stage.

Wong is known to be a &quot;diva with few words&quot; in public, and has gained a reputation for her &quot;cool&quot; personality. In &quot;Encyclopedia of Contemporary Chinese Culture&quot;, Jeroen de Kloet characterised her as &quot;singer, actress, mother, celebrity, royalty, sex symbol and diva all at the same time&quot;. In 2000, she was recognised by Guinness World Records as the best selling Cantopop female artist, having sold an estimated 9.7 million copies of her albums by March 2000.

== Early life ==
Wong was born at Peking Union Medical College Hospital in Dongcheng District, Beijing in the midst of the Cultural Revolution. Her father was Wang Youlin (王佑林), a mining engineer and second son of Wang Zhaomin aka Wang Molin (王兆民; 王墨林) (1901–1985), member of the Legislative Yuan of the Republic of China. Wang Youlin had been parentally betrothed to Li Min (李珉), sister of Taiwanese writer Li Ao, but when Wang Zhaomin left for Taiwan upon the Communist takeover, Wang Youlin, then a left-leaning college student, stayed in mainland China and later wed Xia Guiying (夏桂影), a revolutionary music soprano with China Coal Mine Art Troupe, who would be Wong&#x27;s mother. Wong had a brother named Wang Yi (王弋), who was two years older than her and passed away in his fifties due to illness.

Wong grew up in the Qingniangou area near Andingmen, where the residential communities affiliated with the coal mining industry were situated. She attended Ditan Primary School, where she served as the class&#x27;s arts and cultural coordinator. She then attended the Beijing No. 145 Middle School, before transferring to Beijing Dongzhimen Middle School. In 1987, she was admitted to the Biology Department of Xiamen University through the national college entrance exam but chose to move to Hong Kong instead.

== Music career ==

=== 1985–1988: Beginnings ===
As a student, Wong already was involved in singing and attracted interest from several publishers. On occasions, the school had to hide her artistic activities from her strict mother, who as a professional saw singing as a dead-end career. Despite her mother&#x27;s opposition, Wong released 6 low-cost cover albums from 1985 to 1987 while still in high school, all in the form of cassettes, mostly consisting of songs by her personal idol, iconic Taiwanese singer Teresa Teng. For the last of these early recordings, the producer Wei Yuanqiang chose the title &quot;Wong Fei Collection&quot;, intending to show that he recognised a distinctive talent in the teenager.

In 1987, after being accepted to Xiamen University to study biology, she migrated to Hong Kong to join her father, who had been working there for a few years. The plan was for her to stay there for a year to fulfill the permanent residency requirement, and go to a university abroad thereafter. However, since Wong did not know a word of Cantonese, the language spoken in Hong Kong, she experienced great loneliness. Following a brief modeling stint, she began taking singing lessons as a distraction with Tai See-Chung (戴思聰), an Indonesian-born Chinese who had gone to school in Mainland China before tutoring Hong Kong superstars Anita Mui, Andy Lau, Leon Lai and Aaron Kwok. With Tai&#x27;s recommendation, the 19-year-old signed with Cinepoly Records after winning third place in an ABU singing contest in 1988. It was not only an unplanned move on the part of Wong, since her mother disapproved of a singing career, but also a risky move on the part of Chan Siu-Bo (陳小寶), Cinepoly&#x27;s general manager, since Mainlanders were stereotyped as &quot;backwards&quot; in Hong Kong.

=== 1989–1991: the Shirley Wong period ===
At the request of Cinepoly, Wong picked one of the &quot;sophisticated&quot; stage names offered by the company, Wong Jing Man, with an English name Shirley,&quot; to replace her &quot;Mainland-sounding&quot; name. In 1989, her debut album &quot;Shirley Wong&quot; sold 25,000 copies and won her bronze at the &quot;Chik Chak New Artist Award&quot;. Two more albums (&quot;Everything&quot; and &quot;You&#x27;re the Only One&quot;) followed, similarly featuring many cover songs by artists from the US and Japan. They sold 10,000 copies each, despite relentless promotions by the company. Many in Hong Kong perceived her to be &quot;backwards&quot;, lacking personality.

At the time, both Wong and her then-agent Leslie Chan (陳健添) were in conflicts with Cinepoly under Chan Siu-Bo&#x27;s successor Lal Dayaram (林振業). Leslie Chan then sold Wong&#x27;s contract for 2 million HKD to Taiwanese singer Lo Ta-yu. Under the arrangement of Lo, who founded Music Factory in 1990 (later becoming the Hong Kong subsidiary of Rock Records), Wong went to the United States for professional training at the end of 1991. She initially went to Los Angeles with plans to learn keyboards, but missed the class registration deadline. She then moved to New York, living with Wawa, another new artist signed by Lo, at the house of Lo&#x27;s sister, Jennifer, in Flushing. Wong attended classes at the Barbizon School, the Martha Graham School and with personal singing tutors for about two months. In 1996, she explained New York&#x27;s influence on her:

Even though Wong found the experience enlightening, her less than tactful communication led Lo to decide to end the contract with her by the time she returned to Hong Kong. The two never collaborated or shared the stage thereafter. With the help of her teacher Tai See-Chung, Wong found a new agent in Katie Chan (陳家瑛), who has remained her agent as well as her daughter&#x27;s ever since.

=== 1992–1995: &quot;Coming Home&quot;, &quot;No Regrets&quot;, &quot;100,000 Whys&quot;, &quot;Random Thoughts&quot;, &quot;Mystery&quot;, &quot;Sky&quot;, &quot;Decadent Sounds of Faye&quot; and &quot;Di-Dar&quot; ===
The 1992 album &quot;Coming Home,&quot; the first release since her return from New York, prominently featured on the cover her new English name &quot;Faye&quot;, a homophone to her given Chinese name, and the Chinese character &quot;Jing&quot;, a reference to her hometown Beijing. From then on she changed her stage name back to &quot;Wang Fei&quot; (). &quot;Coming Home&quot; incorporated R&amp;B influences and was a change in musical direction from the more traditional Cantopop fare of her earlier albums. &quot;Coming Home&quot; also included her first English-language number, &quot;Kisses in the Wind&quot;. Wong stated in a 1994 concert that she very much liked this song, after which various websites listed it as her personal favourite; however, in a 1998 CNN interview she declined to name one favourite song, saying that there were too many, and in 2003 she stated that she no longer liked her old songs.

One of the songs on &quot;Coming Home&quot;, &quot;Fragile Woman&quot; (容易受傷的女人), a cover of a Japanese song &quot;Rouge&quot; originally composed by Miyuki Nakajima and sung by Naomi Chiaki, became Wong&#x27;s first hit after being featured in the popular TVB drama &quot;The Greed of Man&quot; (1992). (Thanks to Wong&#x27;s cover, this 1972 song—in different language versions—would in the early 1990s become a huge regional hit in Thailand, Vietnam, the rest of Southeast Asia and even Turkey; the most popular English version was titled &quot;Broken-Hearted Woman&quot;.) The favourable reception of &quot;Fragile Woman&quot; led Wong to abandon her original plans to return to Los Angeles to continue her studies. Instead, she stayed in Hong Kong to build on her newfound success.

In February 1993, she wrote the Mandarin lyrics for her ballad &quot;No Regrets&quot; (執迷不悔) which led many to praise her as a gifted lyricist. In February, it became the title track to her album &quot;No Regrets&quot;. &quot;No Regrets&quot; features soft contemporary numbers, a few dance tracks and two versions of the title ballad: Wong&#x27;s Mandarin version, and a Cantonese version (lyrics by Keith Chan). In September 1993, her next album &quot;100,000 Whys&quot; showed considerable alternative music influences from the West, including the popular song &quot;Cold War&quot; (冷戰), a cover of &quot;Silent All These Years&quot; by Tori Amos. In 1992–93 she also appeared in TVB shows such as &quot;File of Justice II&quot; and &quot;Legendary Ranger&quot;.

Wong has named the Scottish post-punk group Cocteau Twins among her favourite bands, and their influence was clear on her next Cantonese album, &quot;Random Thoughts&quot;. Her Cantonese version of The Cranberries&#x27; &quot;Dreams&quot; was featured in Wong Kar-wai&#x27;s film &quot;Chungking Express&quot;, and gained lasting popularity. Besides covering songs and learning distinctive vocal techniques, Wong recorded her own compositions: &quot;Pledge&quot; (誓言), co-written with her then-boyfriend (and later husband), Beijing rock star Dou Wei, as well as her first and only spoken-word song &quot;Exit&quot; (出路). The latter is a rare window into her outlook on life, including her worries about her future marriage with Dou, her conversion to Buddhism, her self-criticism, and her cynicism about the show business.

Besides two Cantonese albums in 1994, Wong released two other albums in Mandarin in Taiwan, &quot;Mystery&quot; and &quot;Sky,&quot; which propelled her to fame in the Mandarin-speaking world. The song &quot;I&#x27;m Willing&quot; (我願意) in &quot;Mystery&quot; would become her trademark Mandopop song till this day, and has been covered by other singers such as Gigi Leung, Sammi Cheng and Jay Chou. &quot;Sky&quot; was seen by fans as a successful amalgam of artistic experimentation and commercialism. While her hits in Hong Kong were noticeably alternative, her two Mandarin albums were more lyrical and traditional. Critics generally credit Taiwanese producer Yang Ming-huang (楊明煌) for their success.

With four best-selling albums in Cantonese and Mandarin and a record-breaking 18 consecutive concerts in Hong Kong, Wong had established herself as a diva, or &quot;heavenly queen&quot; (天后) as she is commonly known in the Chinese world, by the mid-1990s. Meanwhile, her distaste for Hong Kong&#x27;s entertainment industry and media environment only grew. She was frequently in touch with the Beijing rock scene, where Dou Wei was a leading light and whose influence distinguished her from the mainstream pop music in Hong Kong.

In 1995, she released &quot;Decadent Sounds of Faye&quot;, a cover album of songs originally recorded by her idol Teresa Teng (whose songs had been banned during Wong&#x27;s formative years in mainland China for being &quot;decadent sounds&quot; from Taiwan). A duet with Teng was planned for the album, but she died before this could be recorded. &quot;Decadent Sounds&quot; sold well despite initial negative criticism, and has come to be recognised as an example of imaginative covering by recent critics.

Faye Wong and Dou Wei were the winner and the runner-up to the 1995 MTV International Viewer&#x27;s Choice Award, with the music videos &quot;Chess&quot; and &quot;Black Dream&quot; respectively. In December, she released her Cantonese album &quot;Di-Dar&quot; which mixes an alternative yodelling style with a touch of Indian and Middle Eastern flavour. This album was a success, partly because it was so different from the mainstream Cantopop music, but—ironically—a couple of very traditional romantic songs topped the charts.

=== 1996: &quot;Fuzao&quot; and Cinepoly extended plays ===
1996 saw the release of what many would consider her boldest and most artistically coherent effort to date, &quot;Fuzao&quot;, usually translated as &quot;Restless&quot; or &quot;Impatience&quot;. This was her last album with Cinepoly, and Wong felt she could take more artistic risks. The album contains mainly her own compositions, with an aesthetic inspired by the Cocteau Twins, who penned two original songs for the album, &quot;Fracture&quot; (分裂) and &quot;Spoilsport&quot; (掃興). As Wong had covered their work in 1994, she had established a remote working relationship with them—even laying down vocals for a special duet version of &quot;Serpentskirt&quot; on the Asian release of the group&#x27;s 1996 album &quot;Milk &amp; Kisses&quot;.

Although the album was Wong&#x27;s personal favourite, the response from Hong Kong and Taiwan was less supportive. Many fans who enjoyed her previous three Mandarin albums turned their back on &quot;Restless&quot;, which they considered to be too alternative and self-absorbed. There were few ballads which were radio-friendly and some became disenchanted with her experimental style of recording. However, hardcore fans, known as Fayenatics, adored the album and it became a cult hit. Wong has not released another fully artistic album since. After the release, Wong became the second Chinese artist (after Gong Li)—and the first Chinese singer—to be featured on the cover of &quot;Time&quot; magazine.

From 1993 to 1995, Cinepoly released an EP of Wong&#x27;s songs each year: &quot;Like Wind&quot; (如風), &quot;Faye Disc&quot; (菲碟) and &quot;One Person, Two Roles&quot;. Then in 1996–97, she recorded ten original songs in Cantonese, all written by lyricist Albert Leung and various composers, such as Wong Ka Keung, Adrian Chan and Chan Xiao Xia, before her departure from Cinepoly. After her contract with Cinepoly expired, the company released eight of these songs in the two subsequent EPs entitled &quot;Toy&quot; (玩具) and &quot;Help Yourself&quot; (自便). Although the EPs contained new songs—ballad hits like &quot;Undercurrent&quot; (暗湧), &quot;Date&quot; (約定) and &quot;On Time&quot; (守時)—and were welcomed by fans, they received lukewarm critical responses. The other two songs were included in later compilations; the last to be released was &quot;Scary&quot; (心驚膽顫) in 2002.

=== 1997–1998: &quot;Faye Wong&quot; and &quot;Sing and Play&quot; ===
Wong signed for the recording giant EMI in 1997 after her first daughter was born, in a contract worth HK$60 million (approx. US$7.7 million), to release 55 songs in five albums. While most of her earlier albums were in Cantonese, Wong has since sung more in Mandarin, her mother tongue. Having gone through a period of experimentation, Wong stated that she wished to make &quot;music that I like. I do not care if others don&#x27;t, though I would be delighted if they do&quot;.

Her first album with EMI was &quot;Faye Wong&quot; (王菲 1997), released in autumn 1997. Critics expecting another artistic breakthrough after 1996&#x27;s &quot;Restlessness&quot; found—much to their dismay—a much more inoffensive and commercially oriented musical album. Simon Raymonde and Robin Guthrie of the Cocteau Twins wrote two original compositions for the album, but only one, &quot;The Amusement Park&quot; (娛樂場), was used. This release included an acoustic cover of the Cocteau Twins&#x27; &quot;Rilkean Heart&quot;, renamed &quot;Nostalgia&quot; (懷念).

This album is filled with feelings of lethargy, languor and disengagement, yet most of the tracks sound warm and sweet, as opposed to those piquant self-centered ones before her motherhood. Reporters noticed that she began to smile more often in public and was not as icy or aloof as before. However, the album was released during the Asian financial crisis which swept East and Southeast Asia. Wong&#x27;s former company Cinepoly, which retains the copyright on her previous records, released a Mandarin compilation at the same time in 1997 to counteract her new EMI album (and indeed outperformed it). Later, Cinepoly would release two compilations each year to compete with Wong&#x27;s new releases, a tactic which has come under fire from her international fans. &quot;Faye Wong&quot; did not sell well in Hong Kong, but did quite well in Taiwan and mainland China. Although Wong had garnered some popularity with her 4 previous Mandarin albums, it was really this sweet yet slightly alternative album which had the mainland Chinese audience listening. Her profile began to rise sharply in Asia.

In 1997, singer Na Ying signed with EMI and struck a lasting friendship with Wong. Na had been a regular at the annual &quot;CCTV New Year&#x27;s Gala&quot;, the most-watched TV show in mainland China and the world, and she invited Wong to do a duet with her on the upcoming show in 1998. The collaboration by the &quot;Mainland Diva&quot; and &quot;Hong Kong Diva&quot;, titled &quot;Let&#x27;s Meet in 1998&quot; (相約一九九八), became an instant hit and arguably the most played song in mainland China that year. Thanks to this exposure, in late 1998 Wong finally held her first concert in her native mainland, and continued her tour in 9 cities.

&quot;Sing and Play&quot; was released in October, and contained four songs composed by Wong: the opening track &quot;Emotional Life&quot;, &quot;Face&quot;, &quot;A Little Clever&quot; and &quot;Tong&quot; (both written for her daughter, the latter produced by Dou Wei). Amongst other songs were &quot;Give Up Halfway&quot; (sung both in Mandarin and Cantonese), which was one of the more commercially successful tracks from the album, along with the successful ballad &quot;Red Bean&quot; (紅豆). It was the best selling Chinese album in Singapore in 1999. Together with &quot;Lovers &amp; Strangers&quot; and the compilation album &quot;Wishing We Last Forever&quot;, it gave Wong 3 albums in the Singapore top 10 selling Chinese albums of 1999, making her one of the best selling artists in Singapore in 1999. In Japan, the album sold close to 90,000 copies in the first three months after its release.

=== 1999: &quot;Eyes on Me&quot; and &quot;Lovers &amp; Strangers&quot; ===
The video game &quot;Final Fantasy VIII&quot; was released in Japan in February 1999, for which Faye Wong recorded the ballad &quot;Eyes on Me&quot; in English. It was the first time that a Japanese video game featured a Chinese singer for its theme. The &quot;Eyes on Me&quot; single sold over 335,620 copies in Japan and 500,000 worldwide, making it the best-selling video game music disc to that date, and winning &quot;Song of the Year (Western Music)&quot; at the 14th Annual Japan Gold Disc Awards. When the game was released in North America later that year, the theme song became very popular among gamers in the West; while it was not a mainstream hit there (as Wong had no desire to explore these markets), she gained many fans who were not previously familiar with her music.

In March, she held two concerts in Nippon Budokan, with tickets for the first show on 11 March being sold out in one day and an extra show added on 12 March; she was the first Chinese singer to perform in that venue. Earlier in the year, Pepsi-Cola had made Wong a spokesperson, and after these concerts she shot the promotional music video for &quot;Spectacular&quot; (精彩), which Pepsi used in commercials.

The album &quot;Lovers &amp; Strangers&quot; was released in late September, and sold over 800,000 copies, topping the charts in Hong Kong, mainland China, Taiwan, Singapore and Malaysia. This was her first album after parting from Dou Wei, and her first without any musical collaborations with him since their relationship began. The title track of the album was featured in Sylvester Stallone&#x27;s remake of &quot;Get Carter&quot;. The entire album was penned by Albert Leung, who, like Wong, was suffering from a broken heart in his love life at the time. Buddhist philosophy has informed his lyrics since the album, originally as a way to console both Wong and himself. In 2022, Leung picked two of the songs, &quot;Last Blossom&quot; (開到荼靡) and &quot;One Hundred Years of Solitude&quot; (百年孤寂), as his all-time favorites over his prolific career. Wong also became a spokesperson for JPhone in October, 1999, performing in several commercials which aired in Japan.

=== 2000–2004: &quot;Fable&quot;, &quot;Faye Wong&quot; and &quot;To Love&quot; ===

The new millennium saw a shift in Wong&#x27;s musical career with the album &quot;Fable&quot;. The prominent feature of this album is its segregated and distinguishable halves—songs in the first half of the album running in an almost continuous manner and in a format that is akin to a song-cycle, and the second half of discrete, chart-friendly numbers. The album itself derives its artistic merits from the first half, notable for its unique thematic and continuous sequencing of songs unprecedented in the Chinese music industry. The theme itself is ambiguous and the lyrics subject to multiple interpretations, though it is quite certain that the theme of &quot;Fable&quot; forms the main thematic reference, derived from the motivic elements of the prince and princess in fables and fairytales of European origins. Elements of spirituality, metaphysics and Buddhism hold an important place in the lyrics as well, penned by Albert Leung who has by then, been unanimously identified as Wong&#x27;s lyricist &quot;par excellence&quot;. Musically the arrangements display influences of drum and bass, electronica, east–west collage and lush string orchestral infusions. Her other activities during this year included the Pepsi promotional duet and music video of &quot;Galaxy Unlimited&quot; with Aaron Kwok as well as several concerts in China and Taiwan.

By this time, Wong had forged a famous alliance with producer/musician Zhang Yadong and lyricist Albert Leung, often referred to as the &#x27;iron triangle&#x27;. However, due to Zhang Yadong&#x27;s unavailability during this period (he was engaged on other projects), Wong decided to treat this last album with EMI as an experiment whereby she would collaborate with new producers/musicians/lyricists and &#x27;see what their vision of her will be&#x27;.

The response from the public and critics alike were lukewarm at best. Wong herself admitted that she was not totally satisfied with some tracks, namely those produced by Taiwan&#x27;s “father of rock” Wu Bai, which had an industrial electronica flavour reminiscent of Karen Mok&#x27;s album &quot;Golden Flower&quot;. She cited the two folk-style songs written by Singaporean singer-songwriter Tanya Chua as her favourite picks on her album. The song that generated most noise from the press turned out to be &quot;Vertigo&quot; (迷魂記), a ballad composed by her then-boyfriend Nicholas Tse. Tse claimed that his composition was originally for Singaporean singer Stefanie Sun; however, when the song went to Wong, Albert Leung crafted it as a love song between Wong and Tse from Wong&#x27;s perspective. Leung followed this with a less known companion piece for Tse, &quot;Angel in White&quot;(白衣天使), from Tse&#x27;s perspective. &quot;Vertigo&quot; is also Leah Dou&#x27;s favorite song from her mother&#x27;s body of work.

While she was under contract with EMI and later Sony, she had an acting career and performed at benefit concerts, including ones that helped those who suffered from AIDS and SARS. She sang on tracks with other celebrities such as Tony Leung, Anita Mui, and Aaron Kwok. She recorded several other solo non-album tracks, such as the eponymous hit theme song to &quot;Hero&quot; and a Buddhist song containing similar sounds to some of her work on her album &quot;Fu Zao&quot;. In addition, she recorded a recitation of the Heart Sutra. Meanwhile, her former record companies released several more compilations and boxed sets of her records.

For her Sony album &quot;To Love&quot;, released in November 2003, she recorded 13 tracks, 10 in Mandarin and 3 in Cantonese. She wrote the music and lyrics for 3 songs, the title track &quot;To Love&quot; (將愛), &quot;Letting Go&quot; (不留), &quot;Sunshine Baby&quot; (陽寶), as well as the music for &quot;April Snow&quot; (四月雪). The three songs with her own lyrics stirred much speculation about their implications of her personal life, as she was in a love quadrangle with Nicholas Tse, Cecilia Cheung, Li Yapeng, though with Li unknown to the public then. &quot;To Love,&quot; short for “To Love to the End&quot; (將愛進行到底), the name of Li Yapeng&#x27;s 1998 breakout show (also known in English as &quot;Eternal Love&quot; or &quot;Cherish Our Love Forever&quot;), describes love as a &quot;war.&quot; She explained in an interview: &quot;Love itself is not a war, but my love triggered a war. I&#x27;m referring to many things attached to love, such as utilitarian and conspiratorial elements, which involve sacrifices. The environment makes love very cruel.&quot; &quot;Sunshine Baby,&quot; along with the song &quot;MV&quot; (short for &quot;My Valentine&quot;) composed by Tse, is sometimes interpreted as her nostalgia for the relationship with Nicholas Tse, as &quot;baby&quot;, or in Beijing dialect &quot;baobei&#x27;er,&quot; was their term of endearment for each other. &quot;Letting Go,&quot; especially in retrospect, is an overture to her then little known life decisions to leave Tse for Li, to leave Hong Kong for Beijing, and, as echoed by &quot;Passenger&quot; (乘客), a cover of Sophie Zelmani&#x27;s &quot;Going Home,&quot; to leave the entertainment business for a new family.

Before the album&#x27;s release, her Cantonese song &quot;The Name of Love&quot; (假愛之名), with lyrics by Albert Leung, was banned in some areas such as mainland China because the lyrics mentioned opium. According to interviews, she said that she preferred the Mandarin version of the song (the title track); she had penned these lyrics herself, and they made no reference to drugs. The album became more successful than her previous self-titled album, both commercially and critically. Afterwards, she held numerous successful concerts for over a year. Faye Wong was awarded pan-Asian female artist of the year at the sixth CCTV-MTV Music Honors. At the 2004 Golden Melody Awards, she was awarded Best Female Artist after being nominated multiple times, delivering the now-famous acceptance speech: &quot;I can sing songs. This I know. Now that Golden Melody judges have given me their approval, I approve of their approval.&quot;

=== 2005–2009: Hiatus ===
In January 2005, during the last concert of her tour, the usually reticent Faye Wong said something that left her fans wondering: &quot;If I ever retire from showbiz, I hope you all forget about me.&quot; In May 2005 her agent Katie Chan confirmed that Wong was &quot;resting indefinitely&quot;. Two months later, Wong wed Li Yapeng in Xinjiang, with only a small marriage banquet held in Beijing, and their daughter Li Yan was born the following year.

In the four years that followed, Wong would not return, ignoring Live Nation&#x27;s offer of 100m HKD as well as the 3m-yuan offer for a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to sing at the Beijing Olympics opening ceremony on her birthday, even though the Beijing native was the choice of over 63% netizens in a CCTV online poll. She did, however, come out to sing &quot;Wishing We Last Forever&quot; in May 2008 at a CCTV fundraising event for Sichuan earthquake victims, and &quot;Heart Sutra&quot; in May 2009 for a Buddhist ceremony at the Famen Temple.

In May 2009, Wong shot an ad for &quot;Royal Wind&quot; shampoo, sparking speculation that it would be the first step in her comeback. In June 2009, a compilation of 3 CDs and 1 DVD of her songs was released by Universal Music.

=== 2010–present: Partial comeback ===

Wong made her comeback at the 2010 CCTV New Year&#x27;s Gala, covering Li Jian&#x27;s ballad &quot;Legend&quot; (傳奇). From October 2010 to June 2012, she embarked on her Faye Wong Comeback Tour 2010–2012 across Asia. Since then, Wong has sporadically released singles, mostly theme songs for Chinese movies. One of these songs is a duet with Alibaba co-founder Jack Ma titled “Feng Qing Yang” (風清揚), the theme song for Ma&#x27;s short film, &quot;Gong Shou Dao&quot;. She also attends fashion shows, shoots advertisements, and makes appearances in gala performances on national TV.

On 30 December 2016, Wong hosted her first concert in six years, &quot;Faye&#x27;s Moments Live 2016&quot; (幻樂一場), at the Mercedes-Benz Cultural Centre in Shanghai, with a VR live webcast via the Tencent Video website watched by 20 million online audience. Her singer-songwriter daughter, Leah Dou, was part of the backing vocalists team. Wong performed several new songs at the concert, opening with &quot;Dust&quot; (塵埃), with her own lyrics comparing herself at this time to a particle of dust: &quot;Blown up and dusted off. Inhaled and exhaled. No meaning, no direction. Don&#x27;t want anything.&quot; She also rendered &quot;Tong&#x27;s Palace&quot; (童殿), the Mandarin version of Leah&#x27;s English song &quot;The Way&quot; with the Chinese lyrics by Albert Leung intended as a sequel to &quot;Mortal World&quot; (人間), Wong&#x27;s song to Leah back in 1998.

However, the highly anticipated concert received divisive reviews. Singer Gong Linna criticized Wong&#x27;s &quot;off-pitch&quot; performance, while music critic Liang Huan accused her of using pre-recorded &quot;live&quot; vocals. Singer and producer Tiger Hu stated that Wong did go off-key during the VR live broadcast but explained that the audio fidelity was too high, which is why the stadium audience didn&#x27;t complain as much as the online audience. Hu believed this highlighted the failure of the VR live broadcast and predicted that fewer singers would attempt it in the future. Nicholas Tse, Wong&#x27;s boyfriend and the Greater China chairman of Digital Domain, who oversaw the VR live broadcast, defended her on social media, saying, &quot;She sounds great on her own!&quot;

In 2018, Wong participated in two variety shows, Hunan TV&#x27;s &quot;PhantaCity (&quot;幻樂之城) and CCTV-3&#x27;s &quot;National Treasure II&quot; (國家寶藏第二季). In May, 2020, she was one of the headliners for Alibaba&#x27;s &quot;Believe In The Future,&quot; a three-day online benefit concert for COVID-19 frontline workers. In September, Wong hosted a karaoke live broadcast on the Alibaba-owned platform Youku, teaming up to sing a duet with Jack Ma near the end of the broadcast. On September 21, 2021, Wong was featured in a pre-recorded performance of “Bay” (灣), the theme song of the CCTV Mid-Autumn Festival Gala in Shenzhen, co-hosted by Nicholas Tse. In January 2025, Wong performed a song, “My Gifts from the World&quot; (世界贈予我的), at the CCTV Spring Festival Gala.

== Acting career ==
Early in her career, Wong acted in Hong Kong TV dramas, such as &quot;The Legendary Ranger&quot; (1993), &quot;The File of Justice II&quot; (1993) and &quot;Eternity&quot; (1994). After establishing herself as a pop diva, she stepped away from television acting until she returned to the small screen in the Japanese drama &quot;Uso Koi&quot; (&quot;ウソコイ&quot;, 2001), for which she also sang the theme song &quot;Separate Ways&quot;, one of her few Japanese songs.

Wong received international acclaim for her performance in Wong Kar-wai&#x27;s &quot;Chungking Express&quot; (1994), which earned her the Best Actress Award at the 1996 Stockholm International Film Festival. Wong Kar-wai praised her performance, calling her &quot;the most unique actress I&#x27;ve ever worked with, because she doesn&#x27;t try hard to act and she doesn&#x27;t need to—she&#x27;s incredibly gifted&quot;, adding, &quot;she always finds a way to make the character a part of herself&quot;. In 1998, she and Tadanobu Asano were featured in a commercial for Motorola, directed by Wong Kar-wai. In 1999, she began filming Wong Kar-wai&#x27;s &quot;2046&quot;, the sequel to &quot;Days of Being Wild&quot; (1990) and &quot;In the Mood for Love&quot; (2000). She worked on the project intermittently over the next few years, when her schedule allowed, until it was completed in 2004.

In 2000, Wong starred alongside Leslie Cheung and Tony Leung Ka-fai in &quot;Okinawa Rendez-vous&quot; (2000), where she had her first on-screen kiss. In 2002, she co-starred with Tony Leung Chiu-wai, Zhao Wei, and Chen Chang in the comedy &quot;Chinese Odyssey 2002&quot; (2002), directed by Jeffrey Lau and supervised by Wong Kar-wai. Her performance earned her a Best Actress nomination at the 22nd Hong Kong Film Awards and the Best Actress Award at the 9th Hong Kong Film Critics Society Awards. In 2004, Wong starred opposite Leon Lai in the romance film &quot;Leaving Me, Loving You&quot;. In 2022, she was featured in a commercial for skincare brand Helena Rubinstein, directed by Wong Kar-wai.

== Personal life ==

=== Vegetarianism ===
Wong used to be a vegetarian. In 2008 and 2011, she was named Asia&#x27;s sexiest vegetarian woman by animal rights group PETA.

=== Social media ===
Wong used to be an active Weibo user under the name &quot;veggieg&quot;, with a talkative, funny presence online. The Weibo account has not been active since 2015. Wong also has a private Instagram account under the name &quot;feibeing&quot;.

=== Religion ===
Wong has been a Buddhist since the early 1990s and has released numerous Buddhist songs. In 2001, she released a Buddhist album, &quot;Loving Kindness &amp; Wisdom&quot; (悲智雙運), to raise funds for the Nepalese lama Thubten Zopa Rinpoche and to support the construction of the world&#x27;s largest Maitreya Buddha statue. She also donated an additional 900 million HKD to the project. Wong has been friends with religious figures such as Ogyen Trinley Dorje and Tsultrim Pelgyi Rinpoche, who wrote the lyrics for her song &quot;Prayer&quot; (願).

Wong&#x27;s religious belief has occasionally sparked controversy. In a 2011 Weibo post, Wong associated the power of religion with the survival of a wooden Buddhist object in a fire in Shenyang earlier that year, inciting an online spat with Fang Zhouzi, a popular science writer who ridiculed her belief. Wang Sicong, son of China&#x27;s then richest man, Wang Jianlin, called her &quot;ridiculous, ignorant, superstitious, and feudal&quot;, and &quot;an embarrassment, unworthy of being a diva, only promoting superstitious beliefs and leading Chinese people further away from scientific thinking and lifestyles&quot;. In 2013, Wong was involved in a high-profile exposé of the self-proclaimed &quot;qigong&quot; master Wang Lin, who had maintained extensive connections among Chinese celebrities. In 2016, the Chinese government warned Wong and other celebrities against fraternising with the Dalai Lama after she attended a Buddhist assembly in India with members of the Tibetan government-in-exile.

=== Relationships ===
In the early 1990s, Wong had a relationship with Luan Shu, the bassist of the Beijing rock band Black Panther. The relationship prompted Dou Wei, the vocalist, to leave Black Panther in 1991. Wong then started dating Dou and, in June 1996, married him. Their daughter, Leah, was born on 3 January 1997, with the Chinese name Dou Jingtong, meaning &quot;child of Dou and Jing&quot; (from Wong&#x27;s stage name Jingwen). The baby&#x27;s voice appears in the song &quot;Tong&quot; on the 1998 album &quot;Sing and Play&quot; and on the title track of the 1999 album &quot;Lovers &amp; Strangers&quot;. Wong and Dou divorced in 1999 with Wong claiming custody of Leah and waiving child support.

Wong had an on-and-off relationship with Hong Kong star Nicholas Tse from early 2000 to late 2003, until Cecilia Cheung became involved. According to Liang Long, the frontman of Second Hand Rose, he and Wong had a brief relationship during one of her breakups with Tse in early 2003. Later that year, Wong began a relationship with Chinese actor Li Yapeng but did not go public until 2004. They married in 2005, after which she took an extended break from the entertainment industry. In 2006, Wong gave birth to their daughter, Li Yan. In 2013, Wong and Li announced that they had divorced, with Li claiming custody of their daughter. In 2014, Wong and Tse rekindled their relationship.

=== Charities ===

In August 2006, Li Yapeng published a public letter, &quot;Gratitude (感謝)&quot;, on his Sina.com blog, showing Wong and his gratitude towards all concerned parties, and confirming rumours that their daughter, Li Yan, was born with a congenital cleft lip. He gave their reason for seeking medical treatment in California: due to the severity of Li Yan&#x27;s cleft, the reconstructive surgeries she needed were not available in China. Citing a South American folk tale, Li called his daughter a special child and her cleft a mark of an angel. The couple has since established the Smile Angel Foundation to assist children with clefts.

On 26 December 2006, Wong made her first public appearance since 2005 at the foundation&#x27;s inaugural fundraising ball. She opted not to speak or sing, but her new composition &quot;Cheerful Angel&quot; (愛笑的天使) debuted at the event as the charity&#x27;s official theme song. At the second fundraising ball on 8 December 2007, Wong sang an electronica-infused version of the Diamond Sutra for the event. For the foundation&#x27;s publicity event on 27–28 November 2008, Wong and her husband visited children in Tibet who were in various stages of recovery after being cured with the charity&#x27;s help.

In May 2008, after the disastrous earthquake in Sichuan, the couple accepted a local girl who lost a leg trying to save her classmates, as she underwent recuperation and treatment in Beijing. The girl returned to her hometown a year later. The Lis agreed to pay for her medical treatment until she turned 22 and visit her at least once a year. In 2012, the Smile Angel Foundation donated 15 million Japanese yen to ChildFund Japan to help needy children after the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami.

In 2010, the China Social Sciences Press recognised Wong as one of China&#x27;s 13 &quot;richest souls&quot;. In 2012, Smile Angel Foundation established China&#x27;s first charity paediatric hospital in Beijing. In 2013, Wong and Li topped the inaugural &quot;China Celebrity Philanthropist List&quot; compiled by &quot;China Philanthropist&quot; magazine. On 19 May 2013, she sang four songs in a memorial concert celebrating Teresa Teng&#x27;s 60th birthday, with part of the concert proceeds going to the charity.

== Artistry ==

The focus of Faye Wong&#x27;s concerts has always been on her vocal performance. She seldom dances or speaks to the audience, and there are generally no supporting dancers. There were two exceptions to the latter in the 1994–95 live concerts; first, many dancers joined her on stage for the lively song &quot;Flow Not Fly&quot;. In the second half, Wong and a line of male dancers were menaced by a giant mechanical spider overhead during the song &quot;Tempt Me&quot;.

Another trademark is her unconventional fashion on stage. Her 1994 concerts were memorable for dreadlocks and extremely long sleeves, as well as for the silver-painted tears. She later said &quot;I wore long sleeves because usually I don&#x27;t have choreography; I don&#x27;t know what to do with my hands.&quot; Her 1998 concerts saw her sporting the &quot;burnt&quot; cheek makeup, the &quot;Indian chief&quot; look, and the soleless strap-on boots. At the start of her 2003 concerts her headgear was topped by an inverted shoe supporting a very long feather, and her makeup for that concert went through several changes of painted eye-shades.

She does not perform encores, and usually exits by sinking below the stage via a platform. After her release of Miyuki Nakajima&#x27;s &quot;Mortal World&quot; (人間) in 1997, she ended her concerts for the next few years with this song while shaking hands with the audience, then taking a deep bow to a horizontal position before leaving the stage. However, during her Comeback Tour from 2010 to 2012, she ended with &quot;Flower of Paradise&quot; (彼岸花), a song from the album &quot;Fable&quot; (2000). She has also given concerts in North America, Australia and Southeast Asia.

== Public image ==
Dutch scholar Jeroen Groenewegen credits Wong&#x27;s mass appeal to some of her perceived &quot;cool&quot; traits including autonomy, unique artistry and childishness. Katie Chan, Wong&#x27;s agent, once said &quot;Faye does whatever she wants... it&#x27;s really quite a miracle that she became a success.&quot;

Despite being a favorite target of media and paparazzi, Wong is known for giving terse, direct, and somewhat unexpected answers, if she responds at all, when asked questions. One of her many famous interactions with the media occurred at a 1999 press conference:

Li Yan, Wong&#x27;s daughter, was once photographed using a cell phone case featuring the meme of Wong saying, &quot;What does it have to do with you?&quot;

Wong&#x27;s devil-may-care attitude is as apparent in her public image as in her love life. In 1994, during one of her many trips to Beijing to see Dou Wei—which already strained her relationship with her agency by distracting her from work—Hong Kong paparazzi from &quot;Next Magazine&quot; followed her and tracked her down. The photographs taken, showing her entering an unhygienic community toilet in a narrow hutong to dump urine—in sharp contrast to the modern and glamorous lives Hong Kong celebrities led—caused quite a stir, with some in Cinepoly fearing that her diva image would be tarnished. But many were impressed by what the diva would do for love, as Taiwanese lyricist Chien Yao, who initially declined to write lyrics for Wong because he never met and knew very little about her, recalled in 2012,

Wong&#x27;s relationship with Nicholas Tse, spanning over two decades, has become the stuff of popular romance and cemented her image as a woman dedicated to love. The two dated in the early 2000s, split in 2003, married and had children with other celebrities, divorced, and reunited in 2014 after an 11-year breakup. Their reunion, revealed by paparazzi photos of them kissing at Wong&#x27;s Beijing apartment, caused a sensation but received mixed reactions. At a time when traditional media was declining and social media was on the rise, her reunion with Tse was welcomed by the media and other celebrities, but she faced considerable criticism on Weibo from conservative quarters for prioritizing love over family at her age and from Cecilia Cheung&#x27;s fans. Not long after, she quit Weibo after having been one of the platform&#x27;s most active celebrities for years.

== Legacy ==

In 2004 and 2005, Faye Wong was ranked in the top five on the &quot;Forbes&quot; China Celebrity 100, as well as in 2011 and 2012 after her comeback. In a 2011 &quot;most popular celebrity in China&quot; marketing study, she was also ranked in the top 5. In 2008, Wong was voted Asia&#x27;s sexiest vegetarian woman in a poll run by animal rights group PETA. In 2009, to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, a government web portal conducted an online poll on &quot;The Most Influential Chinese Cultural Celebrity in the Past 60 Years&quot;; out of 192 candidates, Wong received over 7 million votes, second only to the deceased Teresa Teng from Taiwan, Wong&#x27;s own personal idol. In 2014, she was named one of the 10 most admired female singers in Asia by RHA media. Chen Tao, a China Radio International DJ, compares Wong&#x27;s influence in the Sinophone world to Madonna&#x27;s in America: &quot;She represents a certain era of pop music, a certain trend, and a vision of being unique.&quot;

Numerous artists have released works that paid tribute to her, including &quot;(I Want to See) Faye Wong&quot; by J Church, &quot;Faye Wong&quot; by Green Club Riviera, &quot;Wong Fei, Gwanyu Nei Dik Mei&quot; (王菲，關於你的眉) by my little airport, &quot;Wang Fei de Hui Mou&quot; (王菲的回眸) by YuFeiMen, &quot;I Love Faye Wong&quot; (我愛王菲), debut album of Maggie Chiang, and &quot;We are Not Romantic in This Age&quot; (在這個年代我們不浪漫) by Easy Weeds. Wong&#x27;s songs have been covered in other languages, including &quot;Meteor&quot; (流星) in Japanese by Hanayo, &quot;Chanel&quot; (香奈兒) in Korean by Lim Hyung-joo, and &quot;Red Bean&quot; (紅豆) in Vietnamese by various artists. Lene Marlin&#x27;s &quot;Still Here&quot; is an English cover of &quot;I&#x27;m Willing&quot; (我願意). China&#x27;s 2007 spacecraft Chang&#x27;e 1 played Faye Wong&#x27;s version of &quot;Wishing We Last Forever&quot; (但願人長久).

Japanese director Shunji Iwai had explained that the titular pop-star character of his 2001 film &quot;All About Lily Chou-Chou&quot; was conceived after attending a Faye Wong concert. Wong&#x27;s name was also mentioned in the 2003 Japanese film &quot;The Blue Light&quot; as one of the protagonist&#x27;s favourites. The female protagonist in the 2013 Chinese film &quot;Beijing Flickers&quot; was prototyped after Wong, according to director Zhang Yuan, who remembered when he shot his 1993 hit &quot;Beijing Bastards&quot; with Dou Wei, Wong as Dou&#x27;s girlfriend would visit the set every day. Japanese singer-actress Hikari Mitsushima said that Wong was her idol and muse; she performed Wong&#x27;s Cantopop song &quot;Dreams&quot; at the 2024 Megaport Music Festival, in Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

== Discography ==


=== Cantonese-language studio albums ===
* &quot;Shirley Wong&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Everything&quot; (1990)
* &quot;You&#x27;re the Only One&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Coming Home&quot; (1992)
* &quot;No Regrets&quot; (1993)
* &quot;100,000 Whys&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Random Thoughts&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Please Myself&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Di-Dar&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Be Perfunctory&quot; (2015)
=== Mandarin-language studio albums ===
* &quot;Mystery&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Sky&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Decadent Sounds of Faye&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Fuzao&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Faye Wong&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Sing and Play&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Lovers &amp; Strangers&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Fable&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Faye Wong&quot; (2001)
* &quot;To Love&quot; (2003)
== Concert tours ==
=== Setlists ===

The following setlists only include songs published in the concert albums, not all songs performed throughout the tours.
# 夢遊
# 夢中人
# 多得他
# 無奈那天
# 靜夜的單簧管
# Medley:
## Miss You Night &amp; Day
## Summer of Love
## 又繼續等
## Everything
## 不再兒嬉
# 從明日開始
# 明天我要嫁給你
# Medley:
## 天與地
## 用心良苦
# Medley:
## 如風
## 季候風
## 有一天我會
## 浪漫風暴
## Kisses in the Wind
# 流非飛
# 愛與痛的邊緣
# 知己知彼
# 胡思亂想
# 誓言
# 誘惑我
# 棋子
# 執迷不悔
# 容易受傷的女人
# 冷戰
# 千言萬語
# 出路
# 我願意

# Overture
# 感情生活
# 浮躁
# 悶
# 暗湧
# 天空 (unplugged)
# 臉
# 迷路
# 夢中人
# 夢遊
# 原諒自己
# 末日
# 墮落
# 天使
# 懷念
# 夢醒了
# 但願人長久
# 情誡
# 一人分飾兩角
# 為非作歹
# Di-Dar
# 曖昧
# Bohemian Rhapsody
# 你快樂 (所以我快樂)
# Auld Lang Syne
# 約定
# 償還
# 我願意
# 執迷不悔

# Overture
# 我願意
# 再見螢火蟲
# 悶
# 矜持
# Medley:
## 半途而廄
## 只愛陌生人
# 開到茶靡
# 過眼雲煙
# 流浪的紅舞鞋
# 新房客
# 香奈兒
# 感情生活
# 掙脫
# 推翻 (unplugged)
# 你 (unplugged)
# 但願人長久
# 天空
# Separate Ways
# 天使
# Eyes on Me
# Thank You For Hearing Me
# 人間

# Overture
# 天空
# 誓言
# Medley:
## 純情
## 背影
## 夢中人
# 流浪的紅舞鞋
# 我願意
# 假如我是真的
# 只願為你守著約
# 但願人長久
# 新房客
# 香奈兒
# 將愛
# 開到荼蘼
# 償還
# 紅豆
# 暗湧
# 光之翼
# 悶
# Heart of Glass
# 旋木
# 只愛陌生人
# The Look of Love
# 如風
# 愛與痛的邊緣
# 精彩
# Medley:
## 尾班車
## 靜夜的單簧管
## 守時
# 約定
# 給自己的情書
# 冷戰
# 人間

# N/A (Not yet officially released)
== Filmography ==

=== Films ===
=== Television ===
== Awards and achievements ==
|-
! colspan=3 style=&quot;background: #DAA520;&quot; | Top Chinese Music Chart Awards
! colspan=3 style=&quot;background: #DAA520;&quot; | Golden Melody Awards


== Footnotes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464650" start="0" end="9" title="Faye Wong" label="Faye Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="13" end="19" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055303" start="151" end="161" title="stage name" label="stage name"/>
<link wikidata="Q464650" start="162" end="174" title="Faye Wong" label="Shirley Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="187" end="194" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="266" end="275" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482367" start="288" end="300" title="Shirley Wong (album)" label="Shirley Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="357" end="374" title="alternative pop" label="alternative music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192110" start="391" end="402" title="C-pop" label="Chinese pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="464" end="472" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="516" end="524" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q55431" start="702" end="714" title="Wong Kar-wai" label="Wong Kar-wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q766263" start="734" end="751" title="Chungking Express" label="Chungking Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q164702" start="775" end="779" title="2046 (film)" label="2046"/>
<link wikidata="Q687900" start="1014" end="1042" title="Cool (aesthetic)" label="&amp;quot;cool&amp;quot; personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="1272" end="1294" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q853873" start="1315" end="1323" title="Cantopop" label="Cantopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161058" start="1447" end="1484" title="Peking Union Medical College Hospital" label="Peking Union Medical College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="1536" end="1555" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370637" start="1593" end="1608" title="mining engineer" label="mining engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q715869" start="1689" end="1734" title="Legislative Yuan" label="the Legislative Yuan of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q70986" start="1821" end="1826" title="Li Ao" label="Li Ao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2005" end="2024" title="Guoyue#Revolutionary songs" label="revolutionary music"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="2025" end="2032" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890808" start="2261" end="2270" title="Andingmen" label="Andingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153539" start="2630" end="2647" title="Xiamen University" label="Xiamen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q670287" start="2660" end="2690" title="Gaokao" label="national college entrance exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917775" start="2869" end="2879" title="Music publisher (popular music)" label="publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="3085" end="3097" title="cover version" label="cover albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="3163" end="3172" title="cassette tape" label="cassettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q463945" start="3247" end="3258" title="Teresa Teng" label="Teresa Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153539" start="3485" end="3502" title="Xiamen University" label="Xiamen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566404" start="3672" end="3691" title="Right of abode in Hong Kong" label="permanent residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="3790" end="3799" title="Cantonese language" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="4032" end="4046" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q232621" start="4084" end="4093" title="Anita Mui" label="Anita Mui"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766" start="4095" end="4103" title="Andy Lau" label="Andy Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836" start="4105" end="4113" title="Leon Lai" label="Leon Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872" start="4118" end="4128" title="Aaron Kwok" label="Aaron Kwok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120875" start="4190" end="4206" title="Cinepoly Records" label="Cinepoly Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q726776" start="4239" end="4242" title="Asia-Pacific Broadcasting Union" label="ABU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736664" start="4468" end="4479" title="Mainland Chinese" label="Mainlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482367" start="4826" end="4838" title="Shirley Wong (album)" label="Shirley Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061533" start="4953" end="4963" title="Everything (Faye Wong album)" label="Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q701992" start="4980" end="5004" title="You&amp;#x27;re the Only One (album)" label="You&amp;#x27;re the Only One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357659" start="5479" end="5487" title="Lo Ta-yu" label="Lo Ta-yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q697466" start="5596" end="5608" title="Rock Records" label="Rock Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358948" start="5837" end="5841" title="Wawa (Taiwanese singer)" label="Wawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864337" start="5958" end="5977" title="Barbizon Modeling and Acting School" label="the Barbizon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774414" start="5979" end="6003" title="Martha Graham Center of Contemporary Dance" label="the Martha Graham School"/>
<link wikidata="Q698165" start="6749" end="6760" title="Coming Home (Faye Wong album)" label="Coming Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="6893" end="6902" title="homophone" label="homophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="7121" end="7128" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q853873" start="7204" end="7212" title="Cantopop" label="Cantopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q17230742" start="7764" end="7769" title="Rouge (song)" label="Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323453" start="7799" end="7814" title="Miyuki Nakajima" label="Miyuki Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550845" start="7827" end="7839" title="Naomi Chiaki" label="Naomi Chiaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195543" start="7906" end="7909" title="TVB" label="TVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357508" start="7922" end="7938" title="The Greed of Man" label="The Greed of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q698168" start="8639" end="8649" title="No Regrets (Faye Wong album)" label="No Regrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070366" start="8838" end="8848" title="Keith Chan Siu-kei" label="Keith Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q701988" start="8891" end="8903" title="100,000 Whys" label="100,000 Whys"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="8930" end="8947" title="alternative pop" label="alternative music"/>
<link wikidata="Q193744" start="9077" end="9086" title="Tori Amos" label="Tori Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195543" start="9120" end="9123" title="TVB" label="TVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448355" start="9144" end="9162" title="File of Justice II" label="File of Justice II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911282" start="9179" end="9195" title="The Legendary Ranger" label="Legendary Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q588820" start="9248" end="9261" title="Cocteau Twins" label="Cocteau Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q701774" start="9354" end="9369" title="Random Thoughts (Faye Wong album)" label="Random Thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="9402" end="9417" title="The Cranberries" label="The Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q98910463" start="9430" end="9436" title="Dreams (The Cranberries song)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q55431" start="9459" end="9471" title="Wong Kar-wai" label="Wong Kar-wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q766263" start="9490" end="9507" title="Chungking Express" label="Chungking Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q64814" start="9747" end="9754" title="Dou Wei" label="Dou Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="10101" end="10109" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q698144" start="10127" end="10134" title="Mystery (Faye Wong album)" label="Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q701780" start="10151" end="10154" title="Sky (Faye Wong album)" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q706192" start="10391" end="10401" title="Gigi Leung" label="Gigi Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q701039" start="10403" end="10414" title="Sammi Cheng" label="Sammi Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q238819" start="10419" end="10427" title="Jay Chou" label="Jay Chou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064810" start="11137" end="11141" title="Chinese rock" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q64814" start="11155" end="11162" title="Dou Wei" label="Dou Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q665925" start="11294" end="11317" title="Decadent Sounds of Faye" label="Decadent Sounds of Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q463945" start="11380" end="11391" title="Teresa Teng" label="Teresa Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q64814" start="11790" end="11797" title="Dou Wei" label="Dou Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161141" start="11844" end="11888" title="MTV Video Music Award for International Viewer&amp;#x27;s Choice" label="MTV International Viewer&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025744" start="12024" end="12030" title="Di-Dar" label="Di-Dar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="12064" end="12073" title="yodelling" label="yodelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q531426" start="12096" end="12102" title="Music of India" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503406" start="12107" end="12121" title="Middle Eastern music" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q853873" start="12212" end="12220" title="Cantopop" label="Cantopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427974" start="12481" end="12486" title="Fuzao" label="Fuzao"/>
<link wikidata="Q588820" start="12735" end="12748" title="Cocteau Twins" label="Cocteau Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858030" start="13091" end="13108" title="Milk &amp;amp; Kisses" label="Milk &amp;amp; Kisses"/>
<link wikidata="Q150903" start="13725" end="13732" title="Gong Li" label="Gong Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="13862" end="13864" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093121" start="13962" end="13983" title="One Person Playing Two Roles" label="One Person, Two Roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q698511" start="14078" end="14090" title="Albert Leung" label="Albert Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031993" start="14122" end="14135" title="Wong Ka Keung" label="Wong Ka Keung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14329" end="14332" title="Toy and Help Yourself#Toy" label="Toy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14354" end="14367" title="Toy and Help Yourself#Help Yourself" label="Help Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="14813" end="14816" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067687" start="15287" end="15308" title="Faye Wong (1997 album)" label="&amp;quot;Faye Wong&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519623" start="15528" end="15542" title="Simon Raymonde" label="Simon Raymonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939268" start="15547" end="15560" title="Robin Guthrie" label="Robin Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="16157" end="16179" title="Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q708923" start="16939" end="16946" title="Na Ying" label="Na Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="16959" end="16962" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748306" start="17048" end="17073" title="CCTV New Year&amp;#x27;s Gala" label="CCTV New Year&amp;#x27;s Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475275" start="17574" end="17587" title="Sing and Play" label="Sing and Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352755" start="18145" end="18167" title="Lovers &amp;amp; Strangers" label="Lovers &amp;amp; Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q245006" start="18571" end="18589" title="Final Fantasy VIII" label="Final Fantasy VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q704789" start="18682" end="18692" title="Eyes on Me (Faye Wong song)" label="Eyes on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062702" start="18919" end="18935" title="video game music" label="video game music"/>
<link wikidata="Q386246" start="19373" end="19387" title="Nippon Budokan" label="Nippon Budokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="19576" end="19586" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="19733" end="19744" title="commercials" label="commercials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352755" start="19763" end="19785" title="Lovers &amp;amp; Strangers" label="Lovers &amp;amp; Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q64814" start="19979" end="19986" title="Dou Wei" label="Dou Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="20123" end="20141" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010099" start="20165" end="20175" title="Get Carter (2000 film)" label="Get Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q698511" start="20214" end="20226" title="Albert Leung" label="Albert Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q201653" start="20637" end="20643" title="SoftBank Group" label="JPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063772" start="20886" end="20891" title="Fable (album)" label="Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="21906" end="21917" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872" start="22102" end="22112" title="Aaron Kwok" label="Aaron Kwok"/>
<link wikidata="Q9094822" start="22234" end="22246" title="Zhang Yadong" label="Zhang Yadong"/>
<link wikidata="Q698511" start="22260" end="22272" title="Albert Leung" label="Albert Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q718279" start="22821" end="22827" title="Wu Bai" label="Wu Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="22853" end="22864" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q716027" start="22888" end="22897" title="Karen Mok" label="Karen Mok"/>
<link wikidata="Q699063" start="23014" end="23024" title="Tanya Chua" label="Tanya Chua"/>
<link wikidata="Q380579" start="23196" end="23208" title="Nicholas Tse" label="Nicholas Tse"/>
<link wikidata="Q51157" start="23281" end="23293" title="Stefanie Sun" label="Stefanie Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q698511" start="23332" end="23344" title="Albert Leung" label="Albert Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q22101203" start="23576" end="23584" title="Leah Dou" label="Leah Dou"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="23818" end="23822" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q319001" start="23874" end="23884" title="Tony Leung Chiu Wai" label="Tony Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q232621" start="23886" end="23895" title="Anita Mui" label="Anita Mui"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872" start="23901" end="23911" title="Aaron Kwok" label="Aaron Kwok"/>
<link wikidata="Q260379" start="24009" end="24013" title="Hero (2002 film)" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q622868" start="24165" end="24176" title="Heart Sutra" label="Heart Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530097" start="24309" end="24316" title="To Love (Faye Wong album)" label="To Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q380579" start="24757" end="24769" title="Nicholas Tse" label="Nicholas Tse"/>
<link wikidata="Q270681" start="24771" end="24785" title="Cecilia Cheung" label="Cecilia Cheung"/>
<link wikidata="Q717397" start="24787" end="24796" title="Li Yapeng" label="Li Yapeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q717397" start="24920" end="24929" title="Li Yapeng" label="Li Yapeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q380579" start="25534" end="25546" title="Nicholas Tse" label="Nicholas Tse"/>
<link wikidata="Q297835" start="25879" end="25893" title="Sophie Zelmani" label="Sophie Zelmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="26131" end="26145" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q715608" start="26638" end="26658" title="Golden Melody Awards" label="Golden Melody Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q625568" start="27095" end="27102" title="show business" label="showbiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q717397" start="27260" end="27269" title="Li Yapeng" label="Li Yapeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="27273" end="27281" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061903" start="27456" end="27467" title="Live Nation" label="Live Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q31015" start="27489" end="27492" title="Hong Kong dollar" label="HKD"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="27511" end="27515" title="Chinese yuan" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077302" start="27574" end="27607" title="2008 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="Beijing Olympics opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q207936" start="27697" end="27701" title="China Central Television" label="CCTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096311" start="27702" end="27713" title="online poll" label="online poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280327" start="27756" end="27779" title="Wishing We Last Forever" label="Wishing We Last Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q152033" start="27830" end="27848" title="2008 Sichuan earthquake" label="Sichuan earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q622868" start="27868" end="27879" title="Heart Sutra" label="Heart Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q614916" start="27929" end="27941" title="Famen Temple" label="Famen Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748306" start="28248" end="28273" title="CCTV New Year&amp;#x27;s Gala" label="CCTV New Year&amp;#x27;s Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227181" start="28284" end="28291" title="Li Jian (singer)" label="Li Jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239507" start="28383" end="28416" title="Faye Wong&amp;#x27;s Comeback Tour 2010–12" label="Faye Wong Comeback Tour 2010–2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359568" start="28555" end="28562" title="Alibaba Group" label="Alibaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137062" start="28574" end="28581" title="Jack Ma" label="Jack Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956187" start="28660" end="28673" title="Gong Shou Dao" label="Gong Shou Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q770149" start="28918" end="28947" title="Mercedes-Benz Arena (Shanghai)" label="Mercedes-Benz Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136991" start="28992" end="29005" title="Tencent Video" label="Tencent Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q22101203" start="29085" end="29093" title="Leah Dou" label="Leah Dou"/>
<link wikidata="Q698511" start="29555" end="29567" title="Albert Leung" label="Albert Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537119" start="29737" end="29747" title="Gong Linna" label="Gong Linna"/>
<link wikidata="Q593285" start="29915" end="29923" title="Tiger Hu" label="Tiger Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q380579" start="30255" end="30267" title="Nicholas Tse" label="Nicholas Tse"/>
<link wikidata="Q568817" start="30325" end="30339" title="Digital Domain" label="Digital Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942034" start="30505" end="30513" title="Hunan Television" label="Hunan TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264545" start="30555" end="30561" title="CCTV-3" label="CCTV-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359568" start="30661" end="30668" title="Alibaba Group" label="Alibaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="30750" end="30758" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359568" start="30836" end="30843" title="Alibaba Group" label="Alibaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q151135" start="30859" end="30864" title="Youku" label="Youku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137062" start="30897" end="30904" title="Jack Ma" label="Jack Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q207936" start="31043" end="31047" title="China Central Television" label="CCTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q379519" start="31048" end="31067" title="Mid-Autumn Festival" label="Mid-Autumn Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="31076" end="31084" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q380579" start="31099" end="31111" title="Nicholas Tse" label="Nicholas Tse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748306" start="31201" end="31226" title="CMG New Year&amp;#x27;s Gala" label="CCTV Spring Festival Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911282" start="31319" end="31339" title="The Legendary Ranger" label="The Legendary Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448355" start="31360" end="31382" title="File of Justice" label="The File of Justice II"/>
<link wikidata="Q55431" start="31775" end="31787" title="Wong Kar-wai" label="Wong Kar-wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q766263" start="31801" end="31818" title="Chungking Express" label="Chungking Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q158428" start="31885" end="31922" title="Stockholm International Film Festival" label="Stockholm International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q379824" start="32239" end="32253" title="Tadanobu Asano" label="Tadanobu Asano"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="32288" end="32296" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q164702" start="32377" end="32381" title="2046 (film)" label="2046"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306553" start="32409" end="32427" title="Days of Being Wild" label="Days of Being Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056853" start="32451" end="32471" title="In the Mood for Love" label="In the Mood for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q313596" start="32644" end="32657" title="Leslie Cheung" label="Leslie Cheung"/>
<link wikidata="Q700175" start="32662" end="32679" title="Tony Leung Ka-fai" label="Tony Leung Ka-fai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082032" start="32689" end="32708" title="Okinawa Rendez-vous" label="Okinawa Rendez-vous"/>
<link wikidata="Q319001" start="32792" end="32811" title="Tony Leung Chiu-wai" label="Tony Leung Chiu-wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q197471" start="32813" end="32821" title="Zhao Wei" label="Zhao Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q717432" start="32827" end="32837" title="Chang Chen" label="Chen Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963768" start="32858" end="32878" title="Chinese Odyssey 2002" label="Chinese Odyssey 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365602" start="32905" end="32916" title="Jeffrey Lau" label="Jeffrey Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q843649" start="33009" end="33035" title="22nd Hong Kong Film Awards" label="22nd Hong Kong Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q844232" start="33070" end="33111" title="Hong Kong Film Critics Society Award" label="9th Hong Kong Film Critics Society Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836" start="33144" end="33152" title="Leon Lai" label="Leon Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q241599" start="33270" end="33287" title="Helena Rubinstein" label="Helena Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="33481" end="33485" title="People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q92526" start="33535" end="33540" title="Weibo" label="Weibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320529" start="33985" end="34006" title="Thubten Zopa Rinpoche" label="Thubten Zopa Rinpoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q193461" start="34067" end="34082" title="Maitreya" label="Maitreya Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q31015" start="34134" end="34137" title="Hong Kong dollar" label="HKD"/>
<link wikidata="Q465033" start="34207" end="34226" title="Ogyen Trinley Dorje" label="Ogyen Trinley Dorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q633818" start="34559" end="34570" title="Fang Zhouzi" label="Fang Zhouzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q995600" start="34574" end="34589" title="popular science" label="popular science"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110121" start="34623" end="34634" title="Wang Sicong" label="Wang Sicong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105413" start="34674" end="34686" title="Wang Jianlin" label="Wang Jianlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204368" start="35019" end="35025" title="qigong" label="qigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14509651" start="35039" end="35047" title="Wang Lin (qigong master)" label="Wang Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="35213" end="35223" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q326343" start="35292" end="35319" title="Central Tibetan Administration" label="Tibetan government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11179582" start="35440" end="35453" title="Black Panther (band)" label="Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q64814" start="35481" end="35488" title="Dou Wei" label="Dou Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11179582" start="35513" end="35526" title="Black Panther (band)" label="Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q22101203" start="35613" end="35617" title="Leah Dou" label="Leah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475275" start="35847" end="35860" title="Sing and Play" label="Sing and Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352755" start="35914" end="35936" title="Lovers &amp;amp; Strangers" label="Lovers &amp;amp; Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q954957" start="36021" end="36034" title="child support" label="child support"/>
<link wikidata="Q380579" start="36093" end="36105" title="Nicholas Tse" label="Nicholas Tse"/>
<link wikidata="Q270681" start="36142" end="36156" title="Cecilia Cheung" label="Cecilia Cheung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361805" start="36215" end="36231" title="Second Hand Rose (band)" label="Second Hand Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q717397" start="36383" end="36392" title="Li Yapeng" label="Li Yapeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q938668" start="36832" end="36840" title="Sina.com" label="Sina.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="36988" end="36997" title="cleft lip" label="cleft lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544627" start="37323" end="37345" title="Smile Angel Foundation" label="Smile Angel Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494235" start="37756" end="37769" title="Diamond Sutra" label="Diamond Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="37892" end="37897" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152033" start="38009" end="38030" title="2008 Sichuan earthquake" label="disastrous earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="38385" end="38397" title="Japanese yen" label="Japanese yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17189927" start="38401" end="38410" title="ChildFund" label="ChildFund"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="38450" end="38484" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38500" end="38527" title="Chinese Academy of Social Sciences#Publishing house" label="China Social Sciences Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q463945" start="38915" end="38926" title="Teresa Teng" label="Teresa Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323453" start="40253" end="40268" title="Miyuki Nakajima" label="Miyuki Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063772" start="40623" end="40628" title="Fable (album)" label="Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="40863" end="40871" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156624" start="41726" end="41735" title="paparazzi" label="paparazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238738" start="41747" end="41760" title="Next Magazine (Hong Kong and Taiwan)" label="Next Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065367" start="41889" end="41895" title="hutong" label="hutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q707133" start="42142" end="42151" title="Taiwanese people" label="Taiwanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943418" start="42161" end="42170" title="Chien Yao" label="Chien Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q380579" start="42322" end="42334" title="Nicholas Tse" label="Nicholas Tse"/>
<link wikidata="Q270681" start="43032" end="43046" title="Cecilia Cheung" label="Cecilia Cheung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467236" start="43248" end="43286" title="Forbes China Celebrity 100" label="&amp;quot;Forbes&amp;quot; China Celebrity 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="43539" end="43543" title="People for the ethical treatment of animals" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641732" start="43571" end="43626" title="60th anniversary of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="60th anniversary of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096311" start="43665" end="43676" title="online poll" label="online poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q463945" start="43849" end="43860" title="Teresa Teng" label="Teresa Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q375117" start="44004" end="44029" title="China Radio International" label="China Radio International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524932" start="44072" end="44087" title="Sinophone world" label="Sinophone world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="44091" end="44098" title="Madonna (entertainer)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109360" start="44335" end="44343" title="J Church (band)" label="J Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705432" start="44445" end="44462" title="My Little Airport" label="my little airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10868981" start="44507" end="44515" title="YuFeiMen" label="YuFeiMen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301791" start="44569" end="44582" title="Maggie Chiang" label="Maggie Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q468631" start="44765" end="44771" title="Hanayo" label="Hanayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q196073" start="44811" end="44824" title="Lim Hyung-joo" label="Lim Hyung-joo"/>
<link wikidata="Q233977" start="44890" end="44901" title="Lene Marlin" label="Lene Marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49044" start="45020" end="45034" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 1" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280327" start="45076" end="45099" title="Wishing We Last Forever" label="Wishing We Last Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323347" start="45134" end="45145" title="Shunji Iwai" label="Shunji Iwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329381" start="45219" end="45243" title="All About Lily Chou-Chou" label="All About Lily Chou-Chou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276164" start="45369" end="45383" title="The Blue Light (2003 film)" label="The Blue Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q197331" start="45561" end="45571" title="Zhang Yuan (director)" label="Zhang Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q814710" start="45620" end="45636" title="Beijing Bastards" label="Beijing Bastards"/>
<link wikidata="Q266376" start="45742" end="45759" title="Hikari Mitsushima" label="Hikari Mitsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482367" start="45986" end="45998" title="Shirley Wong (album)" label="Shirley Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061533" start="46020" end="46030" title="Everything (Faye Wong album)" label="Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q701992" start="46052" end="46076" title="You&amp;#x27;re the Only One (album)" label="You&amp;#x27;re the Only One"/>
<link wikidata="Q698165" start="46098" end="46109" title="Coming Home (Faye Wong album)" label="Coming Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q698168" start="46131" end="46141" title="No Regrets (Faye Wong album)" label="No Regrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q701988" start="46163" end="46175" title="100,000 Whys" label="100,000 Whys"/>
<link wikidata="Q701774" start="46197" end="46212" title="Random Thoughts (Faye Wong album)" label="Random Thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q701979" start="46234" end="46247" title="Please Myself" label="Please Myself"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025744" start="46269" end="46275" title="Di-Dar" label="Di-Dar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46297" end="46311" title="Toy and Help Yourself#Be Perfunctory" label="Be Perfunctory"/>
<link wikidata="Q698144" start="46373" end="46380" title="Mystery (Faye Wong album)" label="Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q701780" start="46402" end="46405" title="Sky (Faye Wong album)" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q665925" start="46427" end="46450" title="Decadent Sounds of Faye" label="Decadent Sounds of Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427974" start="46472" end="46477" title="Fuzao" label="Fuzao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067687" start="46499" end="46508" title="Faye Wong (1997 album)" label="Faye Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475275" start="46530" end="46543" title="Sing and Play" label="Sing and Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352755" start="46565" end="46587" title="Lovers &amp;amp; Strangers" label="Lovers &amp;amp; Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063772" start="46609" end="46614" title="Fable (album)" label="Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886210" start="46636" end="46645" title="Faye Wong (2001 album)" label="Faye Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530097" start="46667" end="46674" title="To Love (Faye Wong album)" label="To Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q187745" start="47304" end="47321" title="Bohemian Rhapsody" label="Bohemian Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="47338" end="47352" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q704789" start="47554" end="47564" title="Eyes on Me (Faye Wong song)" label="Eyes on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824469" start="48039" end="48069" title="Top Chinese Music Chart Awards" label="Top Chinese Music Chart Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q715608" start="48123" end="48143" title="Golden Melody Awards" label="Golden Melody Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294671" wikidata="Q4880016" url="?curid=294671" title="Beer in Serbia">
<text>Beer () is a popular beverage in Serbia. 

==History==
The beer was first mentioned in the 15th century during the reign of despot Stefan Lazarević, as a new drink transferred from neighboring Kingdom of Hungary. It was cooked in households, taverns, and even in the residence of the despot. Its popularity rose several centuries later and industrial-scale production began in the mid-18th century.

==Production, packaging and consumption==
Serbian breweries produce 523 million liters annually, which place country as 43rd largest beer producer in the world. Serbia exports some 138 million liters annually, mainly to neighboring countries, such as Bosnia and Herzegovina (79 million L), Bulgaria (22.3 million L), Montenegro (12.7 million L), Hungary (12.4 million L) or Croatia (11.9 million L), and to a minor extent to countries where there is significant Serbian diaspora, such as the Germany, Austria, United States and Canada.

Beer for home consumption is mostly sold in 0.5-liter bottles of deposit type (reused) and 0.33-liter glass bottles, as well as cans. Most breweries began packing their product in plastic Q-pack bottles of 1.5, 2 or even 2.5 litres. In bars and restaurants, beer is either served in 0.33L or 0.5L bottles or as &quot;draught&quot; (&quot;točeno&quot;).

Serbia ranks 38th by beer consumption per capita, with 60 litres a year.

==Breweries and brands==

===Breweries===
There are three main breweries in Serbia which combined, control 95% of market share. These are: Apatin Brewery, Heineken Srbija and Carlsberg Srbija. The remaining of market share is controlled by domestic breweries Valjevo Brewery, BIP Brewery, Jagodina Brewery and Niš Brewery and 20 other minor breweries.

Most popular domestic brand is Jelen, followed by Lav. Some foreign brands are distributed, while some are produced locally under license (mostly by its respective brand owners).

Pale lager has been the traditional beer choice for Serbians, and dark lager, while being popular, is produced in smaller quantities. Some breweries produce kvass.

===Brands===

;Domestic
* Apatin Brewery (Jelen, Apatinsko, Jelen Cool, Jelen Fresh)
* Čelarevo Brewery (Lav, Merak)
* Novi Sad Brewery (Pils Plus, MB, Master)
* (Zaječarsko, Zaječarsko crno)
* Valjevo Brewery (Valjevsko)
* BIP Brewery (BIP, Bg)
* (Jagodinsko)
* (Niško)

;Foreign
* Apatin Brewery (Beck&#x27;s, Stella Artois, Staropramen, Nikšićko)
* Čelarevo Brewery (Carlsberg, Tuborg, Holsten)
* Novi Sad Brewery (Heineken, Amstel)

==Beer festivals==

===Belgrade Beer Fest===

Started in 2003, Belgrade Beer Fest is held annually over 3–4 days at the foot of Belgrade&#x27;s Kalemegdan fortress as a showcase event for various beer producers. In addition to domestic and foreign brews at affordable prices, the festival features live music performances each evening. It has quickly grown in size and popularity. On 31 December 2005 British daily &quot;The Independent&quot; named it as one of the worldwide events to visit in 2006.

===Dani piva===
Dani Piva (Beer Days) is a beer festival in Zrenjanin, started in 1985, organised by the Zrenjanin Brewery ().

==See also==
* Beer and breweries by region

==References==

==External links==

* Efes Weifert: Manji gubici za 22% at b92.net </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4880016" start="0" end="4" title="Beer in Serbia" label="Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q336531" start="131" end="147" title="Stefan Lazarević" label="Stefan Lazarević"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="193" end="211" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="1076" end="1085" title="brewery" label="breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="1117" end="1124" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q471947" start="1312" end="1339" title="List of countries by beer consumption per capita" label="beer consumption per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="1349" end="1354" title="litre" label="litre"/>
<link wikidata="Q618044" start="1504" end="1518" title="Apatin Brewery" label="Apatin Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613581" start="1520" end="1535" title="Heineken Srbija" label="Heineken Srbija"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042888" start="1540" end="1556" title="Carlsberg Srbija" label="Carlsberg Srbija"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748094" start="1624" end="1639" title="Valjevska Pivara" label="Valjevo Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877087" start="1641" end="1652" title="BIP Brewery" label="BIP Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686634" start="1749" end="1754" title="Jelen pivo" label="Jelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871906" start="1768" end="1771" title="Lav pivo" label="Lav"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709638" start="1898" end="1908" title="Pale lager" label="Pale lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q253481" start="1964" end="1974" title="dark lager" label="dark lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q173773" start="2055" end="2060" title="kvass" label="kvass"/>
<link wikidata="Q618044" start="2089" end="2103" title="Apatin Brewery" label="Apatin Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686634" start="2105" end="2110" title="Jelen pivo" label="Jelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042888" start="2150" end="2166" title="Carlsberg Srbija" label="Čelarevo Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871906" start="2168" end="2171" title="Lav pivo" label="Lav"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043394" start="2182" end="2198" title="Novi Sad Brewery" label="Novi Sad Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16108998" start="2226" end="2236" title="Zaječarsko pivo" label="Zaječarsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748094" start="2257" end="2272" title="Valjevo Brewery" label="Valjevo Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877087" start="2287" end="2298" title="BIP Brewery" label="BIP Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q618044" start="2346" end="2360" title="Apatin Brewery" label="Apatin Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q106854" start="2362" end="2373" title="Beck&amp;#x27;s" label="Beck&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q929276" start="2375" end="2388" title="Stella Artois" label="Stella Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q935317" start="2390" end="2401" title="Staropramen" label="Staropramen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2403" end="2411" title="Trebjesa Brewery#Products" label="Nikšićko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042888" start="2415" end="2431" title="Carlsberg Srbija" label="Čelarevo Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q113215" start="2433" end="2442" title="Carlsberg Lager" label="Carlsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798652" start="2444" end="2450" title="Tuborg" label="Tuborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q460206" start="2452" end="2459" title="Holsten" label="Holsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043394" start="2463" end="2479" title="Novi Sad Brewery" label="Novi Sad Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q854383" start="2481" end="2489" title="Heineken" label="Heineken"/>
<link wikidata="Q478119" start="2491" end="2497" title="Amstel Brewery" label="Amstel"/>
<link wikidata="Q737804" start="2563" end="2581" title="Belgrade Beer Fest" label="Belgrade Beer Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q599868" start="2644" end="2654" title="Kalemegdan" label="Kalemegdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2901" end="2908" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="2921" end="2936" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3018" end="3027" title="Dani Piva" label="Dani Piva"/>
<link wikidata="Q201125" start="3062" end="3071" title="Zrenjanin" label="Zrenjanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q691552" start="3145" end="3173" title="Beer and breweries by region" label="Beer and breweries by region"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294683" wikidata="Q7810218" url="?curid=294683" title="Tītokowaru's War">
<text>Tītokowaru&#x27;s War was a military conflict that took place in the South Taranaki region of New Zealand&#x27;s North Island from June 1868 to March 1869 between the Ngāti Ruanui and Ngāruahine Māori tribes and the New Zealand Government. The conflict, near the conclusion of the New Zealand wars, was a revival of hostilities of the Second Taranaki War as Riwha Tītokowaru, chief of Ngaruahine, responded to the continued surveying and settlement of confiscated land with well-planned and effective attacks on settlers and government troops in an effort to block the occupation of Māori land.

The war, coinciding with a violent raid on a European settlement on the East Coast by fugitive guerrilla fighter Te Kooti, shattered what European colonists regarded as a new era of peace and prosperity, creating fears of a &quot;general uprising of hostile Māoris&quot;, but once Tītokowaru was defeated and the East Coast threat minimised, the alienation of Māori land, as well as the political subjugation of Māori, continued at an even more rapid pace.

Tītokowaru, who had fought in the Second Taranaki War, was a skilful West Coast Māori warrior. Formerly a follower of Te Ua Haumēne, he was also a priest and prophet of his Pai Mārire political and religious movement, reviving ancient rites of cannibalism and propitiation of Māori gods with a heart torn from the first enemy slain in a battle. Although Tītokowaru&#x27;s forces were numerically small and initially outnumbered in battle 12 to one by government troops, the ferocity of their attacks provoked fear among settlers and prompted the resignation and desertion of many militia volunteers, ultimately leading to the withdrawal of most government military forces from South Taranaki and giving Tītokowaru control of almost all the territory between New Plymouth and Wanganui.

Tītokowaru provided the strategy and leadership that had been missing among tribes that had fought in the Second Taranaki War. His forces never lost a battle during their intensive campaign, but abandoned their resistance after being pursued into their headquarters in the swamps of Ngaere by Colonel George Stoddart Whitmore, commander of the colonial forces, on 24 March 1869, although Tītokowaru himself managed to escape.

Tītokowaru&#x27;s apparent invincibility created a security crisis in 1868, with the government fearing attacks on Wanganui and Manawatu. Yet according to historian James Belich, his achievements were gradually watered down to the point where his name was erased from the most widely read New Zealand histories. Belich concluded: &quot;As a result, the military crisis of which he was the principal architect—perhaps the greatest threat to European dominance in the history of New Zealand—has all but disappeared from the received version.&quot;

==Cause and background of the war==
The immediate cause of the war was the confiscation of vast areas of Māori land in Taranaki by the Government under the powers of the punitive New Zealand Settlements Act 1863. Surveying and settling of the confiscated land had begun in 1865 and Māori, weakened and intimidated by the bush-scouring campaigns of Major Thomas McDonnell and Major-General Trevor Chute in 1865–66, had accepted the loss of their land. Tītokowaru declared 1867 to be a year of peace and reconciliation and travelled among local tribes urging them to accept that the war was over. By mid-1868 colonists assumed the New Zealand wars were over and they were about to enter a long-awaited period of rapid progress.

But as settlers continued to move into the confiscated areas in early 1868, taking possession of greater areas of farmland, tribes faced the option of fighting to retain their cultivable land or starving. Tītokowaru, in response, began to mount campaigns of non-violent resistance to halt further incursions by white settlers. Members of his &quot;hapu&quot; removed survey equipment and destroyed fences and huts, then began harassing South Taranaki settlers with minor thefts of stock and property to persuade them to leave. On 9 June 1868, Ngāti Ruanui warriors escalated their campaign, shooting and tomahawking three settlers felling and sawing timber on the east side of the Waingongoro River, between Hāwera and Manaia. Soon after, a member of the Armed Constabulary, the colonial regular army, was shot and mutilated by tomahawk near the Waihi Redoubt (at present-day Normanby). The upper part of his body was taken by Hauhau warriors to Te Ngutu o Te Manu, a village 16 km north of Hāwera, where it was cooked and eaten. Tītokowaru issued a letter threatening that other pākehā intruders on the land would also be killed and eaten, warning: &quot;I have begun to eat the flesh of the white man... My throat is continually open for the eating of human flesh by day and night.&quot;

The 9 June killings signaled a resumption of war and McDonnell was recalled from Wanganui. He gained approval from the Defence Minister, Colonel Theodore Haultain, to enlist 400 men, including 100 Wanganui Māori, for three months&#x27; service. The companies were hastily drilled for the campaign and the garrison at Waihi reinforced by Rifle Volunteers from Wellington.

==Engagements==
===Turuturu-Mokai Redoubt===
Tītokowaru&#x27;s first major clash with the colonial forces occurred on 12 July 1868 and, in a portent of things to come, it proved disastrous for his enemy. In a move Belich claims was designed to provoke McDonnell and lure him to a battle at a place of Tītokowaru&#x27;s choosing, 60 warriors from the Ngaruahine &quot;hapu&quot;, along with Imperial Army deserter Charles Kane, launched a pre-dawn raid on the dilapidated Turuturu-Mokai Redoubt, 2.5 km north of Hāwera and 5 km from the main army camp at Waihi Redoubt, killing 10 and wounding six of the 25 Armed Constabulary garrisoned there. Tītokowaru remained at Te Ngutu o Te Manu during the battle. The redoubt was small, about 20 metres square, built on low ground and was protected by crumbling parapets only 1.5 metres high and a trench 1.8m deep. The hearts of two of the Constabulary soldiers were cut from their bodies by Māori warriors, prompting McDonnell to make the dramatic gesture of kissing the blade of his sword and vowing, &quot;I shall have revenge for this.&quot;

===Te Ngutu o Te Manu===

On 21 August McDonnell crossed the flooded Waingongoro River with a column of 350 men to retaliate against Tītokowaru. His force comprised three divisions of Armed Constabulary, Wellington Rangers, Wellington Rifles, Taranaki Volunteer Militia, Patea Yeomanry Cavalry and a number of unenlisted volunteers. McDonnell marched through dense rata forest to reach Te Ngutu o Te Manu, which he had last visited in May and was surprised to find a new palisade in front of the village. He split his force into two sections to storm the palisade from the front and circle it from the left to enter near the rear. The raid was a modest success, with his troops capturing weapons and ammunition and burning part of the village, most of whose inhabitants were out hunting for food. McDonnell&#x27;s troops were forced to retreat under heavy fire as Māori returned, regrouped in the bush and pursued them to the Waingongoro River. McDonnell&#x27;s casualties were four men killed and eight wounded.

Less than three weeks later, on 7 September 1868, McDonnell returned to the Ngāti Ruanui heartland, this time determined to skirt Te Ngutu o Te Manu and first strike at another village to the east, Ruaruru, before returning to Te Ngutu. The plan went awry when his column of 360 men became disoriented in the forest, missing Ruaruru and approaching Te Ngutu from the north. Shots fired at the occupants of outlying huts warned Tītokowaru of the direction of McDonnell&#x27;s approach, giving the chief time to organise his defence. He remained in the pā with 20 men and sent the remaining 40, in small groups, to hidden rifle pits in bush surrounding a clearing that led to the palisade, and possibly other positions within the clearing itself. McDonnell&#x27;s force, attempting to storm the palisade, came under immediate and very heavy fire from front, right and rear, with troops &quot;being knocked over like ninepins&quot; by unseen marksmen. Again the heart of the first soldier killed was cut from his body as a Hauhau war rite. McDonnell hesitated, torn between advancing with further losses or retreating, watching as the inexperienced volunteer recruits from the Wellington Rangers and Rifles either bunched together and froze or panicked and fled. McDonnell then gave the order to retreat, with casualties carried out first and McDonnell following with 80 men. Major Gustavus von Tempsky, near the palisade, was shot dead while awaiting orders, and four other officers—two captains and two lieutenants—were also killed. Tītokowaru&#x27;s small attacking force was quickly reinforced by warriors from neighboring villages and McDonnell&#x27;s retreat to Waihi came under relentless fire from Māori who followed them almost to the Waingongoro, inflicting further casualties. The expedition left 24 Europeans killed and 26 wounded.

Te Ngutu o Te Manu was a shattering defeat for the Europeans, on a similar magnitude to the Battle of Puketakuere during the First Taranaki War. Contemporary writers described the loss as &quot;the most serious and complete defeat ever experienced by the colonial forces&quot; and &quot;the most disastrous affair that ever took place in New Zealand&quot;. Von Tempsky&#x27;s death came as a shock to his military followers and to his wider audience of admirers throughout New Zealand. In the minds of the Pākeha public, von Tempsky was a dashing hero of the New Zealand wars, whose fearlessness and ability to survive near-misses gave him an aura of invincibility. One newspaper correspondent wrote: &quot;Unless something is done and done quickly we had all better clear out.&quot;

The aftermath of the defeat was even more disastrous as it led to a disintegration of the Government forces. Hundreds deserted or refused to re-enlist for further service. Many &quot;kupapa&quot; (so-called &quot;friendly&quot; Māori) returned home and Von Tempsky&#x27;s Forest Rangers mutinied. The Government was forced to abandon its Waihi and Manawapou camps, as well as the Kakaramea redoubt and withdraw to Patea, which prompted colonists to leave their farms and redoubts and retreat to the safety of Wanganui. The abandoned colonist sites were quickly occupied by Ngaruahine warriors.

===Moturoa===
In September 1868 Tītokowaru, who had until then been fighting only with his own &quot;hapu&quot;, gained the support of the Pakakohe, Tangahoe and Ngarauru &quot;hapu&quot;, more than doubling his strength to between 150 and 200. In early October his force marched south and built a pā at Otoia, just northeast of Patea and busied themselves with repairing weapons, gathering food and ammunition and planting crops. Further raids were carried out on settlers between Patea and the Waitotara River in a bid to bait the Government to fight them at their pā, without success.

McDonnell resigned as commander and was replaced in September by Colonel George S. Whitmore, who had carried out the first operations against Te Kooti on the East Coast. In early November Whitmore moved his field headquarters to Wairoa (modern-day Waverley) after learning Tītokowaru had moved south of him and established a camp at Moturoa, about 5 km inland of Wairoa, from where it was feared he would attack the rich farming area of Waitotara.

On 6 November Whitmore&#x27;s force was boosted by the arrival of 100 men of a newly raised company of the Armed Constabulary, No.6 Division, commanded by Captain J. M. Roberts, who had fought at Te Ngutu. At midnight that night an attacking column of 550, including 300 Wanganui &quot;kupapa&quot;, picked their way from Wairoa toward Moturoa. Two hundred of the &quot;kupapa&quot; refused to enter the bush and the remaining force arrived at the pā before daylight.

The Māori camp had been established just four days earlier, in hilly, bush-covered country below the high wooded tableland of Okutuku, a village that had been raided in January 1866 as part of a &quot;bush-scouring&quot; campaign by Major-General Trevor Chute during the earlier hostilities. About 100 metres of 3.6m-high loose palisading had been hastily erected in a concave shape, blocking the path to the pā, while other defensive works included a long trench 2m wide and 2m deep behind the palisade, as well as hidden rifle pits and three &quot;taumaihi&quot;, 6m-high towers built of packed soil and ferns. While men in the trenches could fire through a gap beneath the palings of the palisade, others on an earth bank behind the trenches could fire through gaps in the palings, while a third line of fire could be effected from the &quot;taumaihi&quot;. Tītokowaru had placed his men on high alert and in the misty dawn, sentries caught sight of Whitmore&#x27;s advance guard moving through the bush. The Moturoa defenders were silently roused and took their firing positions without being seen by the attacking force.

Whitmore ordered No.1 Division of the Armed Constabulary and a contingent of Wanganui &quot;kupapa&quot; under Major Kepa Te Rangihiwinui to move around to the right of the pā to attack the flank while the main body assaulted the front, supported by the newly arrived No.6 Division. Entry from the left was prevented by a steep and thickly forested gully at the western end of the palisade.

The signal for the assault was given and Hunter rushed for the palisades with a storming party of 50 Armed Constabulary. Tītokowaru&#x27;s men waited until Hunter&#x27;s men were within 10 or 12 metres before opening fire. One survivor said: &quot;I never saw the like of that sheet of fire. Men went down all round me.&quot; Within minutes a dozen men were lying dead or wounded on the open ground. Kepa could not reach his assault point on the right flank and returned to help Hunter, who moments later suffered a fatal wound. Whitmore then sounded the bugle to retire, prompting many Moturoa defenders to run from the shelter of the stockade and trenches in pursuit. On the west, or left, flank a small detachment of No.2 Division was left to engage with Māori outside the pā and was the last group to retreat, coming under heavy fire not only from the pursuers but also from &quot;kupapa&quot; who believed they were the enemy, so far were they behind the main force. The Moturoa force followed Whitmore&#x27;s troops all the way to Wairoa, firing on the redoubt before retreating.

Whitmore&#x27;s casualties were recorded as 19 killed or missing and 20 wounded, with the heart of one soldier cut from his body and another later cooked and eaten. Only one of Tītokowaru&#x27;s force was killed in the encounter.

The battle was regarded as the worst reverse suffered by government troops on the West Coast, surpassing even the Te Ngutu disaster. Colonel W.E. Gudgeon, who described it as &quot;the most desperate engagement fought in the Māori War&quot;, claimed: &quot;Whitmore&#x27;s return did not give nearly our casualties. I made it at the time 52 out of fewer than 200 actually engaged.&quot; Whitmore offered his resignation to the Defence Minister, but was given government support and retained. Historian James Cowan described the Moturoa expedition as &quot;Whitmore&#x27;s one great blunder&quot;, but strong criticisms of Whitmore&#x27;s strategy were rejected by Belich, who said the commander&#x27;s one mistake was to underestimate the Moturoa deceptively strong defences. Although he claimed Whitmore had greatly exaggerated the strength of his enemy—reporting Tītokowaru had as many as 600 warriors at Moturoa—he concluded: &quot;Whitmore was simply unfortunate enough to be a good general matched against an excellent one.&quot;

===Tauranga-Ika===
In the wake of the Moturoa defeat, Whitmore moved his base further south to Nukumaru, forming an entrenched camp ready to defend Wanganui&#x27;s outlying settlements with a force of 350. Tītokowaru responded by following him, establishing an elaborate fortification for his 400 warriors at the Māori village of Tauranga-ika close to the Europeans&#x27; military base and just 29 km, or a day&#x27;s march, from Wanganui. The new pā was sited alongside a road running from Kai-Iwi to the Waitotora River and provided a commanding view to the coast, with impenetrable bush behind it. From his new base he launched a night-long assault on the Weraroa Redoubt, overlooking the Waitotara River. Whitmore promptly abandoned Weraroa, moving its 50 Wanganui militia to join him at Nukumaru. As tensions continued to rise on the West Coast, the country learned of the massacre by fugitive East Coast guerrilla fighter Te Kooti of 50 men, women and children at Poverty Bay on 9/10 November. Defence Minister Haultain immediately ordered Whitmore to withdraw his entire force another 11 km to build a defensive line on the south side of the Kai-Iwi River and transfer some of his force to the East Coast to eradicate Te Kooti&#x27;s threat. Whitmore convinced Haultain that it would be easier to concentrate first on defeating Te Kooti before returning with a stronger, more disciplined force to successfully act against Tītokowaru. He sailed from Wanganui for Poverty Bay on 2 December with 212 Armed Constabulary, leaving Wanganui&#x27;s defence in the hands of about 620 Imperial troops, Armed Constabulary and militia and volunteers. Whitmore remained away from the West Coast for five weeks, during which time the colonial forces at Wanganui swelled to almost 2000 men.

Tītokowaru used those five weeks to demonstrate his hold on the Wanganui hinterland, burning farms and abandoned military posts and driving off stock, but also laboring over the fortifications at Tauranga-ika until it became one of the most formidable modern pā ever built. The pā had been built in a diamond shape, 135 metres long on each side, complete with trenches, rifle pits, parapets and a double line of stockade. The palisade, attached to 30 cm-thick posts, reached 5m above the ground, with a gap at its base to allow defenders in the trenches to fire beneath it. Inside the pā were trenches, covered walkways and shellproof underground shelters roofed with strong timbers, packed earth and galvanised roofing iron. At one corner was a 10m-high &quot;taumaihi&quot;, providing a third level of fire. Inspecting it later, Whitmore wrote in his report of 3 February 1869, &quot;No troops in the world could have hewn their way through a double row of strong palisades, backed by rifle pits, and flanked by two-storeyed erections, such as was constructed in this fortification, defended by excellent shots and desperate men.&quot;

Whitmore returned to Wanganui on 18 January 1869 and immediately began preparing for a major offensive against Tītokowaru. A week later he set off with 800 Armed Constabulary and Wanganui and Kai-Iwi Mounted Corps, as well as 200 &quot;kupapa&quot; under Major Kepa, clinging to the coast to avoid the danger of bush ambushes. On 1 February he was at Nukumaru and the force dug itself in 100m away from the stockade. Two Armstrong guns were brought up on 2 February and used to shell the pā, causing little damage and no casualties. Two Coehorn mortars were used to fire on the pā the next day in preparation for a possible assault, when a reconnaissance mission by some Armed Constabulary discovered the pā was empty, its inhabitants—men, women and children—having slipped out through the rear during the night.

Tītokowaru&#x27;s army immediately began to disperse, with entire hapu splitting from his force. No clear evidence exists why his forces would abandon a fortress so apparently unassailable, or why the chief&#x27;s support from Taranaki Māori quickly evaporated, though Kimble Bent, who was sheltering with Tītokowaru&#x27;s &quot;hapu&quot; after deserting from the 57th Regiment, told Cowan 50 years later the chief had lost his &quot;mana tapu&quot;, or sacred power, after committing adultery with the wife of another chief.

Whitmore professed no regret that Tauranga-ika had been taken without resistance: &quot;My object was to gain possession of the district and if I could do this without loss and without putting too heavy a strain on my raw troops they would be encouraged.&quot;

Whitmore began pursuing Tītokowaru, with soldiers offered rewards of £10 for the head of a chief and £5 for the head of any others of his half-starved forces. Straggling warriors were shot and prisoners were decapitated as European troops and &quot;kūpapa&quot; competed in the race for blood money, collecting sacks of human heads. Whitmore suffered several casualties from a rearguard defence near the Waitotara River, but caught up with them on 13 March at Otautu, north of Patea, when six colonial soldiers were killed and 12 wounded in an attempted assault on the Māori camp. Eleven days later a group of Tītokowaru&#x27;s followers, by now starving and subsisting on foraged food including fungus and grubs, surrendered in a swamp hideout at Ngaere, near modern-day Eltham, while their chief evaded soldiers and settled at Kawau Pa in the Upper Waitara Valley. The Government abandoned attempts to pursue him further and apart from mopping-up actions to capture his former allies in South Taranaki, the war had come to an end.

Although Tītokowaru had fought the entire war without direct assistance from the Māori King Movement, it is possible the Kingites had attempted to intervene in February 1869 with an attack on the Pukearuhe Redoubt in Taranaki&#x27;s far north—in which the settlers Lieutenant Gascoigne, his wife, and their four children were killed alongside Rev. John Whiteley after being deceived with an opportunity for trade —and again in March when a force of Kingite warriors massed at Mokau, reportedly preparing to invade Taranaki. The raid, if planned, did not eventuate and the intervention plans, if they existed, came too late to assist Tītokowaru.

==In popular culture==
* River Queen, film (2005) based on Tītokowaru&#x27;s War in Whanganui.
* Monday&#x27;s Warriors, novel (1990) by New Zealand author Maurice Shadbolt. Semi-fictionalized account of the war told from the perspective of Kimball Bent.

==See also==
*New Zealand land confiscations

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Original publication, 1923
* 
* 
* Original Italian publication, 1896.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7810218" start="0" end="21" title="Tītokowaru&amp;#x27;s War" label="Tītokowaru&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972712" start="69" end="83" title="South Taranaki District" label="South Taranaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="94" end="105" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="113" end="125" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023270" start="167" end="179" title="Ngāti Ruanui" label="Ngāti Ruanui"/>
<link wikidata="Q10967369" start="184" end="194" title="Ngāruahine" label="Ngāruahine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="195" end="200" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545405" start="281" end="297" title="New Zealand wars" label="New Zealand wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443579" start="335" end="354" title="Second Taranaki War" label="Second Taranaki War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810216" start="358" end="374" title="Tītokowaru" label="Riwha Tītokowaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q737045" start="709" end="717" title="Te Kooti" label="Te Kooti"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027992" start="1172" end="1185" title="Te Ua Haumēne" label="Te Ua Haumēne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589278" start="1227" end="1237" title="Pai Mārire" label="Pai Mārire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="1298" end="1309" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203961" start="1314" end="1326" title="propitiation" label="propitiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212984" start="1812" end="1824" title="New Plymouth" label="New Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015672" start="1829" end="1837" title="Wanganui" label="Wanganui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021852" start="2123" end="2129" title="Ngaere" label="Ngaere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544869" start="2141" end="2165" title="George Stoddart Whitmore" label="George Stoddart Whitmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747134" start="2395" end="2403" title="Manawatū Plains" label="Manawatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160933" start="2432" end="2444" title="James Belich (historian)" label="James Belich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933317" start="2889" end="2929" title="New Zealand land confiscations" label="confiscation of vast areas of Māori land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792293" start="3168" end="3184" title="Thomas McDonnell" label="Thomas McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839091" start="3203" end="3215" title="Trevor Chute" label="Trevor Chute"/>
<link wikidata="Q998452" start="4249" end="4255" title="Hāwera" label="Hāwera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488548" start="4260" end="4266" title="Manaia, Taranaki" label="Manaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052998" start="4417" end="4425" title="Normanby, Taranaki" label="Normanby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="4621" end="4627" title="pākehā" label="pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781817" start="4977" end="4994" title="Theodore Haultain" label="Theodore Haultain"/>
<link wikidata="Q111954221" start="6497" end="6534" title="Wellington Regiment (City of Wellington&amp;#x27;s Own)" label="Wellington Rangers, Wellington Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q744244" start="6658" end="6662" title="Metrosideros robusta" label="rata"/>
<link wikidata="Q108592" start="8686" end="8706" title="Gustavus von Tempsky" label="Gustavus von Tempsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453870" start="9274" end="9292" title="First Taranaki War" label="First Taranaki War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13640645" start="10314" end="10323" title="Kakaramea" label="Kakaramea"/>
<link wikidata="Q737045" start="11260" end="11268" title="Te Kooti" label="Te Kooti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159776" start="11366" end="11374" title="Waverley, Taranaki" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960641" start="11555" end="11564" title="Waitotara" label="Waitotara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839091" start="12283" end="12295" title="Trevor Chute" label="Trevor Chute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443579" start="12303" end="12326" title="Second Taranaki War" label="the earlier hostilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690845" start="13274" end="13300" title="Kepa Te Rangihiwinui" label="Major Kepa Te Rangihiwinui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565745" start="15006" end="15026" title="Walter Edward Gudgeon" label="Colonel W.E. Gudgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q737045" start="16837" end="16845" title="Te Kooti" label="Te Kooti"/>
<link wikidata="Q498841" start="17378" end="17389" title="Poverty Bay" label="Poverty Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q689133" start="19253" end="19266" title="Armstrong gun" label="Armstrong gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965451" start="19369" end="19384" title="Coehorn" label="Coehorn mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q675182" start="19712" end="19716" title="hapu" label="hapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409762" start="19915" end="19926" title="Kimble Bent" label="Kimble Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455384" start="20686" end="20692" title="kūpapa" label="kūpapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056659" start="20914" end="20919" title="Patea" label="Patea"/>
<link wikidata="Q378717" start="21209" end="21215" title="Eltham, New Zealand" label="Eltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235723" start="21558" end="21571" title="King Movement" label="King Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254624" start="21947" end="21952" title="Mokau" label="Mokau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155524" start="22142" end="22153" title="River Queen" label="River Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015672" start="22201" end="22210" title="Whanganui" label="Whanganui"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898609" start="22214" end="22236" title="Monday&amp;#x27;s Warriors" label="Monday&amp;#x27;s Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847218" start="22273" end="22289" title="Maurice Shadbolt" label="Maurice Shadbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933317" start="22387" end="22417" title="New Zealand land confiscations" label="New Zealand land confiscations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294685" wikidata="Q950406" url="?curid=294685" title="Julius Chan">
<text>Sir Julius Chan (29 August 1939 – 30 January 2025) was a Papua New Guinean politician who served as Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea from 1980 to 1982 and from 1994 to 1997. He was Member of Parliament for New Ireland Province, having won the seat in the 2007 national election. He was also the Governor of New Ireland Province from 2007 until his death in 2025. On 26 May 2019, Prime Minister Peter O&#x27;Neill announced he would soon resign and that he wished for Sir Julius to succeed him. An outgoing Prime Minister does not, however, have the power to appoint his successor, and the following day O&#x27;Neill delayed his own formal resignation. He was also a leading figure in his country during the years-long Bougainville conflict.

==Early life==
Chan was born as the fifth child out of seven children on the Tanga Islands in the Territory of New Guinea, in what is now New Ireland Province, the son of Chan Pak (陳柏), a trader from Taishan, China, and Miriam Tinkoris, a native New Irelander. In addition to English, he spoke Cantonese, Tok Pisin, and Sursurunga. He was educated at Marist College Ashgrove in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

==Early political career==
Chan first became actively involved in politics in the 1960s. He was elected to represent the Namatanai district of New Ireland province in the pre-independence House of Assembly in 1968 and was re-elected in 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987 and 1992. He was Deputy Prime Minister four times (1976, 1985, 1986, 1992–1994), and Minister of Finance three times (1972–1977, 1985–1986 and 1992–1994). He also held the portfolios of Primary Industry (1977–78) and External Affairs and Trade (1994). Chan became leader of the People&#x27;s Progress Party in 1970. He was knighted as a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) in 1981, and appointed a Privy Counsellor the next year.

==Prime minister==
Chan first became prime minister on 11 March 1980, succeeding the country&#x27;s first prime minister, Michael Somare, after he launched a no-confidence motion against him over a disagreement on whether to increase the salaries of MPs and require them to divest from their business interests. He served as prime minister until 2 August 1982, when Somare regained the position. During his first tenure, which was marred by fiscal problems, he oversaw an austerity program, infrastructure projects and the devaluation of the kina. In 1980, he also ordered the deployment of the Papua New Guinea Defence Force to support the government of Vanuatu against rebels during the Coconut War, in what was the first overseas operation by the PNGDF. 

He succeeded Prime Minister Paias Wingti in August 1994 and took office on the dual platform of national security and appropriate economic management. In 1997, the Chan government&#x27;s multimillion-dollar contract with Sandline International, a mercenary organization, to counter separatist guerrilla warfare on Bougainville caused the Sandline affair, with immense public protests and a 10-day mutiny by the underpaid national army, which became known as &quot;Rausim Kwik&quot;. He was also criticised for his decision to float the kina in 1994, citing a balance of payments crisis.

During his term as prime minister, Chan was also implicated in the 1994 Cairns Conservatory purchase in which he approved the purchase of the said building for A$18.7 million, despite it having been purchased two weeks earlier by the sellers for A$9.8 million. An Ombudsman Commission investigation subsequently found that he had an undeclared conflict of interest.

On 25 March 1997, during an inquiry that started on 21 March that caused five ministers to resign, the Parliament defeated a motion calling on Chan to resign (59–38). However, the next day, Chan and two ministers chose to step down, and John Giheno, a member of Chan&#x27;s party, became acting prime minister a day later. He regained the position on 2 June 1997, shortly before the national elections. Chan was defeated in the national election in June 1997 and was succeeded as prime minister by Bill Skate on 22 July 1997. Chan was later acquitted on corruption charges relating to the Sandline affair. He remained out of Parliament until winning the New Ireland Provincial seat in the June–July 2007 election.

==Later career==
In 2002, Chan ran for a seat in the New Ireland provincial assembly but lost to Ian Ling-Stuckey. During the &quot;horse trading&quot; phase of negotiations following the 2007 general election, Chan was nominated for the position of prime minister, with the backing of Mekere Morauta and Bart Philemon, as an alternative to the large National Alliance grouping which appeared likely to again be led by Somare. Parliamentary Speaker Jeffrey Nape rejected Chan&#x27;s nomination as a candidate and Somare won the vote to become Prime Minister without opposition on 13 August, while 21 members of Parliament joined Chan&#x27;s opposition group. Chan was briefly Leader of the Opposition, but gave up the position to Mekere Morauta in August 2007. That same month, he became governor of New Ireland Province, during which he established a pension system and promoted the usage of the MaiMai, New Ireland&#x27;s Chieftain System as a recognised decision-making body in provincial politics.

In his later years, Chan was referred to in Papua New Guinea as the &quot;Last Man Standing&quot;, in reference to him outliving many members of the first post-independence parliament. He released his memoirs in 2015.

==Personal life and death==
Chan married Stella, Lady Chan in 1966 and had four children: Vanessa Andrea, Byron James, Mark Gavin, and Toea Julius. His son Byron Chan was Member of Parliament for Namatanai Open electorate, covering the south of New Ireland from 2002 until 2017. Among his nephews was MP Walter Schnaubelt.

Chan died in Huris, New Ireland Province on 30 January 2025, at the age of 85. The Papua New Guinean government declared a one-week period of national mourning over his death and granted Chan, whose remains were transported to Port Moresby, a state funeral on 2 February. His remains were then returned to New Ireland, where he was buried on 6 February.

==Honours==
** Grand Companion of the Order of Logohu (GCL) 
** Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (GCMG) 
** Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE)

==See also==

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q950406" start="0" end="15" title="Julius Chan" label="Sir Julius Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="100" end="114" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="118" end="134" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q24563" start="183" end="203" title="National Parliament of Papua New Guinea" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q838690" start="208" end="228" title="New Ireland Province" label="New Ireland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q945615" start="257" end="279" title="2007 Papua New Guinean general election" label="2007 national election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57892" start="396" end="414" title="Peter O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Peter O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10360270" start="720" end="741" title="Bougainville conflict" label="Bougainville conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401361" start="821" end="834" title="Tanga Islands" label="Tanga Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443945" start="842" end="865" title="Territory of New Guinea" label="Territory of New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q838690" start="882" end="902" title="New Ireland Province" label="New Ireland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q164904" start="944" end="951" title="Taishan, Guangdong" label="Taishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="953" end="958" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1020" end="1027" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="1038" end="1047" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="1049" end="1058" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36511" start="1064" end="1074" title="Sursurunga language" label="Sursurunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765668" start="1095" end="1118" title="Marist College Ashgrove" label="Marist College Ashgrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="1122" end="1130" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="1132" end="1142" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1144" end="1153" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="1222" end="1230" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914699" start="1344" end="1361" title="House of Assembly of Papua and New Guinea" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866951" start="1500" end="1519" title="Minister of Finance of Papua New Guinea" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069646" start="1693" end="1721" title="People&amp;#x27;s Progress Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1776" end="1803" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1835" end="1851" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Counsellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q316264" start="1990" end="2004" title="Michael Somare" label="Michael Somare"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="2026" end="2046" title="no-confidence motion" label="no-confidence motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q200759" start="2410" end="2414" title="Papua New Guinean kina" label="kina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743186" start="2463" end="2493" title="Papua New Guinea Defence Force" label="Papua New Guinea Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446722" start="2557" end="2568" title="Coconut War" label="Coconut War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007264" start="2655" end="2667" title="Paias Wingti" label="Paias Wingti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932556" start="2848" end="2870" title="Sandline International" label="Sandline International"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="2874" end="2883" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="2909" end="2919" title="separatist" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="2920" end="2937" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10360270" start="2938" end="2940" title="Bougainville Civil War" label="on"/>
<link wikidata="Q201766" start="2941" end="2953" title="Bougainville Island" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q599237" start="2965" end="2980" title="Sandline affair" label="Sandline affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="3024" end="3030" title="mutiny" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q719336" start="4080" end="4090" title="Bill Skate" label="Bill Skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959129" start="4394" end="4410" title="Ian Ling-Stuckey" label="Ian Ling-Stuckey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381425" start="4583" end="4597" title="Mekere Morauta" label="Mekere Morauta"/>
<link wikidata="Q809205" start="4602" end="4615" title="Bart Philemon" label="Bart Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313018" start="4648" end="4665" title="National Alliance Party (Papua New Guinea)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686476" start="4746" end="4758" title="Jeffrey Nape" label="Jeffrey Nape"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725785" start="4973" end="4997" title="Leader of the Opposition (Papua New Guinea)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381425" start="5027" end="5041" title="Mekere Morauta" label="Mekere Morauta"/>
<link wikidata="Q838690" start="5097" end="5117" title="New Ireland Province" label="New Ireland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967737" start="5675" end="5685" title="Byron Chan" label="Byron Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498105" start="5823" end="5840" title="Walter Schnaubelt" label="Walter Schnaubelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q838690" start="5863" end="5883" title="New Ireland Province" label="New Ireland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q36526" start="6070" end="6082" title="Port Moresby" label="Port Moresby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="6086" end="6099" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q786914" start="6236" end="6251" title="Order of Logohu" label="Order of Logohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="6288" end="6321" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="6357" end="6384" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294692" wikidata="Q6808012" url="?curid=294692" title="List of Buddhist temples">
<text>This is a list of [[Buddhism|Buddhist]] [[temple]]s, monasteries, stupas, and pagodas for which there are Wikipedia articles, sorted by location.

== Australia ==
== Bangladesh ==
== Bhutan ==
==Brazil==
* Khadro Ling Buddhist Temple, Três Coroas, Rio Grande do Sul
* Zu Lai Temple, Cotia, São Paulo

== Cambodia ==
== Canada ==
== Denmark ==
* Havredal Zendo, Viborg

==Finland==
* Liên Tâm Monastery, Turku

==France==

* Kagyu-Dzong, Paris
* Lerab Ling, Montpellier
* Pagode de Vincennes, Bois de Vincennes
* Plum Village Monastery
* Vajradhara-Ling and Temple for Peace, Aubry-le-Panthou, Normandy

==Germany==

* Das Buddhistische Haus (engl.: &quot;the Buddhist house&quot;; oldest Buddhist temple in Europe)
* German Dharmaduta Society
* Mahamevnawa Buddhist Monastery, (Theravada)

==Greece==
*Kalachakra Stupa, in Karma Berchen Ling Buddhist Center, Lagkadaiika, Xylokastro

==Hungary==
* Hungarian Shaolin Temple
* Wonkwangsa International Zen Temple, Esztergom (Taego Order, Korean tradition)

== India ==
== Indonesia ==
==Italy==

* Ensoji il Cerchio (Soto Zen)
* Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa 
* Santacittarama Buddhist Monastery, Poggio Nativa (Theravada)

== Japan ==
== Laos ==
===Khammouane===
* Tham Pha
* That Sikhottabong

===Luang Prabang===
* Wat Hosian Voravihane
* Wat Mai Suwannaphumaham
* Wat Manorom
* Wat Pa Phon Phao
* Wat Sen
* Wat Xieng Thong

===Vientiane===
* Pha That Luang
* Tham Phu Kham
* Tham Sang Triangle
* That Dam
* Wat Ong Teu Mahawihan
* Wat Si Muang
* Wat Si Saket

=== Xiangkhouang===
* Wat Phia Wat

== Malaysia ==

== Mongolia ==
== Myanmar ==
== Nepal ==
==The Netherlands==
==New Zealand==
* Fo Guang Shan Temple, Auckland, North Island

== People&#x27;s Republic of China ==
== Philippines ==

===Davao===
* Lon Wa Buddhist Temple

===Metro Manila===
* Ocean Sky Chan Monastery, San Juan City, Metro Manila
* Seng Guan Temple, Divisoria, Tondo, Manila

==Poland==
* Drophan Ling

==Republic of China (Taiwan)==

* Chung Tai Chan Monastery, Nantou, the tallest Buddhist temple in the world. Height: 
* Dharma Drum Mountain, New Taipei City (&quot;Fa Gu Shan&quot;), international headquarters of Dharma Drum Mountain organization
* Fo Guang Shan Monastery, Kaohsiung
* Linji Huguo Chan Temple, Zhongshan District, Taipei
* Mengjia Longshan Temple, Wanhua District, Taipei
* Nung Chan Monastery, Beitou District, Taipei
* Shandao Temple, Zhongzheng District, Taipei
* Xiangde Temple, Xiulin Township, Hualien County
* Xuanzang Temple, Yuchih Township, Nantou County

==Russia==
===Republic of Kalmykia===
* Burkhan Bakshin Altan Sume
* Geden Sheddup Choikorling Monastery

== Singapore ==
==Slovenia==
* Buddhist Congregation Dharmaling

==Spain==
* Benalmádena Stupa, Benalmádena
* Dag Shang Kagyü, Panillo, Huesca
* Sakya Tashi Ling, La Plana Novella, Olivella

==South Africa==
* Nan Hua Temple

== South Korea ==
==Sri Lanka==
==Sweden==
* Buddharama Temple, Fredrika (Theravada)

==Switzerland==
* Tibet Institute Rikon, Zell (Tibetan)
* Wat Srinagarindravararam, Gretzenbach (Theravada)

==Tanzania==
* Tanzania Buddhist Temple and Meditation Center, Dar es Salaam

== Thailand ==
==Uganda==
* The Uganda Buddhist Centre, Kampala

==United Kingdom==
==United States==
==Vietnam==
==See also==

* Buddhist architecture
* Buddhist temple
* Kyaung
* Ordination hall
* Vihāra
* Wat
==Notes==

==External links==

* BuddhaNet&#x27;s Comprehensive Directory of Buddhist Temples sorted by country
* Buddhactivity Dharma Centres database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6808012" start="10" end="51" title="List of Buddhist temples" label="list of [[Buddhism|Buddhist]] [[temple]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="53" end="64" title="Monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="66" end="71" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="78" end="84" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419463" start="206" end="233" title="Khadro Ling Buddhist Temple" label="Khadro Ling Buddhist Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488778" start="268" end="281" title="Zu Lai Temple" label="Zu Lai Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347750" start="345" end="359" title="Havredal Zendo" label="Havredal Zendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176" start="361" end="367" title="Viborg, Denmark" label="Viborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257121" start="383" end="401" title="Liên Tâm Monastery" label="Liên Tâm Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="403" end="408" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191872" start="424" end="435" title="Kagyu-Dzong" label="Kagyu-Dzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472388" start="445" end="455" title="Lerab Ling" label="Lerab Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="457" end="468" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985016" start="471" end="490" title="Pagode de Vincennes" label="Pagode de Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q271639" start="492" end="509" title="Bois de Vincennes" label="Bois de Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099678" start="512" end="534" title="Plum Village Monastery" label="Plum Village Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553347" start="537" end="552" title="Vajradhara-Ling" label="Vajradhara-Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517687" start="557" end="573" title="Temple for Peace" label="Temple for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q624911" start="575" end="591" title="Aubry-le-Panthou" label="Aubry-le-Panthou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="593" end="601" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125927" start="618" end="640" title="Das Buddhistische Haus" label="Das Buddhistische Haus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="642" end="646" title="English language" label="engl"/>
<link wikidata="Q653048" start="707" end="713" title="Buddhism in Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551079" start="717" end="742" title="German Dharmaduta Society" label="German Dharmaduta Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733059" start="745" end="775" title="Mahamevnawa Buddhist Monastery" label="Mahamevnawa Buddhist Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103381" start="802" end="818" title="Kalachakra Stupa" label="Kalachakra Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248347" start="872" end="882" title="Xylokastro" label="Xylokastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942843" start="898" end="922" title="Hungarian Shaolin Temple" label="Hungarian Shaolin Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q661885" start="925" end="960" title="Wonkwangsa International Zen Temple" label="Wonkwangsa International Zen Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q171353" start="962" end="971" title="Esztergom" label="Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958436" start="973" end="984" title="Taego Order" label="Taego Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q18289661" start="1046" end="1063" title="Ensoji il Cerchio" label="Ensoji il Cerchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q969796" start="1077" end="1102" title="Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa" label="Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419998" start="1106" end="1120" title="Santacittarama" label="Santacittarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040938" start="1210" end="1218" title="Tham Pha" label="Tham Pha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711276" start="1221" end="1238" title="That Sikhottabong" label="That Sikhottabong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902989" start="1262" end="1283" title="Wat Hosian Voravihane" label="Wat Hosian Voravihane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972939" start="1286" end="1309" title="Wat Mai Suwannaphumaham" label="Wat Mai Suwannaphumaham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670535" start="1312" end="1323" title="Wat Manorom" label="Wat Manorom"/>
<link wikidata="Q54468244" start="1326" end="1342" title="Wat Pa Phon Phao" label="Wat Pa Phon Phao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972957" start="1345" end="1352" title="Wat Sen" label="Wat Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671118" start="1355" end="1370" title="Wat Xieng Thong" label="Wat Xieng Thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059720" start="1390" end="1404" title="Pha That Luang" label="Pha That Luang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040939" start="1407" end="1420" title="Tham Phu Kham" label="Tham Phu Kham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709780" start="1423" end="1441" title="Tham Sang Triangle" label="Tham Sang Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4466863" start="1444" end="1452" title="That Dam" label="That Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972946" start="1455" end="1476" title="Wat Ong Teu Mahawihan" label="Wat Ong Teu Mahawihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441659" start="1479" end="1491" title="Wat Si Muang" label="Wat Si Muang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442048" start="1494" end="1506" title="Wat Si Saket" label="Wat Si Saket"/>
<link wikidata="Q25706380" start="1530" end="1542" title="Wat Phia Wat" label="Wat Phia Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439580" start="1639" end="1669" title="Fo Guang Shan Temple, Auckland" label="Fo Guang Shan Temple, Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="1671" end="1683" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669621" start="1756" end="1778" title="Lon Wa Buddhist Temple" label="Lon Wa Buddhist Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008728" start="1801" end="1825" title="Ocean Sky Chan Monastery" label="Ocean Sky Chan Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356889" start="1857" end="1873" title="Seng Guan Temple" label="Seng Guan Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581250" start="1914" end="1926" title="Gompa Drophan Ling in Darnków" label="Drophan Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116338" start="1962" end="1986" title="Chung Tai Chan Monastery" label="Chung Tai Chan Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q82357" start="1988" end="1994" title="Nantou County" label="Nantou"/>
<link wikidata="Q700949" start="2049" end="2069" title="Dharma Drum Mountain" label="Dharma Drum Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q96418421" start="2179" end="2202" title="Fo Guang Shan Monastery" label="Fo Guang Shan Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11612560" start="2216" end="2239" title="Linji Huguo Chan Temple" label="Linji Huguo Chan Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q706761" start="2270" end="2293" title="Mengjia Longshan Temple" label="Mengjia Longshan Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069824" start="2321" end="2340" title="Nung Chan Monastery" label="Nung Chan Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q10923449" start="2368" end="2382" title="Shandao Temple" label="Shandao Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906083" start="2414" end="2428" title="Xiangde Temple" label="Xiangde Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q48928927" start="2464" end="2479" title="Xuanzang Temple (Taiwan)" label="Xuanzang Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657222" start="2553" end="2579" title="Burkhan Bakshin Altan Sume" label="Burkhan Bakshin Altan Sume"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448619" start="2582" end="2617" title="Geden Sheddup Choikorling Monastery" label="Geden Sheddup Choikorling Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q722542" start="2650" end="2682" title="Buddhist Congregation Dharmaling" label="Buddhist Congregation Dharmaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817748" start="2696" end="2713" title="Benalmádena Stupa" label="Benalmádena Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q488869" start="2715" end="2726" title="Benalmádena, Spain" label="Benalmádena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011852" start="2729" end="2744" title="Dag Shang Kagyü" label="Dag Shang Kagyü"/>
<link wikidata="Q55182" start="2755" end="2761" title="Province of Huesca" label="Huesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656212" start="2764" end="2780" title="Sakya Tashi Ling" label="Sakya Tashi Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464461" start="2782" end="2798" title="La Plana Novella" label="La Plana Novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q15557" start="2800" end="2808" title="Olivella" label="Olivella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218064" start="2829" end="2843" title="Nan Hua Temple" label="Nan Hua Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984183" start="2890" end="2907" title="Buddharama Temple" label="Buddharama Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025513" start="2909" end="2917" title="Fredrika, Sweden" label="Fredrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152652" start="2949" end="2970" title="Tibet Institute Rikon" label="Tibet Institute Rikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q67211" start="2972" end="2976" title="Zell, Zürich" label="Zell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26258397" start="2989" end="3013" title="Wat Srinagarindravararam" label="Wat Srinagarindravararam"/>
<link wikidata="Q65965" start="3015" end="3026" title="Gretzenbach" label="Gretzenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684107" start="3055" end="3101" title="Tanzania Buddhist Temple and Meditation Center" label="Tanzania Buddhist Temple and Meditation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960" start="3103" end="3116" title="Dar es Salaam" label="Dar es Salaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771039" start="3146" end="3172" title="The Uganda Buddhist Centre" label="The Uganda Buddhist Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="3174" end="3181" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047562" start="3248" end="3269" title="Buddhist architecture" label="Buddhist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393308" start="3272" end="3287" title="Buddhist temple" label="Buddhist temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q48911265" start="3290" end="3296" title="Kyaung" label="Kyaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897071" start="3299" end="3314" title="Ordination hall" label="Ordination hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q844619" start="3317" end="3323" title="Vihāra" label="Vihāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="3326" end="3329" title="Wat" label="Wat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294694" wikidata="Q7258606" url="?curid=294694" title="Puerto Rican Renewal Party">
<text>The Puerto Rican Renewal Party — or Partido Renovación Puertorriqueña (PRP) in Spanish — was a short-lived Puerto Rican political party founded on August 28, 1983, in Ponce, Puerto Rico. The party was disbanded in 1987.

The party&#x27;s main leader was then-mayor of San Juan Hernán Padilla, a pro-statehood leader and founder of the Partido Nuevo Progresista, PNP.

==History==
===Prelude===
The PRP traces its origins to the 1980 election in Puerto Rico, when the pro-statehood party (in favor of making Puerto Rico the 51st state of the United States), barely retained the governorship and the Resident Commissioner position, while losing control of the Puerto Rico Senate and the Puerto Rico House of representatives, as well as a majority of the island&#x27;s 78 municipalities.

After what many statehood supporters perceived as a defeat in the 1980 election, a movement started to get the New Progressive Party to nominate a new candidate for the 1984 election. Dr. Hernán Padilla&#x27;s name was the favorite to substitute governor Carlos Romero Barceló at the top of the NPP&#x27;s ticket in 1984.

However, Governor Romero saw the threat from Padilla and at a party assembly held in Ponce on November 14, 1982, he asked the assembled delegates if there was anyone who dared to challenge him (Romero) for the gubernatorial nomination. He did so three times, looking straight at Padilla, who was sitting at the podium. See &quot;El Nuevo Dia,&quot; &quot;El Mundo,&quot; &quot;The San Juan Star,&quot; &quot;El Reportero,&quot; and &quot;El Vocero&quot; (the main newspapers in Puerto Rico at the time), November 15, 1982.
Padilla did not answer immediately but some time later announced that he would seek the NPP nomination for governor for the 1984 election. The escalating feud between Padilla and Romero Barceló for the NPP nomination can be followed through the newspapers of the time.

===Founding===

After numerous controversies between Padilla and Romero on how and when to conduct primaries to settle the dispute, and convinced that a fair primary was not possible, Padilla and his followers created the Puerto Rican Renewal Party. Some of the pro-statehood leaders who followed Padilla were:

* Ángel Viera Martínez (at-large representative in the Puerto Rico House of Representatives and vice president of the NPP, who ran for Resident Commissioner in 1984);
* Luis Batista Salas (vice-mayor of San Juan, ran for San Juan mayor in 1984);
* Ángel Rivera Salas (interagency coordinator)
* Danny López Soto (State Senator from the Carolina District, ran for an at-large seat in the Puerto Rico Senate)
* Luis Gonzalo de Jesús
* Héctor Martínez Colón

Although most PRP leaders supported statehood for Puerto Rico, they decided that their new party would seek to include people who supported other status options.

The Puerto Rican Renewal Party was formally founded on August 28, 1983, in Ponce, Puerto Rico, just a few meters from where the NPP assembly of Nov. 14, 1982 had taken place.

Despite the fact that Padilla was widely respected by the voters, in the end he received just over 4.05% of the vote, below the 5% threshold to keep the party registered.

The gubernatorial vote in 1984 was:&lt;br&gt;
Rafael Hernández Colón PDP (PPD) 822,709 (47.754%)&lt;br&gt;
Carlos Romero Barceló NPP (PNP) 768,959 (44.634%)&lt;br&gt;
Hernán Padilla PRP (PRP) 69,807 ( 4.051%)&lt;br&gt;
Fernando Martín PIP (PIP) 61,312 ( 3.558%)

(Source: State Elections Commission of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (Comision Estatal de Elecciones del Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico); Estadisticas de las Elecciones de 1984 (Statistics of the 1984 election [in Spanish])
The Puerto Rican Renewal Party attempted to register again for the 1988 election but the effort failed for lack of support, and Padilla returned to the NPP in the Summer of 1988. The Puerto Rican Renewal Party formally dissolved in the Summer of 1987. See &quot;El Reportero&quot;, 28 August 1987.

After the 1984 election, Padilla moved to Maryland with his family, and served in several hospitals there, reaching high positions in the medical field. He currently lives in the state of Florida.

The PRP was known as the multi-color party, because its logo was a rainbow.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7258606" start="4" end="30" title="Puerto Rican Renewal Party" label="Puerto Rican Renewal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258606" start="36" end="69" title="Puerto Rican Renewal Party" label="Partido Renovación Puertorriqueña"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258606" start="71" end="74" title="Puerto Rican Renewal Party" label="PRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="79" end="86" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="107" end="119" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="120" end="135" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q864024" start="167" end="185" title="Ponce, Puerto Rico" label="Ponce, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742482" start="277" end="291" title="Hernán Padilla" label="Hernán Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076562" start="335" end="360" title="New Progressive Party of Puerto Rico" label="Partido Nuevo Progresista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="445" end="456" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076562" start="897" end="918" title="New Progressive Party of Puerto Rico" label="New Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183412" start="1041" end="1062" title="Carlos Romero Barceló" label="Carlos Romero Barceló"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294705" wikidata="Q1143302" url="?curid=294705" title="Torugart Pass">
<text>Torugart Pass (, , ; ; ) is a mountain pass in the Tian Shan mountain range near the border between the Naryn Region of Kyrgyzstan and the Xinjiang Autonomous Region of China. It is one of two border crossings between Kyrgyzstan and China, the other being Erkeshtam, some to the southwest.

The scenic lake Chatyr-Köl lies near the pass on the Kyrgyz side. The road to Naryn and then to Balykchy and Bishkek—stretching for some —is narrow and in winter often impassable due to heavy snowfall and frequent avalanches. On the Chinese side, the Torugart Port of Entry (吐尔尕特口岸), where travelers must clear for customs, is located about from the pass itself in Ulugqat County of the Kizilsu Kirghiz Autonomous Prefecture. Distances from the pass to major cities are: to Ulugqat, to Kashgar, to Artux and some to Ürümqi.

The pass is also terminus of European route E125 and, under the new National Highway plans, the China National Highway 315, but neither are signed in this area by 2020.

==History==
The pass has been used since antiquity. During the Han dynasty it was under the jurisdiction of a micro-state called Juandu (). During the Tang dynasty, the region came under Tang control as part of Anxi Protectorate.

The pass is open to all nationalities but clearance requires careful arrangement of transportation.

=== Planned railway ===
A going through Torugart Pass has been in the works that would connect Kashgar and the Ferghana Valley since 2012. The railway would lead from Kashgar to Jalal-Abad and further on to the Uzbek city of Andijan. However, the Kyrgyz section of the rail has been stalled due to financial and technical issues and possibly due to Russian and Kazakh opposition to the project. In 2023, the project development received new push from the governments of the three countries involved. A tripartite agreement was signed on 17 September 2022 during the Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit, although funding was yet to be secured at the time. An inaugural ceremony was held in Jalal-Abad in December 2024 and construction is set to begin in July 2025.

==Gallery==
==Climate==

==See also==

* China–Kyrgyzstan border
* Geography of China
* Geography of Kyrgyzstan
* Geostrategy in Central Asia
* Baykurut

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1143302" start="0" end="13" title="Torugart Pass" label="Torugart Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q133056" start="30" end="43" title="mountain pass" label="mountain pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474" start="51" end="60" title="Tian Shan" label="Tian Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q486375" start="104" end="116" title="Naryn Region" label="Naryn Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="120" end="130" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="139" end="165" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="169" end="174" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027049" start="256" end="265" title="Erkeshtam" label="Erkeshtam"/>
<link wikidata="Q864853" start="307" end="317" title="Chatyr-Köl" label="Chatyr-Köl"/>
<link wikidata="Q311946" start="369" end="374" title="Naryn" label="Naryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q805876" start="387" end="395" title="Balykchy" label="Balykchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="400" end="407" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="505" end="514" title="avalanche" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q615115" start="656" end="670" title="Ulugqat County" label="Ulugqat County"/>
<link wikidata="Q861035" start="678" end="715" title="Kizilsu Kirghiz Autonomous Prefecture" label="Kizilsu Kirghiz Autonomous Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q615115" start="765" end="772" title="Ulugqat" label="Ulugqat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170521" start="777" end="784" title="Kashgar" label="Kashgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q668353" start="789" end="794" title="Artux" label="Artux"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959" start="807" end="813" title="Ürümqi" label="Ürümqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625376" start="845" end="864" title="European route E125" label="European route E125"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892882" start="912" end="938" title="China National Highway 315" label="China National Highway 315"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1049" end="1060" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1137" end="1149" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q284387" start="1197" end="1214" title="Anxi Protectorate" label="Anxi Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170521" start="1413" end="1420" title="Kashgar" label="Kashgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q486324" start="1429" end="1444" title="Ferghana Valley" label="Ferghana Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q487689" start="1496" end="1506" title="Jalal-Abad" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q487656" start="1543" end="1550" title="Andijan" label="Andijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1667" end="1674" title="Russia" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="1679" end="1685" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="1884" end="1917" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="Shanghai Cooperation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q487689" start="2012" end="2022" title="Jalal-Abad" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089112" start="2129" end="2152" title="China–Kyrgyzstan border" label="China–Kyrgyzstan border"/>
<link wikidata="Q839778" start="2155" end="2173" title="Geography of China" label="Geography of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709473" start="2176" end="2199" title="Geography of Kyrgyzstan" label="Geography of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548564" start="2202" end="2229" title="Geostrategy in Central Asia" label="Geostrategy in Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059363" start="2232" end="2240" title="Baykurut" label="Baykurut"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294707" wikidata="Q461911" url="?curid=294707" title="Swissair Flight 111">
<text>Swissair Flight 111 (SR111/SWR111) was a scheduled international passenger flight from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City, United States, to Cointrin Airport in Geneva, Switzerland. The flight was also a codeshare flight with Delta Air Lines. On 2 September 1998, the McDonnell Douglas MD-11 performing this flight, registration HB-IWF, crashed into the Atlantic Ocean southwest of Halifax Stanfield International Airport at the entrance to St. Margarets Bay, Nova Scotia, Canada. The crash site was from shore, roughly equidistant from the small fishing and tourist communities of Peggy&#x27;s Cove and Bayswater, killing all 215 passengers and 14 crew members on board the MD-11, making the crash the deadliest accident in the history of Swissair and the deadliest accident involving the McDonnell Douglas MD-11. It is also the second-deadliest aviation accident to occur in Canada, behind Arrow Air Flight 1285R.

The search and rescue response, crash recovery operation and investigation by the government of Canada took more than four years and cost CA$57 million. The investigation carried out by the Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) concluded that flammable material used in the aircraft&#x27;s structure allowed a fire to spread beyond the control of the flight crew, resulting in the crash of the aircraft. Several wide-ranging recommendations were made which were incorporated into newer US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) standards.

== Background ==

=== Aircraft ===
The aircraft involved, manufactured in 1991, was a seven-year-old McDonnell Douglas MD-11 and registered as HB-IWF. The aircraft was powered by three Pratt &amp; Whitney PW4462 turbofan engines and the aircraft had logged 36,041 airframe hours before the accident. It bore the title of &quot;Vaud&quot;. The cabin was configured with 241 passenger seats. First and business class seats were equipped with in-seat in-flight entertainment (IFE) systems from Interactive Flight Technologies.

The in-flight entertainment system was the first of its kind equipped on the aircraft. It allowed the first and business class passengers to select their own movies and games and gamble. The system was installed in business class one year before the incident, between 21 August and 9 September 1997. It was installed in first class five months later, in February 1998, due to delivery delays.

=== Crew ===
In command was 49-year-old Captain Urs Zimmermann. At the time of the accident, he had logged approximately 10,800 hours of total flying time, of which 900 hours were logged in the MD-11. He was also an instructor pilot for the MD-11. Before his career with Swissair, he was a fighter pilot in the Swiss Air Force from 1966 to 1970. Zimmermann was described as a friendly person with professional skills, who always worked with exactness and precision. Zimmermann was due to turn 50 the day after the accident.

The first officer, 36-year-old Stefan Löw, had logged approximately 4,800 hours of total flying time, including 230 hours on the MD-11. He was an instructor on the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and the Airbus A320. From 1982 to 1990, Löw had been a pilot in the Swiss Air Force. The cabin crew comprised a maître de cabine (purser) and eleven flight attendants. All crew members on board Flight 111 were qualified, certified, and trained in accordance with Swiss regulations under the Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA).

== Flight timeline ==

Flight 111 took off from New York City&#x27;s John F. Kennedy International Airport at 20:18 EDT (00:18 UTC) on 2 September 1998. From 20:33 – 20:47 EDT (00:33 to 00:47 UTC), the aircraft experienced a radio blackout for approximately thirteen minutes, which was later found to be caused by communication radio tuning errors.

At 22:10 ADT (01:10 UTC, 52 minutes after takeoff), while flying over Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, the flight crew detected an odour in the cockpit and determined it to be smoke from the air conditioning system. Four minutes later, the odour returned and smoke became visible, prompting the pilots to make a &quot;pan-pan&quot; radio call to Moncton air traffic control (ATC), the area control center (ACC) station in charge of air traffic over Nova Scotia. The pan-pan call indicated that there was an urgency due to smoke in the cockpit but did not declare an emergency as denoted by a &quot;mayday&quot; call. The crew requested a diversion to Boston ( away) before accepting Moncton ATC&#x27;s offer of radar vectors to the closer Halifax International Airport in Enfield, Nova Scotia, away.

At 22:18 ADT (01:18 UTC), Moncton ATC handed over traffic control of the plane to Halifax ATC, which was in charge of controlling traffic in and out of Halifax International Airport. Upon being advised by Halifax ATC that they were from Halifax airport, the crew requested more flight distance to allow the aircraft to descend safely from its altitude of at the time. The crew then requested to dump fuel to reduce their weight for landing. Halifax thus vectored the plane south toward St. Margaret&#x27;s Bay, where it was safe for the aircraft to dump fuel while remaining within of the airport.
In accordance with the Swissair checklist &quot;Smoke/fumes of unknown origin&quot;, the flight crew shut off power to the cabin using the &quot;CABIN BUS&quot; switch, which also turned off the recirculating fans in the cabin&#x27;s ceiling. This allowed the fire to spread to the cockpit, eventually shutting off power to the aircraft&#x27;s autopilot. At 22:24:28 ADT (01:24:28 UTC), the crew informed Halifax that &quot;we now must fly manually&quot;, followed by an emergency declaration. Ten seconds later, the crew declared an emergency again, saying &quot;...and we are declaring emergency now, Swissair one eleven&quot;; this was the last transmission received from Flight 111.

The aircraft flight data recorder stopped operating at 22:25:40 ADT (01:25:40 UTC), followed one second later by the cockpit voice recorder. The aircraft&#x27;s transponder briefly resumed transmission of secondary radar returns from 22:25:50 to 22:26:04 ADT (01:25:50 to 01:26:04 UTC), at which time the aircraft&#x27;s altitude was . After this, the aircraft could be tracked only through primary radar, which does not provide altitude information.

Engine 2 was shut down by First Officer Löw approximately one minute prior to the time of impact. The shutdown of Engine 2 would have had little or no adverse effect on aircraft controllability. With Captain Zimmermann likely dead or incapacitated by fire and smoke, in a smoke-filled cockpit, and with almost no flight instruments and little to no view outside, it is possible that Löw became spatially disoriented and as a result, flew into the sea. Another possibility is that while attempting to see outside the cockpit windows, Löw inadvertently pushed the control column forward, thus resulting in a descent and eventual impact with the water. 

At 22:31:18 ADT (01:31:18 UTC), Flight 111 struck the ocean at an estimated speed of . The impact time also coincides with seismographic recorders at Halifax and Moncton which detected a seismic event at the time. The collision with the water decelerated the aircraft with approximately 350 &quot;g&quot;, causing it to disintegrate instantly. The location of the crash was identified as approximately 44°24′33″N 63°58′25″W.

==Victims==
There were 132 Americans (including one employee each from Delta Air Lines and United Airlines), 41 Swiss (including the 13 crew members), 30 French, 3 British, 4 Canadian, 3 Italian, 2 Greek, 2 Lebanese, 1 each from Afghanistan, China, Germany, India, Iran, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Spain, St. Kitts and Nevis, Mexico, Sweden and Yugoslavia, and 4 other passengers on board. Epidemiologists Jonathan Mann and Mary Lou Clements-Mann, both prominent researchers of HIV/AIDS and a married couple, died in the crash. Joseph LaMotta, son of boxing legend Jake LaMotta, also died. The LaMotta family later sued Swissair for his death.

Swiss tennis player Marc Rosset had originally booked a ticket home for the flight, but cancelled the day prior to practice further after losing a match in the US Open.

== Post-crash response ==

=== Search and rescue operation ===
The search and rescue (SAR) operation was code-named &quot;Operation Persistence&quot; and was launched immediately by Joint Rescue Coordination Centre Halifax (JRCC Halifax). The search and rescue operation consisted of 400 Royal Canadian Air Force personnel, 
the Royal Canadian Navy, 700 Canadian Army personnel, the Canadian Coast Guard (CCG), Canadian Coast Guard Auxiliary (CCGA) resources, and 450 Royal Canadian Mounted Police and more than 2400 Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) personnel who were participating as part of &quot;Operation Homage&quot;. The United States Navy and the Red Cross were also involved in the operation.

Local fishermen and boaters, many of whom were CCGA volunteers, were the first rescue resources to approach the crash site, which were mostly privately owned fishing boats operating from Peggy&#x27;s Cove and Bayswater, as well as other harbours on St. Margaret&#x27;s Bay and the Aspotogan Peninsula. They were soon joined by the CCGS &quot;Sambro&quot;.

The crash site&#x27;s proximity to Halifax placed it within one hour&#x27;s sailing time of ships docked at Canada&#x27;s largest naval base, CFB Halifax, and one of the largest CCG bases in Canada, the CCG Regional Headquarters in Dartmouth. Calls went out immediately and ships sailed directly to St. Margaret&#x27;s Bay.

The provincial ambulance service, Emergency Health Services (EHS), received word of the crash at 22:39 AT, and ordered 21 emergency units from Halifax, the South Shore, and the Annapolis Valley to respond. An EHS helicopter was also sent to the crash site, and the Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre in Halifax was put on emergency alert. The emergency health services were stood down around 3:30 AT the next morning, as expectations of finding survivors diminished.

The land search, including shoreline searching, was the responsibility of Halifax Regional Search and Rescue. The organization was responsible for all ground operations including military operations and other ground search and rescue teams.

=== Search and recovery operation ===
By the afternoon of 3 September, it was apparent that there were no survivors from the crash. On the morning of 4 September, JRCC Halifax de-tasked dedicated SAR assets and the Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) were given control of the scene.

The aircraft broke up on impact with the water and most of the debris sank to the ocean floor (a depth of ). Some debris was found floating in the crash area and over the following weeks debris washed up on the nearby shorelines.

The initial focus of the recovery was on finding and identifying human remains and on recovering the flight recorders. As the force of impact was &quot;in the order of at least 350 &quot;g&quot;&quot;, the aircraft was fragmented and the environmental conditions only allowed the recovery of human remains along with the aircraft wreckage.
Only one of the victims was visually identifiable. Eventually, 147 were identified by fingerprint, dental records, and X-ray comparisons. The remaining 81 were identified through DNA tests.

With CAF divers (navy clearance divers, port inspection divers, ship&#x27;s team divers, and Army combat divers) working on the recovery, a request was made by the Government of Canada to the Government of the United States for a larger dedicated salvage recovery vessel. was tasked to the recovery effort, arriving from Philadelphia on 9 September. Among &quot;Grapple&quot;″s crew were 32 salvage divers. Additionally, the USS &quot;Grapple&quot; welcomed two teams of Canadian Navy Clearance Divers that flew across Canada from Fleet Diving Unit (FDU) Pacific.

The cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and flight data recorder (FDR) were found by the submarine HMCS &quot;Okanagan&quot; using sonar to detect the underwater locator beacon signals and were quickly retrieved by Canadian Navy divers (the FDR on 6 September and the CVR on 11 September 1998). Both had stopped recording when the aircraft lost electrical power at approximately , 5 minutes and 37 seconds before impact.

The recovery operation was guided by the TSB with resources from the Canadian Forces, Canadian Coast Guard, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and other agencies. The area was surveyed using route survey sonar, laser line scanners, and remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) to locate items. After being located, the debris was then recovered (initially by divers and ROVs, later by dredging and trawling).

On 2 October 1998, the TSB initiated a heavy lift operation to retrieve the major portion of the wreckage from the deep water before the expected winter storms began. By 21 October, an estimated 27% of the wreckage was recovered. At that point in the investigation, the crash was generally believed to have been caused by faulty wiring in the cockpit after the IFE system started to overheat. The TSB released its preliminary report on 30 August 2000 and the final report in 2003.

The final phase of wreckage recovery employed the ship to dredge the remaining aircraft debris. It concluded in December 1999 with 98% of the aircraft retrieved: approximately of aircraft debris and of cargo.

=== Response to victims&#x27; families and friends ===
JFK Airport used the JFK Ramada Plaza Hotel to house relatives and friends of the victims of the crash, due to the hotel&#x27;s central location relative to the airport. Jerome Hauer, the head of the emergency management task force of New York City, praised the swift actions of Swissair and codeshare partner Delta Air Lines in responding to the accident; he had criticized Trans World Airlines in its response to the TWA Flight 800 crash in 1996.

== Investigation ==
=== Identification of victims ===
The RCMP medical examiners positively identified most of the bodies within ten weeks of the accident. Due to extreme impact forces, only one body was identifiable by sight. DNA profiling was used to identify approximately one hundred bodies. At the time, it was &quot;the largest DNA identification project ever undertaken in Canada&quot;. The RCMP contacted relatives of victims to request medical histories and dental records. They were also asked to provide blood samples for genetic matching in the DNA identification of the victims. About 90 bodies were identified by the medical examiners using dental records; owing to the large number of (before death) dental X-rays available to the examiners, these bodies were identified by late October 1998. Fingerprints and ante-mortem X-rays were used to identify around 30 bodies.

=== Examination of wreckage ===

An estimated 2 million pieces of debris were recovered and brought ashore for inspection at a secure handling facility in a marine industrial park at Sheet Harbour, where small material was hand inspected by teams of RCMP officers looking for human remains, personal effects, and valuables from the aircraft&#x27;s cargo hold. The material was then transported to CFB Shearwater, where it was sorted and inspected by over 350 investigators from multiple organizations and companies, including the Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB), the US National Transportation Safety Board, the US Federal Aviation Administration, the Swiss Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau, Boeing, Pratt &amp; Whitney, Air Line Pilots Association, and Swissair.

As each piece of wreckage was brought in, it was carefully cleaned with fresh water, sorted, and weighed. The item was then placed in a specific area of a hangar at CFB Shearwater, based on a grid system representing the various sections of the plane. All items not considered significant to the crash were stored with similar items in large boxes. When a box was full, it was weighed and moved to a custom-built temporary structure (J-Hangar) on a discontinued runway for long-term storage. If deemed significant to the investigation, the item was documented, photographed, and kept in the active examination hangar. Particular attention was paid to any item showing heat damage, burns, or other unusual marks. The front of the aircraft, from the front of the cockpit to near the front of the first-class passenger cabin, was reconstructed. Information gained by this allowed investigators to determine the severity and limits of the fire damage, its possible origins, and progression.

The lack of flight recorder data for the last six minutes of the flight added significant complexity to the investigation and was a major factor in its lengthy duration. The TSB team had to reconstruct the final six minutes entirely from the physical evidence. The investigation became the largest and most expensive transport accident investigation in Canadian history, costing CA$57 million (US$48.5 million) over five years.

=== Cockpit recordings ===

The cockpit voice recorder used a recording tape that operated on a 30-minute loop. It therefore retained only that half-hour of the flight before the recorders failed, six minutes before the crash. The CVR recording and transcript were covered by a strict privilege under section 28 of the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act and thus were not publicly disclosed, although the air traffic control recordings are less strictly privileged: section 29 of the same act provides only that they may not be used in certain legal proceedings. The air traffic control transcripts were released within days of the crash in 1998 and the air traffic control audio was released in May 2007, following a ruling by the Federal Court of Appeal. Several key minutes of the air traffic control audio can be found on the &quot;Toronto Star&quot; web site.

In 1999, an article in &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; alleged that the pilots disagreed about whether to dump fuel or descend straight to Halifax. Based on internal TSB summaries of the CVR recording, the &quot;Journal&quot; claimed that co-pilot Löw suggested steps aimed at a quick landing, which were ignored or rejected by Captain Zimmermann. Swissair and Canadian investigators would not comment on the accuracy of the reporting, with a TSB spokesman deeming it &quot;a reporter&#x27;s interpretation of a summary document of what might have been&quot; on the CVR.

=== Probable cause ===
The Transportation Safety Board of Canada investigation identified eleven causes and contributing factors of the crash in its final report. The first and most prominent was:

Investigators identified evidence of arcing in wiring of the in-flight entertainment network (IFEN), but this did not trip the circuit breakers, which were not designed to trip on arcing. The investigation was unable to determine whether this arc was the &quot;lead event&quot; that was assumed to have ignited the flammable covering on MPET insulation blankets that quickly spread across other flammable materials. After the crew cut power to &quot;non-essential&quot; cabin systems, a reverse flow in the cockpit ventilation ducts increased the amount of smoke reaching the flight deck. By the time the crew became aware of the severity of the fire, it had become so extensive that it was impossible to address as it happened.

The rapid spread of electrical power failures led to the breakdown of key avionics systems, and the crew was soon rendered unable to control the aircraft. The pilot-in-command was forced to fly manually because he had no light by which to see his controls after the instrument lighting failed. The fuel-laden plane was above maximum landing weight so the flight crew activated dumping of fuel. The pilots lost all control and the doomed plane flew into the ocean uncommanded. Recovered fragments of the plane show that the temperature inside the cockpit became so great that aluminium parts in the flight deck ceiling had melted. The recovered standby attitude indicator and airspeed indicators showed that the aircraft struck the water at in a 20 degrees nose down and 110-degree bank attitude; the impact force of the aircraft crashing into the Atlantic Ocean was calculated to be 350 times the force of gravity (G-force). Death was instantaneous for all passengers and crew due to the impact forces and deceleration.

==== In-flight entertainment network ====
Both first and business class seats were equipped with a Windows NT 4.0 based In-Flight Entertainment Network (IFEN) system with touchscreen in-seat video displays and magnetic card readers. In the galley, a cabin file server served as a central hub for managing content, which facilitated movie downloads, stored flight and casino information, and collected credit card data transmitted from each seat.

The original system design provided IFEN to all 257 seats. Originally, the IFEN was to be powered from the cabin power distribution, but it could not deliver enough power for the complete IFEN setup intended for the 257-seat configuration. As a result, 115-volt three-phase 400 Hz AC Bus 2, located in the cockpit area (the origin of the fire), was used to provide most of the IFEN power requirements. In April 1997 IFEN configuration was reduced only to 61 first and business class seats. 

By design, AC Bus 2 remained active even when the &quot;CABIN BUS&quot; switch was turned off. The purpose of using the &quot;CABIN BUS&quot; switch, which was the first step in Swissair&#x27;s &quot;Smoke/Fumes of Unknown Origin&quot; checklist during the incident, was to cut off most electrical power to the aircraft cabin, which was not helpful in the system design where IFEN was connected to AC Bus 2.

Former employees of Interactive Flight Technologies, the company that manufactured the IFEN, conceded that each entertainment system box which processed all information for the passenger interface was positioned under each passenger seat and emitted excessive heat. Others raised concerns that extended to the high power consumption and overall heat generation of the system.

Installation of IFEN at Swissair was rushed and violated various FAA certification procedures. According to Swissair Operational Engineering, IFEN added more than of weight to the plane.

=== Safety recommendations ===
The TSB made nine recommendations relating to changes in aircraft materials (testing, certification, inspection, and maintenance), electrical systems, and flight data capture, as both flight recorders had stopped when they lost power six minutes before impact. General recommendations were also made regarding improvements in checklists and in fire-detection and fire-fighting equipment and training. These recommendations led to widespread changes in Federal Aviation Administration standards, principally affecting wiring and fire hardening.

=== Conspiracy and alternative theories ===
On October 16, 1998, an article in the magazine &quot;Executive Intelligence Review&quot; alleged the involvement of British intelligence, through the planting of a magnesium sulfate-based incendiary device in the cockpit. The author, Dean Andromidas, based his allegation on the fact that former MI6 agent Richard Tomlinson had been scheduled to fly on Swissair 111, which was also reported in the British tabloid &quot;News of the World&quot; and confirmed by Tomlinson himself. However, Tomlinson was detained on arrival at JFK after disembarking Swissair Flight 110 from Geneva, thereby preventing him from flying back days later on the ill-fated flight. Tomlinson had revealed British state secrets and in the months preceding the crash had threatened to reveal more. Andromidas further alleged that a key Swissair safety official involved in the investigation, upon returning to Switzerland, was banned from speaking to the press and even his superiors. Andromidas followed up with a subsequent article on November 13th, mentioning that Swiss daily &quot;Neue Zürcher Zeitung&quot; had reported a burglary at Swissair headquarters in Zürich, occurring about a month after the crash. The intruders were reportedly not interested in valuables but documents. Local police began investigating the possibility of a link between Swissair 111 and the break-in.

Unrelated to Andromidas, former RCMP sergeant Tom Juby, who had been part of the Swissair 111 investigation, published a book in 2017 titled &quot;Twice as Far&quot; where he alleged that the TSB suppressed strong evidence for the existence of an incendiary device aboard Swissair 111, such as high levels of magnesium, iron and other elements in the part of the cockpit that burned the strongest. Juby also alleged that a mechanic who serviced the airplane before the flight had provided fake credentials and had disappeared. Further, Juby claims he was asked by senior RCMP officials to retroactively edit his notes for the public record of the investigation so as to omit any mention of his views on the plausibility of an incendiary device having brought down the flight. Reaction to Juby&#x27;s book was mostly negative. The TSB would not comment explicitly on Juby&#x27;s claims, saying that it stood by the findings of its investigation. Juby&#x27;s allegations were initially featured in an episode of the CBC&#x27;s &quot;The Fifth Estate&quot; on September 16, 2011. Swiss television co-produced the episode, but withdrew it from being broadcast in Switzerland citing the speculative nature of Juby&#x27;s conclusions.

Other alternative theories pertain to whether the pilots could have landed at Halifax had they not attempted a fuel dump procedure. In a 2023 interview with Swiss daily newspaper Tages-Anzeiger, German aviation journalist and commentator Jens Flottau believes it would have been advantageous had the pilots decided to land directly without dumping upon smelling smoke. However, he does not fault them for abiding by the guidelines and checklists at the time, which involved a fuel dump and systematically checking for sources of smoke. He also believes a possible runway overshoot or partial breakup of the heavy aircraft would have been a &quot;lesser evil&quot; versus what ended up happening.

It has emerged that the Swiss Federal Archives holds records, still in the 50-year statutory protection period, dating from 1998 to 1999 suggesting Swiss Federal Prosecutors had pursued a criminal investigation of possible involuntary homicide (manslaughter) related to the Swissair 111 crash, though it remains unclear who the exact target of the probe was.

== Legacy ==

=== Valuables ===
The plane&#x27;s manifest indicated the presence of a significant amount of valuables, including 2 pounds of diamonds from &quot;Nature of Diamonds&quot; exhibition at the American Museum of Natural History, 4 pounds of watches, 10 pounds of jewelry, and 49 kilograms of cash intended for a U.S. bank in Geneva. Insurer Lloyd&#x27;s of London reportedly paid out an estimated $300 million for the lost diamonds and jewels. The company applied for a treasure-trove license from the Nova Scotia government to search the crash site but faced opposition from victims&#x27; relatives, leading to the withdrawal of the application.

Following the crash, a two-kilometer-square exclusion zone was established around the site and maintained for over a year to secure the scene. Despite restrictions, concerns arose regarding potential unauthorized attempts to search for valuables. Halifax-based TV documentary producer John Wesley Chisholm suggested that treasure hunters might have covertly explored the area in the years following the crash.

=== Lost works ===
Two paintings, including &quot;Le Peintre&quot; (&quot;The Painter&quot;) by Pablo Picasso, were on board the aircraft and were destroyed in the accident. At the time, &quot;The Painter&quot; painting&#x27;s value was estimated at $1.5 million.

=== Lawsuit ===
In September 1999, Swissair, Delta Air Lines, and Boeing (who had acquired McDonnell Douglas through a merger in 1997) agreed to share liability for the accident and offered the families of the passengers financial compensation. The offer was rejected in favour of a $19.8 billion suit against Swissair and DuPont, the supplier of the Mylar insulation sheathing. A US federal court ruled against punitive damages in February 2002. The resulting compensations for one group of plaintiffs totaled over $13 million.

=== Memorials and tributes ===


A non-denominational memorial service was held on the grounds of East St. Margaret&#x27;s Elementary School in Indian Harbour on 9 September 1998. Among those in attendance were 175 relatives of the crash victims, Swiss president Flavio Cotti, Canadian prime minister Jean Chrétien, and Nova Scotia premier Russell MacLellan. A memorial service was also held in Zürich on 11 September 1998. The following year, another memorial was held in Nova Scotia.

Two memorials to those who died in the crash were established by the Government of Nova Scotia. One is to the east of the crash site at The Whalesback, a promontory north of Peggy&#x27;s Cove. The second is a more private, but much larger commemoration located west of the crash site near Bayswater Beach Provincial Park on the Aspotogan Peninsula in Bayswater. Here, the unidentified remains of the victims are interred. A fund was established to maintain the memorials and the government passed an act to recognize the memorials. Various other charitable funds were also created, including one in the name of a young victim from Louisiana, Robert Martin Maillet, which provided money for children in need, and one in the name of Robert&#x27;s mother, Karen E. Maillet-Domingue (also a victim), which granted scholarships.

=== Aftermath and effects on the industry ===
After the crash of Flight 111, the flight designator for Swissair&#x27;s New York–Geneva route was changed to SR139, although the route was still operated by MD-11 aircraft. The crash of Flight 111 was a severe blow to Swissair and the airline suffered even more loss following the accident, particularly as the in-flight entertainment system that was blamed for causing the accident had been installed on the aircraft to attract more passengers. It was disconnected following the Transportation Safety Board discovery on 29 October 1998 and eventually removed on both Swissair fleets of 15 MD-11 and 3 Boeing 747. Swissair later went bankrupt shortly after the September 11 attacks in 2001, an event that caused a significant and widespread disruption to the aviation transportation industry.

Following the bankruptcy of Swissair in 2001, their international traffic rights were passed to Crossair who took over Swissair&#x27;s route network and fleet and began operating flights as the newly renamed Swiss International Air Lines, changing the flight designator for the New York–Geneva route to LX023. The MD-11 was retired from the Swiss fleet in 2004, and the flight today is operated by an Airbus A330-300.

==See also==

* Aviation accidents and incidents
* South African Airways Flight 295 – another aviation accident which occurred due to inflight fire
* EgyptAir Flight 804 – another case of fire in the cockpit

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* – French version available here
*
*

==External links==

*Detailed report about the crash on Austrian Wings (German, published on 2 September 2013)
*Swissair – Information about the accident of SR111 – Swissair ()
*Transportation Safety Board of Canada investigation report (PDF)
*&quot;Esquire&quot; July 2000 report &quot;The Long Fall of One-Eleven Heavy&quot; highlighting the human side of the accident
*Lloyd&#x27;s of London
**&quot;Lloyd&#x27;s statement regarding Swissair crash site license application.&quot; Friday 19 May 2000. (Archive)
**&quot;Lloyd&#x27;s statement regarding the Swissair crash site.&quot; Tuesday 23 May 2000. (Archive)
*Cockpit Voice Recorder transcript and accident summary on tailstrike.com 
*Swissair Flight 111 memorial site (Archive)
*Swissair profile &quot;CNN&quot; (Archive)
*Swissair crash warning to airlines, &quot;BBC&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q461911" start="0" end="19" title="Swissair Flight 111" label="Swissair Flight 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q461911" start="21" end="33" title="Swissair Flight 111" label="SR111/SWR111"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="87" end="124" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="128" end="141" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q289972" start="161" end="177" title="Cointrin Airport" label="Cointrin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="181" end="187" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="224" end="233" title="codeshare" label="codeshare"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="246" end="261" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q62161" start="288" end="311" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-11" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345785" start="402" end="441" title="Halifax Stanfield International Airport" label="Halifax Stanfield International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589882" start="461" end="478" title="St. Margarets Bay, Nova Scotia" label="St. Margarets Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="480" end="491" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021695" start="602" end="619" title="Peggy&amp;#x27;s Cove, Nova Scotia" label="Peggy&amp;#x27;s Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874853" start="624" end="633" title="Bayswater, Nova Scotia" label="Bayswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q694098" start="760" end="768" title="Swissair" label="Swissair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180238" start="912" end="934" title="Arrow Air Flight 1285R" label="Arrow Air Flight 1285R"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="1019" end="1039" title="government of Canada" label="government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="1075" end="1078" title="Canadian dollar" label="CA$"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928368" start="1127" end="1164" title="Transportation Safety Board of Canada" label="Transportation Safety Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q120706493" start="1294" end="1305" title="flight crew" label="flight crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="1432" end="1463" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="1611" end="1621" title="Aircraft registration" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q173150" start="1667" end="1686" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q128862" start="1687" end="1693" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney PW4000" label="PW4462"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="1809" end="1813" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239480" start="1930" end="1953" title="in-flight entertainment" label="in-flight entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="2186" end="2192" title="gambling" label="gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146304" start="2441" end="2448" title="Pilot in command" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q688072" start="2712" end="2727" title="Swiss Air Force" label="Swiss Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q123030" start="2930" end="2943" title="first officer (aviation)" label="first officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="3090" end="3113" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="3122" end="3133" title="Airbus A320 family" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3226" end="3242" title="Flight attendant#Purser" label="maître de cabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101539" start="3263" end="3279" title="flight attendant" label="flight attendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q751137" start="3405" end="3431" title="Joint Aviation Authorities" label="Joint Aviation Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3488" end="3501" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="3509" end="3546" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="3556" end="3559" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097684" start="3665" end="3679" title="Communications blackout" label="radio blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085376" start="3799" end="3802" title="Atlantic Time Zone" label="ADT"/>
<link wikidata="Q864688" start="3860" end="3868" title="Yarmouth, Nova Scotia" label="Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="3870" end="3881" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="3924" end="3931" title="cockpit" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="3971" end="3987" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474229" start="4098" end="4105" title="pan-pan" label="pan-pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q457334" start="4126" end="4133" title="Moncton" label="Moncton"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="4134" end="4153" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q854272" start="4165" end="4184" title="area control center" label="area control center"/>
<link wikidata="Q283777" start="4378" end="4384" title="mayday" label="mayday"/>
<link wikidata="Q671475" start="4431" end="4437" title="Logan International Airport" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345785" start="4519" end="4548" title="Halifax Stanfield International Airport" label="Halifax International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377279" start="4552" end="4572" title="Enfield, Nova Scotia" label="Enfield, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457449" start="4976" end="4985" title="Jettison (aviation)" label="dump fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589882" start="5067" end="5090" title="St. Margarets Bay, Nova Scotia" label="St. Margaret&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="5523" end="5532" title="autopilot" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="5880" end="5900" title="flight data recorder" label="flight data recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="5984" end="6006" title="cockpit voice recorder" label="cockpit voice recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q849640" start="6028" end="6039" title="transponder" label="transponder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196868" start="6072" end="6087" title="Secondary surveillance radar" label="secondary radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110245" start="6258" end="6271" title="primary radar" label="primary radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745489" start="6713" end="6734" title="spatial disorientation" label="spatially disoriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="7094" end="7107" title="seismography" label="seismographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="7268" end="7269" title="g-force" label="g"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="7468" end="7483" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="7488" end="7503" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="7697" end="7716" title="St. Kitts and Nevis" label="St. Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="7737" end="7747" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404790" start="7798" end="7811" title="Jonathan Mann (physician)" label="Jonathan Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780120" start="7816" end="7838" title="Mary Lou Clements-Mann" label="Mary Lou Clements-Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="7870" end="7878" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q335855" start="7957" end="7969" title="Jake LaMotta" label="Jake LaMotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q123298" start="8057" end="8068" title="Marc Rosset" label="Marc Rosset"/>
<link wikidata="Q782544" start="8197" end="8204" title="1998 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q741964" start="8274" end="8291" title="search and rescue" label="search and rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269354" start="8389" end="8429" title="Joint Rescue Coordination Centre Halifax" label="Joint Rescue Coordination Centre Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="8495" end="8519" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="8536" end="8555" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="8561" end="8574" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q383520" start="8590" end="8610" title="Canadian Coast Guard" label="Canadian Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029875" start="8618" end="8648" title="Canadian Coast Guard Auxiliary" label="Canadian Coast Guard Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="8675" end="8704" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="8724" end="8745" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="8830" end="8848" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021695" start="9092" end="9109" title="Peggy&amp;#x27;s Cove, Nova Scotia" label="Peggy&amp;#x27;s Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874853" start="9114" end="9123" title="Bayswater, Nova Scotia" label="Bayswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q545926" start="9186" end="9205" title="Aspotogan Peninsula" label="Aspotogan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009557" start="9236" end="9259" title="CCGS Sambro" label="CCGS &amp;quot;Sambro&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023453" start="9404" end="9415" title="CFB Halifax" label="CFB Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821284" start="9440" end="9459" title="List of Canadian Coast Guard Bases and Stations" label="CCG bases in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q497373" start="9494" end="9503" title="Dartmouth, Nova Scotia" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370599" start="9621" end="9646" title="Emergency Health Services" label="Emergency Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234569" start="9743" end="9754" title="Southern Nova Scotia" label="South Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q564530" start="9764" end="9780" title="Annapolis Valley" label="Annapolis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270360" start="9852" end="9893" title="Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre" label="Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878513" start="10136" end="10170" title="Halifax Regional Search and Rescue" label="Halifax Regional Search and Rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928368" start="10519" end="10556" title="Transportation Safety Board of Canada" label="Transportation Safety Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="10929" end="10944" title="flight recorder" label="flight recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="11009" end="11022" title="g-force" label="&amp;quot;g&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="11364" end="11367" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="CAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="11523" end="11543" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="11551" end="11582" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="11606" end="11613" title="Marine salvage" label="salvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="11680" end="11692" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q618465" start="12571" end="12596" title="remotely operated vehicle" label="remotely operated vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239480" start="13099" end="13102" title="In-flight entertainment" label="IFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="13278" end="13284" title="dredge" label="dredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066064" start="13506" end="13522" title="JFK Ramada Plaza" label="JFK Ramada Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868588" start="13655" end="13667" title="Jerome Hauer" label="Jerome Hauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13720" end="13733" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q694098" start="13764" end="13772" title="Swissair" label="Swissair"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="13860" end="13880" title="Trans World Airlines" label="Trans World Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q908717" start="13904" end="13918" title="TWA Flight 800" label="TWA Flight 800"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="13993" end="13997" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="RCMP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14162" end="14175" title="DNA#DNA profiling" label="DNA profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492525" start="15003" end="15016" title="Sheet Harbour, Nova Scotia" label="Sheet Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928368" start="15350" end="15387" title="Transportation Safety Board of Canada" label="Transportation Safety Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="15402" end="15438" title="National Transportation Safety Board" label="National Transportation Safety Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="15447" end="15478" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q663455" start="15490" end="15528" title="Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (Switzerland)" label="Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8793" start="15530" end="15536" title="Boeing Commercial Airplanes" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q407436" start="15559" end="15586" title="Air Line Pilots Association, International" label="Air Line Pilots Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q694098" start="15592" end="15600" title="Swissair" label="Swissair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000992" start="17785" end="17808" title="Federal Court of Appeal (Canada)" label="Federal Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="17889" end="17901" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="17948" end="17971" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="18730" end="18736" title="Electric arc" label="arcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q211058" start="18820" end="18835" title="circuit breaker" label="circuit breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q132172" start="18853" end="18880" title="Arc-fault circuit interrupter" label="designed to trip on arcing."/>
<link wikidata="Q17146623" start="19030" end="19034" title="Metallized polyethylene terephthalate" label="MPET"/>
<link wikidata="Q277694" start="20067" end="20093" title="attitude indicator" label="standby attitude indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q599112" start="20098" end="20116" title="airspeed indicator" label="airspeed indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="20338" end="20345" title="G-force" label="G-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q488978" start="20543" end="20557" title="Windows NT 4.0" label="Windows NT 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="20615" end="20626" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907797" start="20654" end="20667" title="magnetic card" label="magnetic card"/>
<link wikidata="Q497741" start="20684" end="20690" title="Galley (kitchen)" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q513349" start="20700" end="20711" title="file server" label="file server"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="20845" end="20856" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513293" start="20998" end="21003" title="Cabin (aircraft)" label="cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361387" start="21165" end="21171" title="400 Hz" label="400 Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q653026" start="23031" end="23060" title="Executive Intelligence Review" label="Executive Intelligence Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098380" start="23094" end="23114" title="British intelligence agencies" label="British intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="23166" end="23183" title="incendiary device" label="incendiary device"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="23274" end="23277" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431277" start="23284" end="23301" title="Richard Tomlinson" label="Richard Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190534" start="23398" end="23415" title="News of the World" label="News of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q658945" start="24038" end="24058" title="Neue Zürcher Zeitung" label="Neue Zürcher Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q329425" start="24080" end="24088" title="burglary" label="burglary"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="24117" end="24123" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="25352" end="25362" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788617" start="25369" end="25385" title="The Fifth Estate (TV program)" label="The Fifth Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q116401" start="25415" end="25431" title="Schweizer Fernsehen" label="Swiss television"/>
<link wikidata="Q679141" start="26289" end="26311" title="Swiss Federal Archives" label="Swiss Federal Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="26829" end="26863" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430712" start="26977" end="26999" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922985" start="27106" end="27120" title="Treasure trove" label="treasure-trove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589276" start="27138" end="27160" title="Nova Scotia Government" label="Nova Scotia government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="27791" end="27804" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="28026" end="28032" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="28051" end="28068" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="28283" end="28289" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q441961" start="28311" end="28316" title="Mylar" label="Mylar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020402" start="28634" end="28648" title="Indian Harbour, Nova Scotia" label="Indian Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q118199" start="28753" end="28765" title="Flavio Cotti" label="Flavio Cotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q128543" start="28791" end="28804" title="Jean Chrétien" label="Jean Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453480" start="28830" end="28847" title="Russell MacLellan" label="Russell MacLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="28885" end="28891" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021695" start="29151" end="29168" title="Peggys Cove, Nova Scotia" label="Peggy&amp;#x27;s Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="29787" end="29798" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29883" end="29900" title="Flight number#flight designator" label="flight designator"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="30510" end="30530" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q667656" start="30739" end="30747" title="Crossair" label="Crossair"/>
<link wikidata="Q156776" start="30851" end="30880" title="Swiss International Air Lines" label="Swiss International Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31044" end="31059" title="Airbus_A330#A330-300" label="Airbus A330-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q108284447" start="31078" end="31110" title="Aviation accidents and incidents" label="Aviation accidents and incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q715683" start="31113" end="31145" title="South African Airways Flight 295" label="South African Airways Flight 295"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091473" start="31212" end="31231" title="EgyptAir Flight 804" label="EgyptAir Flight 804"/>
<link wikidata="Q694098" start="31520" end="31528" title="Swissair" label="Swissair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430712" start="31727" end="31749" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="32178" end="32181" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294708" wikidata="Q946885" url="?curid=294708" title="Magnus Uggla">
<text>Per Allan Magnus Claësson Uggla (pronounced ; born 18 June 1954) is a Swedish entertainer, composer, actor, and occasional radio host. He is known for his satirical lyrics.

Uggla was born in Stockholm. He was the lead singer of the hard rock band JUSO (later renamed Alexander Lucas) before going solo in the early 1970s. Their influences were Black Sabbath, The Groundhogs and Alice Cooper, among others. Uggla&#x27;s first two glam- and art rock-inspired albums &quot;Om Bobbo Viking&quot; and &quot;Livets teater&quot;ˈ did not sell well, the first only about 500 copies in Sweden and &quot;Livets teater&quot; even less. But his departure from glam rock with the punk and hard rock inspired &quot;Va ska man ta livet av sig för när man ändå inte får höra snacket efteråt&quot; gained him much popularity and the album sold about 150,000 copies. In the 1970s, several music magazines gave Magnus the name &quot;The Swedish Ian Hunter&quot;. In 1979, he was one of the members in Magnus Uggla Band. Povel Ramel awarded him the Karamelodiktstipendiet in 1991.

Uggla&#x27;s solo influences includes Karl Gerhard, David Bowie, The Clash, Marc Bolan, Wendy Carlos and Mott the Hoople. In an interview with Aftonbladet, Uggla said that the Clash &quot;was a really good band&quot; and also created the song &quot;Du ska va&#x27; glad&quot; after he saw them perform at Gröna Lund.

== Personal life ==
Uggla is married to Louise Uggla since 1990, with whom he has one son and a daughter. He also has a daughter from an earlier relationship.

Uggla is diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). He decided to do a psychiatric assessment for ADHD as an adult after one of his children had been diagnosed.

==In popular culture==
*Uggla participated in the fourth semi-final of Melodifestivalen 2007 with the song &quot;För kung och fosterland&quot;, competing for the opportunity to represent Sweden in the Eurovision Song Contest in Helsinki, Finland. On February 24, 2007, Uggla performed his song, and advanced to the Second Chance round the following Saturday, where he lost to Sonja Aldén in the last round of voting. Earlier that week, he had received complaints about the lyrics of the song which contain a line that could be interpreted as degrading to Polish people, but the Swedish Chancellor of Justice decided not to try this as a violation of the hate speech act.
*Plastic Bertrand has recorded a French version of Uggla&#x27;s song &quot;Vittring&quot;. It&#x27;s called &quot;Rock&#x27;n&#x27;Roll je te hais&quot; and is found on Bertrand&#x27;s LP &quot;L&#x27;Album&quot;.

==Discography==
;Studio albums
*1975: &quot;Om Bobbo Viking&quot;
*1976: &quot;Livets teater&quot;
*1977: &quot;Va ska man ta livet av sig för när man ändå inte får höra snacket efteråt&quot;
*1978: &quot;Vittring&quot;
*1980: &quot;Den ljusnande framtid är vår&quot;
*1983: &quot;Välkommen till folkhemmet&quot;
*1986: &quot;Den döende dandyn&quot;
*1987: &quot;Allting som ni gör kan jag göra bättre&quot;
*1989: &quot;35-åringen&quot;
*1993: &quot;Alla får påsar&quot;
*1997: &quot;Karaoke&quot;
*2000: &quot;Där jag är e&#x27;re alltid bäst&quot;
*2004: &quot;Den tatuerade generationen&quot;
*2006: &quot;Ett bedårande barn av sin tid&quot; 
*2007: &quot;Pärlor åt svinen&quot;
*2010: &quot;Karl Gerhard passerar i revy&quot;
*2011: &quot;Innan filmen tagit slut&quot;

;Collections
*1985: &quot;Retrospektivt collage&quot;
*1986: &quot;Collection&quot; (only released in Finland)
*1994: &quot;100% Uggla&quot;
*2002: &quot;Klassiska mästerverk&quot;
*2008: &quot;Magnus Uggla 1975-2008&quot;

;Live albums
*1981: &quot;Godkänd pirat&quot; – Live
*2013: &quot;Magnus den store&quot; – Live 

;Maxi EP
*1979: &quot;Magnus Uggla band sjunger schlagers&quot;

===International singles===
Singles released in France, Spain, United Kingdom and Germany.
*1979: Everything You Do/Concrete Kid
*1981: Ain&#x27;t About To Go Back/Scandal Beauties
*1981: Body Love/The Other Side (also released in Sweden)

===International covers===
Magnus Uggla has recorded several covers. These are the international ones, for which Uggla wrote new Swedish lyrics:
*The Rolling Stones&#x27; &quot;Star Star&quot; became Uggla&#x27;s &quot;Stjärn…r&quot; (or actually &quot;Stjärnluder&quot;)
*The Crystals&#x27; &quot;Then He Kissed Me&quot; became Uggla&#x27;s &quot;Å, han kysste mej&quot;
*Nick Gilder&#x27;s &quot;Metro Jets&quot; became Uggla&#x27;s &quot;Centrumhets&quot;
*Bruce Woolley&#x27;s &quot;Blue Blue (Victoria)&quot; became Uggla&#x27;s &quot;IQ&quot;
*Nick Gilder&#x27;s &quot;Worlds Collide&quot; became Uggla&#x27;s &quot;Herr servitör&quot;
Recorded with original lyrics:
*David Bowie&#x27;s &quot;Rebel Rebel&quot;
*Steppenwolf&#x27;s &quot;Born to Be Wild&quot;
*Ramones&#x27; &quot;Sheena Is a Punk Rocker&quot;

===Swedish covers===
Uggla has covered the following Swedish songs by other artists on officially released studio records (the artists mentioned are those who first recorded the songs, not the songwriters/composers):
*&quot;Jazzgossen&quot; by Karl Gerhard
*&quot;Leva livet&quot; by Lill-Babs (originally &quot;It&#x27;s My Party&quot; by Lesley Gore)
*&quot;Ring ring&quot; (Swedish version) by ABBA
*&quot;Mälarö kyrka&quot; by Sven Lindahl
*&quot;Livet är en fest&quot; by Nationalteatern
*&quot;Påtalåten&quot; by Ola Magnell
*&quot;Vem kan man lita på?&quot; by Hoola Bandoola Band
*&quot;Häng med på party&quot; by Ulf Neidemar
*&quot;I natt är jag din&quot; by Tomas Ledin
*&quot;Hög standard&quot; by Peps Persson
*&quot;Vi måste höja våra röster&quot; by Margareta Garpe, Suzanne Osten and Gunnar Edander (since nobody seems to know exactly who recorded it first, these are the composers and songwriters)
*&quot;Tusen systrar&quot; by Jösses Flickor
*&quot;In kommer Gösta&quot; by Philemon Arthur &amp; the Dung
*&quot;Speedy Gonzales&quot; by Nationalteatern
*&quot;Hog farm&quot; by Pugh Rogefeldt
*&quot;Ska vi gå hem till dig&quot; by Lasse Tennander

;Others
*&quot;Jag och min far&quot; (from EP &quot;Så mycket bättre (Säsong 3 – Olles dag – Program 2)&quot;)
*&quot;Har hört om en tjej (I Heard of a Girl)&quot; (from EP &quot;Säsong 3 – Miss Lis dag – Program 3&quot;)

==Bibliography==
* Jag hade en gång en blogg (2008) with Jonathex Dan
* Enda sättet att genomlida en konsert är att själv stå på scenen (2019)
==See also==
*List of Swedes in music

==References==
==External links==
*Official Magnus Uggla website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q946885" start="0" end="31" title="Magnus Uggla" label="Per Allan Magnus Claësson Uggla"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="155" end="164" title="satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="233" end="242" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="345" end="358" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q682021" start="360" end="374" title="The Groundhogs" label="The Groundhogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="379" end="391" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="430" end="435" title="glam rock" label="glam-"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="440" end="448" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357000" start="471" end="486" title="Om Bobbo Viking" label="Om Bobbo Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357274" start="503" end="516" title="Livets teater" label="Livets teater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="668" end="672" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="677" end="686" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357113" start="702" end="775" title="Va ska man ta livet av sig för när man ändå inte får höra snacket efteråt" label="Va ska man ta livet av sig för när man ändå inte får höra snacket efteråt"/>
<link wikidata="Q712678" start="927" end="937" title="Ian Hunter (singer)" label="Ian Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378879" start="1002" end="1013" title="Povel Ramel" label="Povel Ramel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1030" end="1052" title="Povel Ramel#Karamelodiktstipendiet" label="Karamelodiktstipendiet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731248" start="1101" end="1113" title="Karl Gerhard" label="Karl Gerhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="1115" end="1126" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="1128" end="1137" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q287514" start="1139" end="1149" title="Marc Bolan" label="Marc Bolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44641" start="1151" end="1163" title="Wendy Carlos" label="Wendy Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126287" start="1168" end="1183" title="Mott the Hoople" label="Mott the Hoople"/>
<link wikidata="Q389458" start="1206" end="1217" title="Aftonbladet" label="Aftonbladet"/>
<link wikidata="Q260304" start="1368" end="1378" title="Gröna Lund" label="Gröna Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="1565" end="1605" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q58884" start="1795" end="1811" title="Melodifestivalen" label="Melodifestivalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149860" start="1837" end="1860" title="För kung och fosterland" label="För kung och fosterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10153" start="1925" end="1948" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2007" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934825" start="2100" end="2111" title="Sonja Aldén" label="Sonja Aldén"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353087" start="2310" end="2331" title="Chancellor of Justice" label="Chancellor of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="2378" end="2389" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q558440" start="2396" end="2412" title="Plastic Bertrand" label="Plastic Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357000" start="2654" end="2669" title="Om Bobbo Viking" label="Om Bobbo Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357274" start="2689" end="2702" title="Livets teater" label="Livets teater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357113" start="2722" end="2795" title="Va ska man ta livet av sig för när man ändå inte får höra snacket efteråt" label="Va ska man ta livet av sig för när man ändå inte får höra snacket efteråt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410571" start="2815" end="2823" title="Vittring" label="Vittring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357341" start="2843" end="2871" title="Den ljusnande framtid är vår" label="Den ljusnande framtid är vår"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356884" start="2891" end="2916" title="Välkommen till folkhemmet" label="Välkommen till folkhemmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356768" start="2936" end="2953" title="Den döende dandyn (album)" label="Den döende dandyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356760" start="2973" end="3011" title="Allting som ni gör kan jag göra bättre" label="Allting som ni gör kan jag göra bättre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4187270" start="3031" end="3041" title="35-åringen" label="35-åringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678093" start="3061" end="3075" title="Alla får påsar" label="Alla får påsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356805" start="3095" end="3102" title="Karaoke (Magnus Uggla album)" label="Karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356893" start="3122" end="3154" title="Där jag är e&amp;#x27;re alltid bäst" label="Där jag är e&amp;#x27;re alltid bäst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356816" start="3174" end="3200" title="Den tatuerade generationen" label="Den tatuerade generationen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356788" start="3220" end="3249" title="Ett bedårande barn av sin tid" label="Ett bedårande barn av sin tid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356283" start="3270" end="3286" title="Pärlor åt svinen" label="Pärlor åt svinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10543667" start="3306" end="3334" title="Karl Gerhard passerar i revy" label="Karl Gerhard passerar i revy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10535688" start="3354" end="3377" title="Innan filmen tagit slut" label="Innan filmen tagit slut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356795" start="3411" end="3432" title="Retrospektivt collage" label="Retrospektivt collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356888" start="3452" end="3462" title="Collection (Magnus Uggla album)" label="Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="3487" end="3494" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825483" start="3509" end="3519" title="100% Uggla" label="100% Uggla"/>
<link wikidata="Q387810" start="3539" end="3559" title="Klassiska mästerverk" label="Klassiska mästerverk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3579" end="3601" title="Magnus Uggla 1975-2008" label="Magnus Uggla 1975-2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356735" start="3635" end="3648" title="Godkänd pirat" label="Godkänd pirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17445157" start="3675" end="3691" title="Magnus den store" label="Magnus den store"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356779" start="3729" end="3764" title="Magnus Uggla band sjunger schlagers" label="Magnus Uggla band sjunger schlagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="4158" end="4176" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951518" start="4189" end="4198" title="Star Star" label="Star Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475018" start="4285" end="4297" title="The Crystals" label="The Crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977556" start="4310" end="4327" title="Then He Kissed Me" label="Then He Kissed Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985390" start="4385" end="4396" title="Nick Gilder" label="Nick Gilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978501" start="4472" end="4485" title="Bruce Woolley" label="Bruce Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985390" start="4562" end="4573" title="Nick Gilder" label="Nick Gilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="4686" end="4697" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190364" start="4711" end="4722" title="Rebel Rebel" label="Rebel Rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q465862" start="4730" end="4741" title="Steppenwolf (band)" label="Steppenwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q893936" start="4755" end="4770" title="Born to Be Wild" label="Born to Be Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="4778" end="4785" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720345" start="4798" end="4821" title="Sheena Is a Punk Rocker" label="Sheena Is a Punk Rocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731248" start="5073" end="5085" title="Karl Gerhard" label="Karl Gerhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q285351" start="5113" end="5122" title="Lill-Babs" label="Lill-Babs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452463" start="5141" end="5159" title="It&amp;#x27;s My Party (Lesley Gore song)" label="It&amp;#x27;s My Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q272942" start="5169" end="5180" title="Lesley Gore" label="Lesley Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="5226" end="5230" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356158" start="5260" end="5272" title="Sven Lindahl" label="Sven Lindahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425672" start="5306" end="5321" title="Nationalteatern" label="Nationalteatern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356729" start="5348" end="5359" title="Ola Magnell" label="Ola Magnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775501" start="5397" end="5416" title="Hoola Bandoola Band" label="Hoola Bandoola Band"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5451" end="5463" title="Ulf Neidemar" label="Ulf Neidemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q955209" start="5498" end="5509" title="Tomas Ledin" label="Tomas Ledin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459831" start="5539" end="5551" title="Peps Persson" label="Peps Persson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5594" end="5609" title="Margareta Garpe" label="Margareta Garpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q526431" start="5611" end="5624" title="Suzanne Osten" label="Suzanne Osten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5629" end="5643" title="Gunnar Edander" label="Gunnar Edander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5774" end="5788" title="Jösses Flickor" label="Jösses Flickor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356536" start="5821" end="5851" title="Philemon Arthur &amp;amp; the Dung" label="Philemon Arthur &amp;amp; the Dung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425672" start="5884" end="5899" title="Nationalteatern" label="Nationalteatern"/>
<link wikidata="Q905203" start="5925" end="5939" title="Pugh Rogefeldt" label="Pugh Rogefeldt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5979" end="5994" title="Lasse Tennander" label="Lasse Tennander"/>
<link wikidata="Q10539090" start="6011" end="6026" title="Jag och min far" label="Jag och min far"/>
<link wikidata="Q358074" start="6376" end="6399" title="List of Swedes in music" label="List of Swedes in music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294709" wikidata="Q297646" url="?curid=294709" title="LPC">
<text>LPC may refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Linear predictive coding, a method used in audio signal processing and speech processing
* Leaf protein concentrate, a concentrated form of the proteins found in the leaves of plants
* Long period comet, a comet classification
* Lysophosphatidylcholine, chemical compounds
* Late positive component, a brain potential
* (Latin for coal tar solution)

===Computing===
* LPC (programming language), the programming language of LPMuds
* Local Procedure Call, in Microsoft&#x27;s Windows NT operating systems
* Low Pin Count, a computer bus technology
* Lync Persistent Chat, a Microsoft Lync feature
* NXP LPC, a family of 32-bit microcontroller integrated circuits

==Organizations==
* Lahore Press Club, a press association in Pakistan
* Lambda Pi Chi, a U.S. sorority
* Las Piñas College, Philippines
* Liberal Party of Canada, a Canadian political party
* Li Po Chun United World College, a Hong Kong college
* Little People of Canada, for people of small stature
* London Philharmonic Choir, a British choir
* Lucky People Center, a Swedish electronic music collective
* Luethi-Peterson Camps, an international summer camp program
* New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, the agency administering the city&#x27;s Landmarks Preservation Law

==Other uses==
* Lompoc Airport (FAA LID), US
* Legal Practice Course, the vocational stage for becoming a solicitor in England and Wales
* Liable to become a Public Charge (LPC), in US immigration
* Longmont Potion Castle (born 1972), surrealist prank call artist
* Licensed professional counselor, a professional credential

==See also==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q297646" start="0" end="3" title="LPC" label="LPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826438" start="48" end="72" title="Linear predictive coding" label="Linear predictive coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062603" start="139" end="163" title="Leaf protein concentrate" label="Leaf protein concentrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="233" end="250" title="Long period comet" label="Long period comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q410548" start="277" end="300" title="Lysophosphatidylcholine" label="Lysophosphatidylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495400" start="323" end="346" title="Late positive component" label="Late positive component"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502717" start="417" end="443" title="LPC (programming language)" label="LPC (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664228" start="482" end="502" title="Local Procedure Call" label="Local Procedure Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320152" start="555" end="568" title="Low Pin Count" label="Low Pin Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416838" start="622" end="636" title="Microsoft Lync" label="Microsoft Lync"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956007" start="647" end="654" title="NXP LPC" label="NXP LPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473404" start="732" end="749" title="Lahore Press Club" label="Lahore Press Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481139" start="785" end="798" title="Lambda Pi Chi" label="Lambda Pi Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12963132" start="818" end="835" title="Las Piñas College" label="Las Piñas College"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="851" end="874" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q115454" start="905" end="936" title="Li Po Chun United World College" label="Li Po Chun United World College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651312" start="960" end="983" title="Little People of Canada" label="Little People of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670651" start="1015" end="1040" title="London Philharmonic Choir" label="London Philharmonic Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873727" start="1060" end="1079" title="Lucky People Center" label="Lucky People Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699592" start="1121" end="1142" title="Luethi-Peterson Camps" label="Luethi-Peterson Camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q967276" start="1183" end="1230" title="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission" label="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669547" start="1318" end="1332" title="Lompoc Airport" label="Lompoc Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812363" start="1349" end="1370" title="Legal Practice Course" label="Legal Practice Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539420" start="1441" end="1479" title="Liable to become a Public Charge (LPC)" label="Liable to become a Public Charge (LPC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674125" start="1501" end="1523" title="Longmont Potion Castle" label="Longmont Potion Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543051" start="1568" end="1599" title="Licensed professional counselor" label="Licensed professional counselor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294714" wikidata="Q5227361" url="?curid=294714" title="Data strobe encoding">
<text>Data strobe encoding (or D/S encoding) is an encoding scheme for transmitting data in digital circuits.
It uses two signal lines (e.g. wires in a cable or traces on a printed circuit board), &quot;Data&quot; and &quot;Strobe&quot;. These have the property that either Data or Strobe changes its logical value in one clock cycle, but never both. More precisely data is transmitted as-is and strobe changes its state if and only if data stays constant between two data bits.
This allows for easy clock recovery with a good jitter tolerance by XORing the two signal line values.

There is an equivalent way to specify the relationship between Data and Strobe.
For even-numbered Data bits, Strobe is the opposite of Data.
For odd-numbered Data bits, Strobe is the same as Data.
From this definition it is more obvious that the XOR of Data and Strobe will yield a clock signal. Also, it specifies the simplest means of generating the Strobe signal for a given Data stream.

Data strobe encoding originated in IEEE 1355 Standard and is used on the signal lines in SpaceWire and the IEEE 1394 (also known as FireWire 400) system.

Gray code is another code that always changes one logical value, but never more than one.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5227361" start="0" end="20" title="Data strobe encoding" label="Data strobe encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227361" start="25" end="28" title="Data strobe encoding" label="D/S"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121567" start="86" end="101" title="digital circuit" label="digital circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="167" end="188" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="295" end="308" title="Truth value" label="logical value"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="316" end="327" title="clock cycle" label="clock cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q116245385" start="494" end="508" title="clock recovery" label="clock recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052698" start="521" end="527" title="jitter" label="jitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="541" end="544" title="XOR" label="XOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653434" start="1004" end="1013" title="IEEE 1355" label="IEEE 1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q674249" start="1058" end="1067" title="SpaceWire" label="SpaceWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="1076" end="1085" title="FireWire" label="IEEE 1394"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="1101" end="1113" title="FireWire 400" label="FireWire 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q332772" start="1124" end="1133" title="Gray code" label="Gray code"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294717" wikidata="Q1269950" url="?curid=294717" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election">
<text>The first election to the devolved Scottish Parliament, to fill 129 seats, took place on 6 May 1999. Following the election, the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats formed the Scottish Executive, with Labour Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) Donald Dewar becoming First Minister.

The Scottish Parliament was created after a referendum on devolution took place on 11 September 1997 in which 74.3% of those who voted approved the idea. The Scotland Act (1998) was then passed by the UK Parliament which established the devolved Scottish Parliament and Scottish Executive. The parliament was elected using Mixed-member proportional representation, combining 73 (First-past-the-post) constituencies and proportional representation with the 73 constituencies being grouped together to make eight regions each electing seven additional members to make a total of 129. This meant that it would be unlikely for any party to gain a majority of seats in the new parliament and either minority or coalition Scottish Executives would have to be formed.

The first general election to the Scottish Parliament overall produced few surprises with the Labour Party still enjoying high popularity following their landslide victory in the 1997 UK general election as widely expected was the largest party winning 56 seats, mostly in their traditional Central Belt heartlands, which was nine seats short of an overall majority. Labour formed a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats, who won 17 seats.

The Scottish National Party (SNP) had done well in opinion polls running up to the election, gaining 40% in some approval ratings, but this level of support was not maintained. The SNP were the second largest party with 35 seats, which still represented their best performance since the October 1974 general election. The Conservative Party, still recovering from their wipeout in the 1997 general election across Scotland, failed to win a single constituency seat but did win 18 seats through the Additional Member System.

The Scottish Socialist Party (SSP) and the Greens picked up unexpected additional member seats. Robin Harper became the first ever elected Green parliamentarian in the history of the United Kingdom. Dennis Canavan, who had failed to become an approved Labour candidate, won the Falkirk West constituency as an independent candidate.

Following the election the new parliament met in the General Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland in Edinburgh for the first time on Wednesday 12 May 1999, although the actual devolution of powers from Westminster to the Scottish Parliament did not take place until midnight on Thursday 1 July 1999, almost two months later.

For a full list of MSPs elected, see &quot;1st Scottish Parliament&quot;. For lists of constituencies and regions, see &quot;Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions&quot;.

==Results==

| style=&quot;background-color:white&quot; colspan=15 | 
! rowspan=2 colspan=2 | Party
! colspan=5 | Constituencies
! colspan=5 | Regional additional members
! colspan=5 | Total seats
! Votes !! % !! ± !! Seats !! ± !! Votes !! % !! ± !! Seats !! ± !! Total !! ± !! %







|style=&quot;text-align:left&quot;; colspan=&quot;2&quot; | Valid votes || 2,342,488 || 99.7 || – || colspan=&quot;2&quot;|   || 2,338,914 || 99.7 || – || colspan=&quot;5&quot;|  
|style=&quot;text-align:left&quot;; colspan=&quot;2&quot; | Spoilt votes || 7,839 || 0.3 || – || colspan=&quot;2&quot;|   || 7,268 || 0.3 || – || colspan=&quot;5&quot;|  
!style=&quot;text-align:left&quot;; colspan=&quot;2&quot; | Total || 2,350,327 || 100 ||   || 73 || – || 2,346,182 || 100 ||   || 56 || – || 129 || – || 100
|style=&quot;text-align:left&quot;; colspan=&quot;2&quot; | Electorate/turnout || 4,027,433 || 58.4 || – || colspan=&quot;2&quot;|   || 4,027,433 || 58.3 || – || colspan=&quot;5&quot;|  



== Constituency and regional summary ==

=== Central Scotland ===
|-
! colspan=2 style=&quot;width: 200px&quot;|Constituency
! style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Elected member
! style=&quot;width: 300px&quot;|Result




! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Party
! Elected candidates
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|Seats
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−
! style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|Votes
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|%
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−%





=== Glasgow ===
|-
! colspan=2 style=&quot;width: 200px&quot;|Constituency
! style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Elected member
! style=&quot;width: 300px&quot;|Result




! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Party
! Elected candidates
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|Seats
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−
! style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|Votes
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|%
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−%






=== Highlands and Islands ===
|-
! colspan=2 style=&quot;width: 200px&quot;|Constituency
! style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Elected member
! style=&quot;width: 300px&quot;|Result



! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Party
! Elected candidates
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|Seats
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−
! style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|Votes
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|%
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−%





=== Lothians ===
|-
! colspan=2 style=&quot;width: 200px&quot;|Constituency
! style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Elected member
! style=&quot;width: 300px&quot;|Result



|-
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Party
! Elected candidates
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|Seats
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−
! style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|Votes
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|%
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−%






=== Mid Scotland and Fife ===
|-
! colspan=2 style=&quot;width: 200px&quot;|Constituency
! style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Elected member
! style=&quot;width: 300px&quot;|Result



|-
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Party
! Elected candidates
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|Seats
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−
! style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|Votes
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|%
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−%





=== North East Scotland ===
|-
! colspan=2 style=&quot;width: 200px&quot;|Constituency
! style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Elected member
! style=&quot;width: 300px&quot;|Result



|-
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Party
! Elected candidates
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|Seats
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−
! style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|Votes
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|%
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−%




=== South of Scotland ===
|-
! colspan=2 style=&quot;width: 200px&quot;|Constituency
! style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Elected member
! style=&quot;width: 300px&quot;|Result



|-
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Party
! Elected candidates
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|Seats
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−
! style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|Votes
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|%
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−%




=== West of Scotland ===
|-
! colspan=2 style=&quot;width: 200px&quot;|Constituency
! style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Elected member
! style=&quot;width: 300px&quot;|Result



|-
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;width: 150px&quot;|Party
! Elected candidates
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|Seats
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−
! style=&quot;width: 50px&quot;|Votes
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|%
! style=&quot;width: 40px&quot;|+/−%






===Party representation===
*Labour – 56 Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs)
*SNP – 35 MSPs
*Conservative – 18 MSPs
*Liberal Democrats – 17 MSPs
*Green – 1 MSP
*SSP – 1 MSP
*Others (Dennis Canavan, Falkirk West) – 1 MSP

==Party leaders in 1999==

* Labour – Donald Dewar
* SNP – Alex Salmond
* Conservative – David McLetchie
* Liberal Democrat – Jim Wallace
* SSP – Tommy Sheridan
* Green – Robin Harper

==Opinion polls==
==See also==
* Executive of the 1st Scottish Parliament
* Members elected to the 1st Scottish Parliament

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*SourceForge.net

===Manifestos===
* &quot;Scotland First&quot;, Scottish Conservatives
* &quot;Caring for Scotland&quot;, Scottish Greens
* &quot;Raising the Standard&quot;, Scottish Liberal Democrats
* &quot;Scotland&#x27;s Party&quot;, Scottish National Party</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="35" end="54" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="129" end="141" title="Scottish Labour" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="150" end="167" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="179" end="197" title="Scottish Executive" label="Scottish Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="211" end="250" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q333158" start="251" end="263" title="Donald Dewar" label="Donald Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="273" end="287" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690249" start="334" end="358" title="1997 Scottish devolution referendum" label="referendum on devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="448" end="467" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act (1998)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="491" end="504" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="UK Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="613" end="653" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="Mixed-member proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437888" start="668" end="704" title="List of Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions (1999–2011)" label="(First-past-the-post) constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="709" end="736" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437888" start="795" end="808" title="Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions 1999 to 2011" label="eight regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="829" end="847" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="additional members"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="984" end="992" title="minority government" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="996" end="1005" title="coalition" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="1086" end="1105" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="1146" end="1158" title="Scottish Labour" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053720" start="1343" end="1355" title="Central Belt" label="Central Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="1465" end="1482" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="1507" end="1530" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="1790" end="1819" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="October 1974 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243587" start="1825" end="1843" title="Scottish Conservatives" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="1888" end="1909" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1917" end="1925" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437892" start="1950" end="1962" title="Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q891900" start="2032" end="2056" title="Scottish Socialist Party" label="Scottish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="2071" end="2077" title="Scottish Greens" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="2099" end="2116" title="additional member system" label="additional member"/>
<link wikidata="Q202002" start="2124" end="2136" title="Robin Harper" label="Robin Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189028" start="2227" end="2241" title="Dennis Canavan" label="Dennis Canavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394351" start="2306" end="2318" title="Falkirk West (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Falkirk West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531709" start="2415" end="2462" title="General Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland" label="General Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="2541" end="2551" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="2567" end="2578" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="2586" end="2605" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q29585760" start="2734" end="2757" title="1st Scottish Parliament" label="1st Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437892" start="2816" end="2872" title="Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions" label="Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="3033" end="3050" title="additional member system" label="additional member"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189028" start="7670" end="7684" title="Dennis Canavan" label="Dennis Canavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394351" start="7686" end="7698" title="Falkirk West (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Falkirk West"/>
<link wikidata="Q333158" start="7747" end="7759" title="Donald Dewar" label="Donald Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="7768" end="7780" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175613" start="7798" end="7813" title="David McLetchie" label="David McLetchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q333807" start="7835" end="7846" title="Jim Wallace, Baron Wallace of Tankerness" label="Jim Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q542330" start="7855" end="7869" title="Tommy Sheridan" label="Tommy Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202002" start="7880" end="7892" title="Robin Harper" label="Robin Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036421" start="7927" end="7967" title="Executive of the 1st Scottish Parliament" label="Executive of the 1st Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q29585760" start="7970" end="8016" title="1st Scottish Parliament" label="Members elected to the 1st Scottish Parliament"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294722" wikidata="Q2346527" url="?curid=294722" title="Sagittariidae">
<text>Sagittariidae is a family of raptor with one living species—the secretarybird (&quot;Sagittarius serpentarius&quot;) native to Africa—and a few fossil taxa.

This single extant species has affected the fossil record of the group by ‘pulling’ the temporal range of the family to the present, an artifact called the Pull of the recent.

German naturalists Otto Finsch and Gustav Hartlaub established the taxon name as a subfamily—Sagittariinae—in 1870. Although their term postdated Gypogeranidae of Vigors (1825) and Serpentariidae of Selys Longchamps (1842), the genus name &quot;Sagittarius&quot; (described in 1783) had priority over &quot;Gypogeranus&quot; Illiger, 1811 and &quot;Serpentarius&quot; Cuvier, 1798.

==Genera==
There are at least four genera:
* †&quot;Amanuensis&quot; 
* †&quot;Amphiserpentarius&quot; 
* †&quot;Pelargopappus&quot; 
* &quot;Sagittarius&quot; 

The genus &quot;Pelargopappus&quot; is known from Miocene deposits in France. The genus &quot;Amanuensis&quot; is known from Miocene deposits in Africa.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2346527" start="0" end="13" title="Sagittariidae" label="Sagittariidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="19" end="25" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="29" end="35" title="Bird of prey" label="raptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="52" end="59" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q168748" start="64" end="77" title="secretarybird" label="secretarybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098758" start="314" end="332" title="Pull of the recent" label="Pull of the recent"/>
<link wikidata="Q60592" start="354" end="365" title="Otto Finsch" label="Otto Finsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q62368" start="370" end="385" title="Gustav Hartlaub" label="Gustav Hartlaub"/>
<link wikidata="Q332479" start="498" end="504" title="Nicholas Aylward Vigors" label="Vigors"/>
<link wikidata="Q59638" start="534" end="550" title="Edmond de Sélys Longchamps" label="Selys Longchamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q58832" start="660" end="667" title="Johann Karl Wilhelm Illiger" label="Illiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="703" end="709" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q108921112" start="770" end="780" title="Amanuensis (bird)" label="Amanuensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="797" end="814" title="Amphiserpentarius" label="Amphiserpentarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792675" start="831" end="844" title="Pelargopappus" label="Pelargopappus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168748" start="860" end="871" title="Secretarybird" label="Sagittarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792675" start="896" end="909" title="Pelargopappus" label="Pelargopappus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108921112" start="974" end="984" title="Amanuensis (bird)" label="Amanuensis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294725" wikidata="Q1417071" url="?curid=294725" title="ROX Desktop">
<text>The ROX Desktop is a discontinued graphical desktop environment for the X Window System. It is based on the ROX-Filer which is a drag and drop spatial file manager. It is free software released under the GNU General Public License. The environment was inspired by the user interface of RISC OS (not to be confused with RISC/os). The name &quot;ROX&quot; comes from &quot;RISC OS on X&quot;. Programs can be installed or removed easily using Zero Install, a decentralized software installation system.

The project was started by Thomas Leonard as a student at University of Southampton in 1999 and was still led by him in 2012.

== Software components ==

The ROX Desktop is a desktop environment based on the ROX-Filer file manager. Files are loaded by applications by using drag and drop from the filer to the application, and saved by dragging back to the filer. Applications are executable directories, and are thus also installed (copied), uninstalled (deleted), and run through the filer interface. ROX has a strong link with Zero Install, a method of identifying and executing programs via a URL, to make software installation completely automatic.

The desktop uses the GTK toolkit, like the GNOME and Xfce desktops. The design focuses on small, simple programs using drag-and-drop to move data between them. For example, a user might load a compressed file into a spreadsheet from the web by dragging the data from the web browser to the archiver, and from there into the spreadsheet. A program would be installed in the same way, by dragging the archive from the web to the archiver, and from there to the applications directory in the filer.

Drag-and-drop saving allows the user to save the text file to any directory they please, or directly to another application, such as the archiver on the panel.

==ROX Filer==

ROX-Filer is a graphical spatial file manager for the X Window System. It can be used on its own as a file manager, or can be used as part of ROX Desktop. It is the file manager provided by default in certain Linux distributions such as Puppy Linux and , and was used in Xubuntu until Thunar became stable.

ROX-Filer is built using the GTK+ toolkit. Available under the terms of the GPL-2.0-or-later license, ROX-Filer is free software.

== Zero Install ==
Zero Install (or 0install) is a multi-platform (Windows, Linux, macOS) system for running applications that allows publishing applications in a decentralized way (without using central repositories, directly on the project websites). Unlike the xcopy mechanism, 0install retains the advantages of repositories: shared libraries, automatic updates, validation of digital signatures.

Zero Install uses the metadata (sometimes called the &quot;feed format&quot;) written in XML. Like with xcopy deployment, each application gets its own directory and there are no side effects inflicted upon the OS, so no administrative rights are needed and different versions of the same application can be run side-by-side without special modifications.

To run an application, the user needs to use a launcher in ROX-Filer, that will ask the system to run an application with the given URL in the script inside the launcher. At the first time launching it, the URL will be used to download the program and save it in the system. The next times the program is launched, the system will not download it again. This is the reason why it is called Zero Install: the launcher tries to run the program, and not install it.

==See also==

* Comparison of X Window System desktop environments
* Package manager

==References==
== Sources ==

== Notes ==

* Bruce Byfield (7 February 2007) &quot;ROX Desktop provides light, quirky alternative to GNOME and KDE&quot;, Linux.com
* Jo Moskalewski (July 2002) &#x27; RISC rocks. Jo´s alternativer Desktop: ROX LinuxUser
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1417071" start="4" end="15" title="ROX Desktop" label="ROX Desktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q205020" start="44" end="63" title="desktop environment" label="desktop environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="72" end="87" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417071" start="108" end="117" title="ROX Desktop" label="ROX-Filer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888831" start="143" end="163" title="spatial file manager" label="spatial file manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="171" end="184" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="204" end="230" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="286" end="293" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433109" start="319" end="326" title="MIPS RISC/os" label="RISC/os"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="382" end="383" title="X Window System" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q76473" start="560" end="585" title="University of Southampton" label="University of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205020" start="677" end="696" title="desktop environment" label="desktop environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q732970" start="720" end="732" title="file manager" label="file manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q558376" start="776" end="789" title="drag and drop" label="drag and drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620924" start="883" end="905" title="application directory" label="executable directories"/>
<link wikidata="Q836862" start="925" end="934" title="Installation (computer programs)" label="installed"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="1099" end="1102" title="URL" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="1178" end="1181" title="GTK" label="GTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q44316" start="1200" end="1205" title="GNOME" label="GNOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q170821" start="1210" end="1214" title="Xfce" label="Xfce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888831" start="1855" end="1875" title="spatial file manager" label="spatial file manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="1884" end="1899" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="2039" end="2057" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q240116" start="2067" end="2078" title="Puppy Linux" label="Puppy Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q72688" start="2101" end="2108" title="Xubuntu" label="Xubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q757834" start="2115" end="2121" title="Thunar" label="Thunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="2167" end="2171" title="GTK+" label="GTK+"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004273" start="2172" end="2179" title="toolkit" label="toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="2214" end="2230" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPL-2.0-or-later"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133368" start="2465" end="2485" title="Repository (version control)" label="central repositories"/>
<link wikidata="Q8095398" start="2599" end="2615" title="shared libraries" label="shared libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="2650" end="2668" title="digital signatures" label="digital signatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049444" start="2983" end="2995" title="Side-by-side assembly" label="side-by-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="3038" end="3049" title="Application software" label="application"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155812" start="3508" end="3558" title="Comparison of X Window System desktop environments" label="Comparison of X Window System desktop environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q891055" start="3561" end="3576" title="Package manager" label="Package manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977206" start="3623" end="3636" title="Bruce Byfield" label="Bruce Byfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042995" start="3732" end="3741" title="Linux.com" label="Linux.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827097" start="3821" end="3830" title="LinuxUser" label="LinuxUser"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294731" wikidata="Q721960" url="?curid=294731" title="Musketeer">
<text>A musketeer ( ) was a type of soldier equipped with a musket. Musketeers were an important part of early modern warfare, particularly in Europe, as they normally comprised the majority of their infantry. The musketeer was a precursor to the rifleman. Muskets were replaced by breech loading rifles as the almost universal firearm for modern armies during the period 1850 to 1870. The traditional designation of &quot;musketeer&quot; for an infantry private survived in the Imperial German Army until World War I.

==Historical antecedents==
The hand cannon was invented in Song dynasty China in the 12th century and was in widespread use there in the 13th century. It spread westward across Asia during the 14th century. The hand cannon evolved into the arquebus that appeared in Europe and the Ottoman Empire during the 15th century. The term musket was originally used to describe a heavy arquebus capable of penetrating heavy armor. Although this heavy version of the musket fell out of use after the mid-16th century with the decline of heavy armor, the term &quot;musket&quot; remained as a general descriptor and lent its name to the infantry type knows as the musketeer.

==Musketeers in early modern Europe==
Musketeers are primarily associated with infantry in early modern Europe, and were employed by many European nations.

===Spain===

In the Spanish army, the &quot;tercio&quot; or the &quot;Spanish square&quot; was a mixed infantry formation that theoretically could number up to 3,000 pikemen, swordsmen and musketeers; although it was usually much smaller on the battlefield. It was effective in its era, capitalizing on the close-quarter impact of the pike combined with the long-range projectile capabilities of the musket. It resembled a loosely formed phalanx in function, but was far more flexible and deadly. Musketeers were developed by the Spanish during the Italian Wars so as to deal with the heavily armored French Gendarmes. An arquebus was not powerful enough to take down an armored knight, but a wall gun was. Spanish field commanders wanted to bring the firepower of a small wall gun onto the battlefield yet have it be as maneuverable as an arquebus. The solution was a bigger arquebus, but the additional weight made it extremely difficult to support the barrel during aiming and firing; hence, the musket rest, the precursor to the monopod. Furthermore, musketeers were the first infantry to give up armor entirely. Other than the musket rest, the musketeer&#x27;s equipage was upgraded from a powder flask to a bandolier. Due to the difficulty in manipulating the musket rest and the strength needed to handle the heavier gun, musketeers were stronger men and paid more than the rest of the infantry.

===France===

The Musketeers of the Guard were a junior unit, initially of roughly company strength, of the military branch of the Royal Household. They were created in 1622 when Louis XIII furnished a company of light cavalry (the &quot;carabiniers&quot;, created by Louis&#x27; father Henry IV) with muskets. Musketeers fought in battle both on foot as infantry and on horseback as dragoons. At the Battle of Fontenoy in 1745 the King&#x27;s Musketeers served as regular cavalry, charging British infantry with drawn swords.

As one of the junior units in the Royal Guard, the Musketeers were not closely linked to the royal family. Traditional bodyguard duties were in fact performed by the and the . Because of its later establishment, the Musketeers were open to the lower classes of French nobility or younger sons from noble families whose oldest sons served in the more prestigious and (Light Horse). The Musketeers, many of them still teenagers, soon gained a reputation for fighting spirit and unruly behaviour.

Their high esprit de corps gained royal favor for the Musketeers, and they were frequently seen at court and in Paris. Shortly after their creation, Cardinal Richelieu created a bodyguard unit for himself. So as not to offend the king with a perceived sense of self-importance, Richelieu did not name them Garde du Corps like the king&#x27;s personal guards, but rather Musketeers after the Kings&#x27; junior guard cavalry. This was the start of a bitter rivalry between the two corps of Musketeers. At the cardinal&#x27;s death in 1642, the company passed to his successor Cardinal Mazarin. At Mazarin&#x27;s death in 1661, the Cardinal&#x27;s Musketeers passed to Louis XIV, contrary to the wishes of both the King&#x27;s Musketeers and the Cardinal&#x27;s Musketeers themselves. The Musketeers were subsequently reorganized as a guard cavalry regiment of two companies. The King&#x27;s Musketeers became the first company, popularly known as &quot;Grey Musketeers&quot; (), while the Cardinal&#x27;s Musketeers became the second company, known as &quot;Black Musketeers&quot; () for riding grey and black horses, respectively. From their establishment, the musketeers wore blue cloak-like cassocks, lined with red and edged with silver embroidery. From 1688, the cassocks were replaced by smaller or sleeveless coats in the same colours. In the early decades of the corps, the musketeers had worn civilian dress under their cassocks, according to personal taste and means, but in 1677 a scarlet uniform was adopted.

In terms of recruitment, entry into the Musketeers was much sought after by those sons of the aristocracy who did not possess the quarterings of nobility required for the and . These two senior guard units were closed to all but the highest ranking and wealthy noble families. Accordingly for lesser gentry, or ambitious commoners, service in the Musketeers was the only way to join a mounted unit in the royal household and perhaps catch the King&#x27;s eye. However, enlistment did require both letters of recommendation and evidence that a recruit had the family means to support the costs of service. These included the provision of horses, swords, clothing, a servant and equipment. Only the musket, the sleeveless soubreveste and the distinctive blue cassock were provided by the monarch.

In 1776, the Musketeers were disbanded by Louis XVI for budgetary reasons. Following the first Bourbon Restoration, the Musketeers were reestablished on 6 July 1814 along with the other military units of the former royal household. These expensive and aristocratic regiments proved ineffective when Napoleon returned from Elba, mostly dispersing, though some accompanied Louis XVIII into brief exile. Following the second restoration of the monarchy, the Musketeers were finally disbanded on 31 December 1815.

Decades later, starting in 1844, this group was the subject of the now-famous serial publication &quot;The Three Musketeers&quot;, first published in the magazine between March and July 1844. The author, Alexandre Dumas, père, based his work on the book (&quot;Memoirs of Mister d&#x27;Artagnan, lieutenant captain of the first company of the King&#x27;s Musketeers&quot;) by Gatien de Courtilz de Sandras (Cologne, 1700), a fictionalized account of the life of Charles de Batz de Castelmore d&#x27;Artagnan (c. 1611–1673). Other musketeers served as inspirations for some of the other characters. Isaac de Porthau (1617–1712) was the inspiration for Dumas&#x27;s character Porthos. Jean-Armand du Peyrer, Comte de Troisville (1598–1672), was fictionalized as Monsieur de Tréville.

Other Musketeers include:
* Bénigne Dauvergne de Saint-Mars (died 1708), better known as the jailor of the Man in the Iron Mask
* Pierre de Montesquiou d&#x27;Artagnan (1640–1725), later a Marshal of France
* Jean-François Leriget de La Faye (1674–1731)
* Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon (1675–1755)
* Germain-François Poullain de Saint-Foix (1698–1776), later a writer and playwright
* Thomas de Treil de Pardailhan (1754–1822)
* François-Henri de Franquetot de Coigny (1737–1821), later a Marshal of France
* Alexandre de Beauharnais (1760–1794), first husband of the future Empress Josephine
* Charles Sevin de Quincy (1660–1738), &quot;sous-brigadier des mousquetaires noirs&quot; (1689), later lieutenant-general and historian

=== Netherlands ===
Muskets began to appear in the Netherlands in the mid-16th century, during a time of growing conflict between the Dutch provinces and Spanish rule. These early firearms were matchlock muskets, which required a burning match to ignite the gunpowder. The Dutch rebels, also known as the Geuzen, adapted muskets for their guerrilla tactics during the early phases of the Eighty Years&#x27; War. A pivotal figure in the development of musket tactics in the Netherlands was Maurice of Nassau, the Dutch military commander and prince who led the Dutch forces during much of the war. By the late 17th century, musket technology continued to evolve, with flintlock mechanisms gradually replacing the older matchlock designs. The Dutch military adapted these newer technologies but also faced increasing challenges from other European powers like France and England.

===Sweden===
Thanks to the reforms of Gustav II Adolf, the Swedish Army brought to maturity the new style of fighting that made Sweden into a great power in the 17th century. This style of fighting became the new standard throughout Europe and its colonies in the latter stages of musket dominated warfare. Manuals based on Gustav&#x27;s own revolutionised the training and tactics of western armies.

===Britain===

The iconic &quot;Redcoat&quot; of the British Empire was the staple unit in the British armies that created the largest empire in history. The British infantryman was equipped with the .75 calibre Land Pattern Musket, or Brown Bess. He was well trained by the standards of the time, training with live ammunition. A fully trained redcoat could fire four times a minute. This, combined with the technique of firing by companies (a method wherein blocks of men fired smaller volleys in succession, creating a wave of fire down the front of the regiment), made it possible for the British musketeer to win pitched battles against superior numbers.

The term &quot;musketeer&quot; was rarely used in the titles of regiments. Examples include the 106th Regiment of Foot (Black Musqueteers), the 110th Regiment of Foot (Queen&#x27;s Royal Musqueteers) and the 112th Regiment of Foot (King&#x27;s Royal Musqueteers), all raised and disbanded in the 1760s.

The musket was withdrawn from service with the British Army in 1854, replaced by the muzzle-loading Minié rifle, which had an accurate range of over three times that of the Brown Bess which it replaced.

==Musketeers in Asia==

===Ottoman Empire===

The Janissary corps of the Ottoman army were using matchlock muskets as early as the 1440s. The Ottoman Empire, centering on Turkey and extending into Balkans, Arabia and North Africa used muskets to conquer Constantinople (modern Istanbul) and were one of the earliest users of muskets in a military conflict. It also utilized large cannons, including the Great Turkish Bombard. The Ottomans, under Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent (r. 1520-1566), embraced these weapons to maintain military superiority against European rivals such as the Habsburgs and the Safavids. By the late 17th century, the Ottoman military began to face increasing difficulties in keeping up with the rapid advances in European military technology and tactics, particularly regarding firearms. The stagnation of the Ottoman military was evident during key conflicts such as the Great Turkish War (1683-1699) and the Siege of Vienna in 1683, where the Ottomans were defeated by the combined forces of the Holy Roman Empire and its allies.

During the 18th and 19th centuries, the Ottoman Empire recognized the need to modernize its military, particularly in the face of defeats at the hands of European powers. Several sultans, most notably Sultan Selim III (r. 1789-1807) and later Mahmud II (r. 1808-1839), attempted to reform the army and introduce more modern firearms, including newer versions of muskets with flintlock mechanisms. It wasn&#x27;t until the reign of Mahmud II that the Janissaries were finally abolished in 1826, during the event known as the &quot;Auspicious Incident.&quot; This paved the way for further military reforms, including the widespread adoption of modern muskets and rifles. By the mid-19th century, the Ottomans had restructured their military to be more in line with European standards, though the empire continued to struggle in keeping pace with technological advancements.

===Russia===
Streltsy (, sing. , , literally &quot;shooter&quot;; often translated as &quot;musketeer&quot;, but more properly &quot;harquebusier&quot;) were the units of Russian guardsmen l from the 16th to the early 18th centuries, armed with firearms and bardiches. They are also collectively known as &quot;Strelets Troops&quot; ().

The first streltsy units were created by Ivan the Terrible sometime between 1545 and 1550 and armed with the arquebus. They first saw combat at the Siege of Kazan in 1552. Military service in this unit became lifelong and hereditary. The bearded strelsty were organized into regiments, each with a long coat (&quot;kaftan&quot;) and pointed cloth hat of a distinctive colour. By 1680, there were 20 regiments of Moscow streltsy totaling 20,048 men and comprising about 12 per cent of the total army (along with cossacks, militia and an increasing number of regular soldiers). In addition, there were significant numbers of frontier and garrison streltsy serving outside Moscow, although these were less formally drilled and equipped.

The Muscovite government was chronically short of cash so that the streltsy were often not paid well. While &quot;entitled&quot; to something like four rubles a year in the 1550s, they were often allowed to farm or trade in order to supplement their incomes. Textiles for clothing and foodstuffs were sometimes issued as part of their pay. A commander of one hundred musketeers () received up to 20 roubles a year and a regimental head () between 30 and 60.

In the late 17th century, the Streltsy of Moscow began to actively participate in a struggle for power between different government groups, supporting dissidents and showing hostility towards any foreign innovations.

After the fall of Sophia Alekseyevna in 1689, the government of Peter the Great engaged in a process of gradual limitation of the streltsy&#x27;s military and political influence. In order to counter their power, Peter began to raise a new regular army, still armed with muskets but disciplined, uniformed and organised along West European lines. In spite of these measures, the streltsy revolted yet again while Peter was on his Great Embassy in Europe. The four regiments involved were disbanded and 1,200 of the mutineers were executed. The remainder were exiled, had their property confiscated and were banned from future military employment. The entire corps was technically abolished in 1689; however, after having suffered a defeat at Narva in 1700, the government retained some streltsy units in service.

Gradually, the streltsy were incorporated into the regular army. At the same time, the Tsarist government started to disband the Municipal Streltsy. Liquidation of the last streltsy units (by then social rather than military groups) was finally completed by 1728.

The Preobrazhensky and Semenovsky regiments of the Imperial Guard replaced the streltsy as the political and military force closest to the tsar.

===China===

Arquebusiers and musketeers were employed in the armies of the Ming (1368–1644) and Qing dynasties (1644–1911). Zhao Shizhen&#x27;s book of 1598 AD, the &quot;Shenqipu&quot;, contains illustrations of Ottoman Turkish and European musketeers together with detailed diagrams of their muskets. There was also an illustration and description of how the Han people had adopted the Ottoman kneeling position when firing, while favoring the use of European-made muskets. The Han people also built the first repeating firearm: several barrels behind a small wooden shield. The gunman would turn these barrels lighting each barrel with a slow match one by one. These weapons were most effective when fired from walls or high positions. Needham considered this weapon to be a &quot;primitive machine-gun&quot;.

===Central Asia===
Introduced by the Chinese, muskets were popularised in Central-Asia under the Timurid dynasty.

===Indian Sub-continent===
Matchlock Muskets were first introduced by the first Mughal emperor Babur in the first Battle of Panipat 1526 CE. The weapon became an integral part of Indian warfare from the 16th century onward, mainly from the reign of the Mughal emperor Akbar. It was used as an effective defense against war elephants. The Mughals, Marathas, Rajputs, Sikhs and Ahoms made use of musketeers, firing from cover, to ambush opposing infantry, cavalry and elephants. Many Indian gunsmiths created matchlock muskets for the Mughal infantry plus some combination weapons.

== Africa ==
The Kingdom of Ndongo developed its musketeer forces in the 16th century amid war against the Portuguese in Angola. In 1585, 40 musketeers formed part of an attacking force deployed against Portugal. A small musketeer force was authorized in Kongo mostly made up of the , who were mixed race Kongolese with Portuguese ancestry. Over 300 musketeers served in the Kongo army against the Portuguese at the Battle of Mbwila in 1665.
Musketeers were employed into the Wydah army from 1680 AD but they did not completely replace the spearmen, swordsmen and archers. In war, the Musketeers were first to go into action as they fought in the front ranks of the army.

==See also==
* Fusilier
* Rifleman
* Pike and shot
* Line infantry
* Foot Guards

==Gallery==
==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q721960" start="2" end="11" title="Musketeer" label="musketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="30" end="37" title="soldier" label="soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="54" end="60" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525814" start="99" end="119" title="early modern warfare" label="early modern warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052080" start="241" end="249" title="rifleman" label="rifleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="473" end="493" title="Imperial German Army" label="Imperial German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="500" end="511" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="545" end="556" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="573" end="591" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty China"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="754" end="762" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="795" end="809" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="844" end="850" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322103" start="1356" end="1368" title="Spanish army" label="Spanish army"/>
<link wikidata="Q749150" start="1380" end="1386" title="tercio" label="tercio"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="1774" end="1781" title="phalanx formation" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="1885" end="1897" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391846" start="1921" end="1936" title="Plate armour" label="heavily armored"/>
<link wikidata="Q109293552" start="1937" end="1953" title="Gendarme (historical)" label="French Gendarmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="1958" end="1966" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q578886" start="2029" end="2037" title="wall gun" label="wall gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2369" end="2376" title="Weapon mount#Monopod" label="monopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q806285" start="2549" end="2558" title="bandolier" label="bandolier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564383" start="2758" end="2781" title="Musketeers of the Guard" label="Musketeers of the Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q781132" start="2848" end="2863" title="military branch" label="military branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086469" start="2871" end="2886" title="Maison du Roi" label="Royal Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="2919" end="2929" title="Louis XIII of France" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q912949" start="2953" end="2966" title="light cavalry" label="light cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2978" end="2989" title="Carabinier#French Carabiniers-à-Cheval" label="carabiniers"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="3027" end="3035" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="3124" end="3132" title="dragoons" label="dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q569953" start="3141" end="3159" title="Battle of Fontenoy" label="Battle of Fontenoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="3912" end="3930" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q166056" start="4338" end="4354" title="Cardinal Mazarin" label="Cardinal Mazarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="4430" end="4439" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q355499" start="5414" end="5437" title="Quarters of nobility" label="quarterings of nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="6122" end="6131" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="6379" end="6387" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="6451" end="6462" title="Louis XVIII" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q140527" start="6694" end="6714" title="The Three Musketeers" label="The Three Musketeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38337" start="6795" end="6816" title="Alexandre Dumas, père" label="Alexandre Dumas, père"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385478" start="6967" end="6996" title="Gatien de Courtilz de Sandras" label="Gatien de Courtilz de Sandras"/>
<link wikidata="Q744183" start="7053" end="7098" title="Charles de Batz de Castelmore d&amp;#x27;Artagnan" label="Charles de Batz de Castelmore d&amp;#x27;Artagnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741955" start="7189" end="7205" title="Isaac de Porthau" label="Isaac de Porthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q936529" start="7265" end="7272" title="Porthos" label="Porthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q670332" start="7297" end="7316" title="Comte de Troisville" label="Comte de Troisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q348806" start="7402" end="7433" title="Bénigne Dauvergne de Saint-Mars" label="Bénigne Dauvergne de Saint-Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q72296" start="7481" end="7501" title="Man in the Iron Mask" label="Man in the Iron Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q795589" start="7504" end="7541" title="Pierre de Montesquiou d&amp;#x27;Artagnan" label="Pierre de Montesquiou d&amp;#x27;Artagnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165742" start="7583" end="7615" title="Jean-François Leriget de La Faye" label="Jean-François Leriget de La Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q463728" start="7630" end="7666" title="Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon" label="Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036986" start="7681" end="7720" title="Germain-François Poullain de Saint-Foix" label="Germain-François Poullain de Saint-Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525721" start="7766" end="7795" title="Thomas de Treil de Pardailhan" label="Thomas de Treil de Pardailhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q320383" start="7810" end="7848" title="François-Henri de Franquetot de Coigny" label="François-Henri de Franquetot de Coigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q456122" start="7890" end="7914" title="Alexandre de Beauharnais" label="Alexandre de Beauharnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960221" start="7976" end="7999" title="Charles Sevin de Quincy" label="Charles Sevin de Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q699636" start="8417" end="8423" title="Geuzen" label="Geuzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="8500" end="8522" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="8601" end="8618" title="Maurice, Prince of Orange" label="Maurice of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313694" start="9004" end="9025" title="Swedish allotment system" label="Thanks to the reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="9029" end="9044" title="Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden" label="Gustav II Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="9050" end="9062" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196168" start="9425" end="9432" title="Red coat (British army)" label="Redcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="9446" end="9460" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q269602" start="9605" end="9624" title="Land Pattern Musket" label="Land Pattern Musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546685" start="10150" end="10192" title="106th Regiment of Foot (Black Musqueteers)" label="106th Regiment of Foot (Black Musqueteers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547285" start="10198" end="10253" title="110th Regiment of Foot (Queen&amp;#x27;s Royal Musqueteers)" label="110th Regiment of Foot (Queen&amp;#x27;s Royal Musqueteers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547391" start="10262" end="10316" title="112th Regiment of Foot (King&amp;#x27;s Royal Musqueteers)" label="112th Regiment of Foot (King&amp;#x27;s Royal Musqueteers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427149" start="10458" end="10469" title="Minié rifle" label="Minié rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="10612" end="10621" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="10635" end="10647" title="Military of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="10659" end="10668" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="10704" end="10718" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="10733" end="10739" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="10759" end="10766" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="10768" end="10774" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="10779" end="10791" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="10816" end="10830" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="10839" end="10847" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q800205" start="10965" end="10986" title="Dardanelles Gun" label="Great Turkish Bombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="12521" end="12526" title="Grammatical number" label="sing."/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="12658" end="12662" title="Military unit" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="12667" end="12673" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="12741" end="12749" title="firearms" label="firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195310" start="12754" end="12762" title="bardiche" label="bardiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="12875" end="12892" title="Ivan the Terrible" label="Ivan the Terrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="12943" end="12951" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670327" start="12982" end="12996" title="Siege of Kazan (1552)" label="Siege of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="13006" end="13022" title="Military service" label="Military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="13056" end="13066" title="hereditary" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181043" start="14179" end="14188" title="dissident" label="dissident"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="14232" end="14242" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q233987" start="14264" end="14282" title="Sophia Alekseyevna" label="Sophia Alekseyevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="14310" end="14325" title="Peter I of Russia" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q155726" start="14976" end="15001" title="Battle of Narva (1700)" label="a defeat at Narva in 1700"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471440" start="15329" end="15343" title="Preobrazhensky regiment" label="Preobrazhensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049772" start="15376" end="15390" title="Russian Imperial Guard" label="Imperial Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="15484" end="15492" title="Arquebus" label="Arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="15547" end="15551" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="15568" end="15572" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="15685" end="15692" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="15693" end="15700" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="15833" end="15836" title="Han Chinese" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="15952" end="15955" title="Han Chinese" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="16360" end="16372" title="Central Asia" label="Central-Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737645" start="16383" end="16398" title="Timurid dynasty" label="Timurid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="16428" end="16437" title="Matchlock" label="Matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="16481" end="16495" title="Mughal emperor" label="Mughal emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="16496" end="16501" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q605321" start="16509" end="16532" title="first Battle of Panipat" label="first Battle of Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="16669" end="16674" title="Akbar" label="Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="16720" end="16732" title="war elephant" label="war elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="16739" end="16746" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="16748" end="16756" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Marathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="16758" end="16765" title="Rajputs" label="Rajputs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="16767" end="16772" title="Sikh Empire" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308237" start="16777" end="16782" title="Ahom Kingdom" label="Ahoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371796" start="16890" end="16899" title="gunsmiths" label="gunsmiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618359" start="16960" end="16979" title="combination weapons" label="combination weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796232" start="16999" end="17016" title="Kingdom of Ndongo" label="Kingdom of Ndongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="17089" end="17109" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Portuguese in Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="17237" end="17242" title="Kingdom of Kongo" label="Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752752" start="17398" end="17414" title="Battle of Mbwila" label="Battle of Mbwila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716449" start="17458" end="17463" title="Kingdom of Whydah" label="Wydah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483744" start="17670" end="17678" title="Fusilier" label="Fusilier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052080" start="17681" end="17689" title="Rifleman" label="Rifleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193626" start="17692" end="17705" title="Pike and shot" label="Pike and shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q595732" start="17708" end="17721" title="Line infantry" label="Line infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465729" start="17724" end="17735" title="Foot Guards" label="Foot Guards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294733" wikidata="Q1871533" url="?curid=294733" title="Louis Alphonse de Bourbon">
<text>Louis Alphonse de Bourbon (; born 25 April 1974) is the head of the House of Bourbon. Members of his family formerly ruled France and other countries.

According to the French Legitimists, Louis Alphonse is the rightful claimant to the defunct throne of France, under the name Louis XX. His claim is based on his descent from Louis XIV (r. 1643–1715) through his grandson Philip V of Spain. Philip renounced his claim to the French throne under the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713. The rival Orleanist pretenders argue that this, as well as being born a Spanish citizen, makes Louis Alphonse ineligible for the throne. They also question whether he truly is the heir-male of Louis XIV, given the rumors of illegitimacy surrounding Alfonso XII (his great-great-grandfather).

Louis Alphonse is patrilineally the senior great-grandson of Alfonso XIII, King of Spain. However, his grandfather Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia, renounced his rights to the Spanish throne for himself and his descendants owing to his deafness. The crown of Spain has descended to his second cousin, King Felipe VI of Spain. Through his mother, he is also a great-grandson of Spain&#x27;s &quot;caudillo&quot; (dictator) General Francisco Franco; and through his father, a great-great-great-grandson of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom. Since the death of his father in 1989, he has used the courtesy title of Duke of Anjou.

==Early life==
===Birth===

Louis Alphonse was born in Madrid, the second son of Alfonso de Borbón, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz, and of his wife María del Carmen Martínez-Bordiú y Franco, eldest granddaughter of Francisco Franco. Alfonso was at that time the dauphin (using &quot;Duke of Bourbon&quot; as title of pretence) according to those who supported the claim of his father, Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia to the French throne. On 20 March 1975, Jaime died, and Alfonso then asserted his claim to be Head of the House of Bourbon and Legitimist claimant to the throne of France. As such, he took the title &quot;Duke of Anjou&quot;.

===Childhood===
Louis Alphonse&#x27;s parents separated in 1982, and their Catholic marriage was annulled in 1986. His mother has since remarried civilly twice; he had two stepsisters Mathilda (deceased) and Marella, and a stepbrother Frederick, all born before his mother&#x27;s marriage to Jean-Marie Rossi and a half-sister, Cynthia Rossi, born afterwards. On 7 February 1984, Louis Alphonse&#x27;s older brother Francisco died as the result of a car crash in which Louis Alphonse was also injured, although less so than their father, who was driving the automobile. From that date Louis Alphonse was recognised as the heir apparent to his father by the Legitimists. As such, he was given the additional title Duke of Bourbon on 27 September 1984 by his father. In 1987, the Spanish government declared that titles traditionally attached to the dynasty (such as the Dukedom of Cádiz) would henceforth be borne by its members on a lifetime only basis, forestalling Louis Alphonse from inheriting that grandeeship.

===Education===
Louis Alphonse took his primary studies at College Molière, a bilingual school, where he earned his baccalaureate. In 1991, he was admitted to CUNEF University, where he earned a master&#x27;s degree in international finance. Louis is multilingual, speaking English, Spanish, and French (in addition to some Italian and German).

==Succession==
On 30 January 1989, his father died in a skiing accident near Vail, Colorado. In 1994, Louis Alphonse received 150 million &quot;pesetas&quot; from a lawsuit against Vail Associated, which owned the ski resort where the accident occurred. Louis Alphonse was recognised by some members of the Capetian dynasty as &quot;Chef de la Maison de Bourbon&quot; (Head of the House of Bourbon) and took the title Duke of Anjou, but not his father&#x27;s Spanish dukedom. Legitimists consider him the rightful pretender to the defunct French throne.

Louis Alphonse was the heir apparent to his mother&#x27;s Spanish Dukedom of Franco and Grandeeship until the abolition of the titles by the Democratic Memory Law.

Louis Alphonse was elected by the French Society of the Cincinnati as the representative of Louis XVI.

In addition to his Spanish citizenship, Louis Alphonse acquired French nationality through his paternal grandmother, Emmanuelle de Dampierre, also a French citizen. He attended the Lycée Français de Madrid, obtaining his &quot;COU&quot; in June 1992. He studied economics at the IESE Business School. He worked several years for &quot;BNP Paribas&quot;, a French bank in Madrid.

In 2017, Louis Alphonse stated that he wishes for the remains of his ancestors, including King Charles X, to remain at the Kostanjevica Monastery, after a movement reportedly began to have the King&#x27;s remains moved to be buried along with other French monarchs in Basilica of St Denis.

In 2021, Louis Alphonse attended the wedding of Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia.

==Politics==

Louis Alphonse describes himself as a monarchist, &quot;but not anti-republican&quot;. He argues for a constitutional monarchy, with a king who acts as moral authority, foreign ambassador, unifying figure, and reminder of a nation&#x27;s history. He has spoken out against same-sex marriage and same-sex adoption. In 2019, he spoke at the World Congress of Families XIII, where he called for return to &quot;Christian society&quot;.

He holds ties to the conservative Spanish political party Vox and is a close friend of its leader, Santiago Abascal. In March 2018, Louis Alphonse was named honorary president of the Francisco Franco National Foundation, a position held by his grandmother, Carmen Franco, 1st Duchess of Franco, until her death in December 2017. On 15 July, later that year, he headed a Movement-for-Spain demonstration at the Valley of the Fallen monument, leading supporters of the late Spanish dictator, his great-grandfather Francisco Franco. They opposed the Spanish socialist government&#x27;s plan to remove Franco&#x27;s remains from a basilica near Madrid. He also launched a change.org petition, calling for the resignation of the Socialist Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez.

In 2019, he expressed public support for the Yellow vests movement in France.

==Marriage and children==
Louis Alphonse&#x27;s engagement to marry Venezuelan María Margarita Vargas Santaella, the daughter of the businessman Victor Vargas, was announced in November 2003. They were married civilly in Caracas on 5 November 2004 and religiously on 6 November 2004 in La Romana, Dominican Republic. None of the members of the Spanish royal family attended the wedding. Although no official reason was given, it was no secret that the then king of Spain, Juan Carlos I, did not approve his cousin&#x27;s claim to the French throne, nor the fact that Louis Alphonse issued the wedding invitations styled as &quot;Duke of Anjou&quot;.

Louis Alphonse and María Margarita had their first child, Eugénie, on 5 March 2007, at Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami. She was baptised at the papal nunciature in Paris in June 2007. Her godparents are Prince Charles-Emmanuel of Bourbon-Parma and his wife Constance. French Legitimists recognize her as , the style commonly attributed to the eldest unmarried daughter of a king of France (in Spain her name is ).

The couple had twin sons, Louis and Alphonse, on 28 May 2010 in New York City. Their father has conferred upon them the historic French titles of, respectively, Duke of Burgundy (), and Duke of Berry (). In Spain, the twins are and .

Their fourth child, Henri, was born on 1 February 2019 in New York and was granted the title Duke of Touraine () by his father.

==Ancestry==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Thierry Ardisson. &quot;Louis XX. Contre-enquête sur la monarchie.&quot;, Olivier Orban, 1986, 
* Jean Foyer, &quot;Titre et armes du prince Louis de Bourbon&quot;, Diffusion-Université-Culture, 1990.
* Apezarena, José. &quot;Luis Alfonso de Borbón: Un príncipe a la espera&quot;, Random House Mondadori, 2007, .
* Cassani Pironti, Fabio. &quot;Bref crayon généalogique de S.A.R. la Princesse Marie-Marguerite, Duchesse d&#x27;Anjou, née Vargas Santaella&quot;, &quot;Le Lien Légitimiste&quot;, n. 16, 2007.
* Opfell, Olga S. &quot;H.R.H. Louis-Alphonse, Prince of Bourbon, Duke of Anjou: Royal House of France (House of Bourbon)&quot;, &quot;Royalty Who Wait: The 21 Heads of Formerly Regnant Houses of Europe&quot;. Jefferson: McFarland &amp; Company, Inc., Publishers, 2001. 11–32.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1871533" start="0" end="25" title="Louis Alphonse de Bourbon" label="Louis Alphonse de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="68" end="84" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="123" end="129" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q877884" start="176" end="187" title="Legitimists" label="Legitimists"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="236" end="260" title="Throne of France" label="defunct throne of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871533" start="277" end="285" title="Louis Alphonse de Bourbon" label="Louis XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="326" end="335" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="372" end="389" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="449" end="466" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q431192" start="486" end="495" title="Orleanist" label="Orleanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q32347" start="725" end="736" title="Alfonso XII" label="Alfonso XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="787" end="800" title="patrilineality" label="patrilineally"/>
<link wikidata="Q18363" start="830" end="857" title="Alfonso XIII" label="Alfonso XIII, King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q703780" start="884" end="914" title="Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia" label="Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="1074" end="1092" title="Felipe VI of Spain" label="Felipe VI of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="1164" end="1172" title="caudillo" label="caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="1198" end="1214" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="1272" end="1286" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1294" end="1308" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304081" start="1365" end="1379" title="courtesy title" label="courtesy title"/>
<link wikidata="Q770768" start="1383" end="1396" title="Duke of Anjou" label="Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="1454" end="1460" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q603075" start="1480" end="1522" title="Alfonso, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz" label="Alfonso de Borbón, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939617" start="1540" end="1581" title="Carmen Martínez-Bordiú" label="María del Carmen Martínez-Bordiú y Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="1607" end="1623" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q603075" start="1625" end="1632" title="Alfonso, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz" label="Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="1654" end="1661" title="Dauphin of France" label="dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q836754" start="1675" end="1690" title="Duke of Bourbon" label="Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q845929" start="1700" end="1717" title="pretender" label="title of pretence"/>
<link wikidata="Q703780" start="1777" end="1807" title="Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia" label="Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q603075" start="1864" end="1871" title="Alfonso, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz" label="Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="1914" end="1930" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2013" end="2026" title="Counts and dukes of Anjou#Dukes of Anjou without legal creation" label="Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299585" start="2132" end="2140" title="Declaration of nullity" label="annulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311547" start="2171" end="2180" title="Remarriage" label="remarried"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="2181" end="2188" title="Civil marriage" label="civilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="2657" end="2670" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q836754" start="2748" end="2763" title="Duke of Bourbon" label="Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817301" start="2904" end="2920" title="Dukedom of Cádiz" label="Dukedom of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="3038" end="3045" title="grandee" label="grandee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409994" start="3211" end="3227" title="CUNEF University" label="CUNEF University"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="3376" end="3383" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3388" end="3394" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="3454" end="3460" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q747987" start="3475" end="3489" title="Vail, Colorado" label="Vail, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q189097" start="3542" end="3549" title="Spanish peseta" label="pesetas"/>
<link wikidata="Q179544" start="3705" end="3721" title="Capetian dynasty" label="Capetian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q877884" start="3874" end="3885" title="Legitimists" label="Legitimists"/>
<link wikidata="Q845929" start="3912" end="3921" title="pretender" label="pretender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362090" start="4019" end="4036" title="Duke of Franco" label="Dukedom of Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="4041" end="4048" title="Grandee" label="Grandee"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236282" start="4094" end="4115" title="Democratic Memory Law" label="Democratic Memory Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632484" start="4159" end="4184" title="Society of the Cincinnati" label="Society of the Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="4210" end="4219" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052995" start="4339" end="4362" title="Emmanuelle de Dampierre" label="Emmanuelle de Dampierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572729" start="4403" end="4427" title="Lycée Français de Madrid" label="Lycée Français de Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324692" start="4449" end="4452" title="Curso de Orientación Universitaria" label="COU"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="4484" end="4493" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q705316" start="4501" end="4521" title="IESE Business School" label="IESE Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q499707" start="4557" end="4568" title="BNP Paribas" label="BNP Paribas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="4593" end="4599" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="4692" end="4706" title="Charles X of France" label="King Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q914189" start="4725" end="4747" title="Kostanjevica Monastery" label="Kostanjevica Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="4870" end="4890" title="Basilica of St Denis" label="Basilica of St Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468206" start="4941" end="4981" title="Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia" label="Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="5036" end="5046" title="monarchism" label="monarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17900" start="5293" end="5310" title="same-sex adoption" label="same-sex adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191938" start="5337" end="5368" title="World Congress of Families" label="World Congress of Families XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630787" start="5490" end="5493" title="Vox (political party)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703587" start="5531" end="5547" title="Santiago Abascal" label="Santiago Abascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963083" start="5615" end="5651" title="Francisco Franco National Foundation" label="Francisco Franco National Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736333" start="5689" end="5725" title="Carmen Franco, 1st Duchess of Franco" label="Carmen Franco, 1st Duchess of Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q940833" start="5842" end="5862" title="Valley of the Fallen" label="Valley of the Fallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="5944" end="5960" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070218" start="6181" end="6194" title="Pedro Sánchez" label="Pedro Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q58805164" start="6242" end="6263" title="Yellow vests movement" label="Yellow vests movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="6344" end="6353" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296460" start="6355" end="6387" title="Marie Marguerite, Duchess of Anjou" label="María Margarita Vargas Santaella"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720299" start="6421" end="6434" title="Victor Vargas" label="Victor Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="6497" end="6504" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40508" start="6562" end="6571" title="La Romana, La Romana" label="La Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414413" start="6620" end="6640" title="Spanish royal family" label="Spanish royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="6748" end="6761" title="Juan Carlos I" label="Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999217" start="6985" end="6992" title="Princess Eugénie of Bourbon" label="Eugénie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923670" start="7014" end="7040" title="Mount Sinai Medical Center &amp;amp; Miami Heart Institute" label="Mount Sinai Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="7042" end="7047" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q620045" start="7073" end="7089" title="papal nunciature" label="papal nunciature"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7093" end="7098" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="7117" end="7126" title="godparent" label="godparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009936" start="7132" end="7172" title="Prince Charles-Emmanuel of Bourbon-Parma" label="Prince Charles-Emmanuel of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="7505" end="7521" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615263" start="7530" end="7543" title="Duke of Berry" label="Duke of Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248558" start="7672" end="7688" title="Duke of Touraine" label="Duke of Touraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q732005" start="7755" end="7771" title="Thierry Ardisson" label="Thierry Ardisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685524" start="7853" end="7863" title="Jean Foyer" label="Jean Foyer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8070" end="8092" title="Cassani Pironti, Fabio" label="Cassani Pironti, Fabio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294734" wikidata="Q2366972" url="?curid=294734" title="Hauptmann">
<text> () is an officer rank in the armies of Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. It is usually translated as &quot;captain&quot;.

==Background==
While in contemporary German means &#x27;main&#x27;, it also has, and originally had, the meaning of &#x27;head&#x27;, i.e. &quot;&quot; literally translates to &#x27;head-man&#x27;, which is also the etymological root of &quot;captain&quot; (from Latin , &#x27;head&#x27;).

This rank is equivalent to the rank of captain in the British and US Armies, and is rated OF-2 in NATO.

Currently, there is no female form within the German military (such as &quot;Hauptfrau&quot;): the correct form of address is &quot;&quot;Frau Hauptmann&quot;.&quot;

More generally, a Hauptmann can be the head of any hierarchically structured group of people, often as a compound word. For example, a is the captain of a fire brigade, while refers to the leader of a gang of robbers.

Official Austrian and German titles incorporating the word include , , , and .

In Saxony during the Weimar Republic, the titles of , and were held by senior civil servants.

 (from Early Modern High German ) is cognate with the Swedish , which also has the root meaning &#x27;head-man&#x27; or &#x27;the man at the head&#x27;, and is closely related to , meaning &#x27;chieftain&#x27;. Since medieval times, both titles have been used for state administrators rather than military personnel. may also be the origin of the title hetman, used in Central and Eastern Europe.

==Military ranks==
===Austria===


===Germany===

==== Rank insignia ====

On the shoulder straps (Heer, Luftwaffe) there are three silver pips (stars).

===Switzerland===


====Swiss Guard====

==See also==
* World War II German Army ranks and insignia
* Ranks of the German Bundeswehr
* Rank insignia of the German Bundeswehr

==References==
==External links==
* Deutsches Wörterbuch, Hauptmann</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2366972" start="0" end="0" title="Hauptmann" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="10" end="17" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322507" start="40" end="47" title="German Army" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q248710" start="49" end="56" title="Austrian Federal Army" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q332844" start="62" end="73" title="Swiss Armed Forces" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="388" end="393" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="470" end="477" title="British Army" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="482" end="491" title="United States Army" label="US Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481103" start="506" end="510" title="Ranks and insignia of NATO armies officers" label="OF-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="514" end="518" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="990" end="996" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="1008" end="1023" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472199" start="1089" end="1113" title="Early Modern High German" label="Early Modern High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="1277" end="1286" title="chieftain" label="chieftain"/>
<link wikidata="Q625652" start="1436" end="1442" title="hetman" label="hetman"/>
<link wikidata="Q653644" start="1691" end="1734" title="World War II German Army ranks and insignia" label="World War II German Army ranks and insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q452810" start="1737" end="1767" title="Ranks of the German Bundeswehr" label="Ranks of the German Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710248" start="1770" end="1808" title="Rank insignia of the German Bundeswehr" label="Rank insignia of the German Bundeswehr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294735" wikidata="Q9304299" url="?curid=294735" title="Oberstleutnant">
<text> () (English: Lieutenant Colonel) is a senior field officer rank in several German-speaking and Scandinavian countries, equivalent to lieutenant colonel. It is currently used by both the ground and air forces of Austria, Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, and Norway. The Swedish rank is a direct translation, as is the Finnish rank .

== Austria ==

Austria&#x27;s armed forces, the &quot;Bundesheer&quot;, uses the rank Oberstleutnant as its sixth-highest officer rank. Like in Germany and Switzerland, Oberstleutnants are above Majors and below Obersts. The term also finds usage with the Austrian Bundespolizei (federal police force) and Justizwache (prison guards corps). These two organizations are civilian in nature, but their ranks are nonetheless structured in a military fashion.

== Belgium ==
==Denmark==
The Danish rank of is based around the German term. Ranked OF-4 within NATO and having the paygrade of M401, it is used in the Royal Danish Army and the Royal Danish Air Force.

==Germany==
Typically, suffixes can be applied to the word Oberstleutnant to specify the individual type of officer. Retired officers that are not incapacitated (i.e. theoretically available for reactivation) from service continue to use their title with the suffix &quot;a.D.&quot; (Germany) or &quot;aD&quot; (Switzerland), an abbreviation of &quot;außer Dienst&quot;, &#x27;out of service&#x27;. Suffixes that specify military specialization in active service include &quot;Oberstleutnant i.G.&quot; (&#x27;im Generalstabsdienst&#x27;) for general staff officers or &quot;Oberstleutnant d.R.&quot; (&#x27;der Reserve&#x27;) for reservists. The suffix &quot;i.R.&quot; (&#x27;im Ruhestand&#x27;), implying retirement without the legal specification of a.D., is unofficial.

=== Bundeswehr ===
The armed forces of West Germany and unified Germany since 1955, the &quot;Bundeswehr&quot; uses the Oberstleutnant rank in the German Army and German Air Force. Equivalents in the other branches are &quot;Fregattenkapitän&quot; for the German Navy, &quot;Oberfeldarzt&quot; for medical staff, &quot;Flottillenarzt&quot; for naval medical staff, &quot;Oberfeldapotheker&quot; for apothecary staff, &quot;Flottillenapotheker&quot; for naval apothecary staff, and &quot;Oberfeldveterinär&quot; for veterinary medical staff.

Within the German state employee paygrade system, the Oberstleutnant is placed within &quot;Besoldungsgruppe A&quot; and receives either the A14 or A15 paygrades, depending on individual seniority. Thus, the Oberstleutnant is paid an equivalent wage to that of first-class consuls and legates in the foreign service (A14) or state-employed school directors, ambassadors and general consuls (A15).

The age limit for Oberstleutnant-rank officers is 61.

The Oberstleutnant&#x27;s shoulder straps in Army and Air Force are marked by two vertically aligned stars above oak leaves.

=== Bundesgrenzschutz ===
The Federal Border Guard (&quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot;) used the rank &quot;Oberstleutnant&quot; until 1976, after which it was replaced by the terms &quot;Polizeioberrat&quot; and &quot;Polizeidirektor&quot; as part of the government&#x27;s effort to transform West Germany&#x27;s federal border guard agency into a less militarized structure.

=== Wehrmacht and Waffen-SS ===
The Wehrmacht (1935-1945) of Nazi Germany used the rank of Oberstleutnant for Army and Air Force, much in the same style the Bundeswehr does. The Waffen-SS (1933-1945) used the rank &quot;Obersturmbannführer&quot; as an equivalent.

=== Nationale Volksarmee (NVA) ===
The National People&#x27;s Army (1956-1990) of East Germany used the rank Oberstleutnant (abbr. OSL) for its army and air force, whereas the Volksmarine used the term &quot;Fregattenkapitän&quot;.

==Norway==

The rank of was introduced around the same time as Denmark, as Norway at the time was part of Denmark–Norway.

==Sweden==

The Swedish variant , is a senior field grade military officer rank in the Swedish Army and the Swedish Air Force, immediately below the rank of colonel and just above the rank of major. It is equivalent to the naval rank of Commodore captain in the Swedish Navy.

==Switzerland==


===Swiss Guard===

==See also==
* Ranks of the German Bundeswehr
* Rank insignia of the German Bundeswehr
* Comparative military ranks of World War I
* Comparative military ranks of World War II

==References==
;Citations
;Bibliography
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9304299" start="0" end="0" title="Oberstleutnant" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1053745" start="46" end="59" title="field officer" label="field officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="76" end="82" title="German (language)" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="96" end="107" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="134" end="152" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37726" start="187" end="193" title="Army" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883" start="198" end="207" title="air force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="212" end="219" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="221" end="228" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="230" end="241" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="243" end="250" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="256" end="262" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="268" end="275" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="316" end="323" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="347" end="361" title="Austria" label="Austria&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q700124" start="597" end="610" title="Federal Police (Austria)" label="Bundespolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714458" start="638" end="649" title="Justizwache" label="Justizwache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575188" start="941" end="958" title="Royal Danish Army" label="Royal Danish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q431059" start="967" end="989" title="Royal Danish Air Force" label="Royal Danish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="1807" end="1819" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1832" end="1839" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322507" start="1915" end="1926" title="German Army" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="1931" end="1947" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q56015" start="2024" end="2035" title="German Navy" label="German Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56027" start="2947" end="2964" title="Bundesgrenzschutz" label="Bundesgrenzschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3178" end="3190" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="3298" end="3307" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3323" end="3335" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="3440" end="3449" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q161102" start="3482" end="3501" title="Obersturmbannführer" label="Obersturmbannführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155740" start="3566" end="3593" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="3609" end="3621" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q508647" start="3703" end="3714" title="Volksmarine" label="Volksmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="3823" end="3830" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="3866" end="3880" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053745" start="3929" end="3940" title="field officer" label="field grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="3950" end="3957" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56019" start="3958" end="3962" title="military rank" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="3970" end="3982" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q113525" start="3991" end="4008" title="Swedish Air Force" label="Swedish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052917" start="4040" end="4047" title="Överste" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932055" start="4075" end="4080" title="Major (Sweden)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865016" start="4120" end="4137" title="Kommendörkapten" label="Commodore captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141396" start="4145" end="4157" title="Swedish Navy" label="Swedish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q452810" start="4212" end="4242" title="Ranks of the German Bundeswehr" label="Ranks of the German Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710248" start="4245" end="4283" title="Rank insignia of the German Bundeswehr" label="Rank insignia of the German Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155641" start="4286" end="4327" title="Comparative military ranks of World War I" label="Comparative military ranks of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q717660" start="4330" end="4372" title="Comparative military ranks of World War II" label="Comparative military ranks of World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294736" wikidata="Q2580098" url="?curid=294736" title="Nicholas Biddle">
<text>Nicholas Biddle (January 8, 1786February 27, 1844) was an American financier who served as the third and last president of the Second Bank of the United States (chartered 1816–1836). Throughout his life Biddle worked as an editor, diplomat, author, and politician who served in both houses of the Pennsylvania state legislature. He is best known as the chief opponent of Andrew Jackson in the Bank War.

Born into the Biddle family of Philadelphia, young Nicholas worked for a number of prominent officials, including John Armstrong Jr. and James Monroe. In the Pennsylvania state legislature, he defended the utility of a national bank in the face of Jeffersonian criticisms. From 1823 to 1836, Biddle served as president of the Second Bank, during which time he exercised power over the nation&#x27;s money supply and interest rates, seeking to prevent economic crises.

With prodding from Henry Clay and the Bank&#x27;s major stockholders, Biddle engineered a bill in Congress to renew the Bank&#x27;s federal charter in 1832. The bill passed Congress and headed to President Andrew Jackson&#x27;s desk. Jackson, who expressed deep hostility to most banks, vetoed the measure, ratcheting up tensions in a major political controversy known as the Bank War. When Jackson transferred the federal government&#x27;s deposits from the Second Bank to several state banks, Biddle raised interest rates, causing a mild economic recession. The federal charter expired in 1836, before the Panic of 1837, but the bank continued to operate with a Pennsylvania state charter until its ultimate collapse in 1841.

==Ancestry and early life==
Nicholas Biddle was born into a prominent family in Philadelphia, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, on January 8, 1786. Ancestors of the Biddle family had immigrated to the Pennsylvania colony along with the famous Quaker proprietor, William Penn, and subsequently fought in the pre-Revolutionary colonial struggles. Young Nicholas&#x27;s preparatory education was received at an academy in Philadelphia, where his progress was so rapid that he entered the class of 1799 at the University of Pennsylvania. At thirteen years old, Biddle had completed his coursework, but was not allowed to graduate due to his age. His parents accordingly sent him to Princeton (then the “College of New Jersey”) where he entered the sophomore class, and graduated in 1801 as valedictorian, dividing the first honor of the class with his only rival.

Biddle was offered an official position before he had even finished his law studies. As secretary to former Revolutionary War officer and delegate to the Continental Congress, John Armstrong Jr., he went abroad in 1804 and was in Paris when Napoleon Bonaparte was crowned as emperor of the new French Empire. Afterwards he participated in an audit related to the Louisiana Purchase, acquiring his first experience in financial affairs. Biddle traveled extensively through Europe as secretary for James Monroe, who was then serving as the United States minister to the Court of St. James. In Great Britain, Biddle took part in a conversation with Cambridge University professors involving comparisons between the modern Greek dialect and that of Homer; a conversation that captured Monroe&#x27;s attention.

In 1807, Biddle returned home to Philadelphia. He practiced law and wrote, contributing papers to different publications on various subjects, but chiefly in the fine arts. He became associate editor of a literary magazine called &quot;Port-Folio&quot;, which was published from 1806 to 1823. When editor Joseph Dennie died in 1812, Biddle took over the magazine and lived on 7th Street, near Spruce Street. That same year, Biddle was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society.

===Lewis and Clark===
Biddle also edited the journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition. He encouraged President Thomas Jefferson to write an introductory memoir of his former aide and private secretary, Captain Meriwether Lewis (1774–1809). Biddle&#x27;s work would be published as a book in 1814 and would become the standard account of the expedition for more than a century. But because he had been elected to the Pennsylvania state legislature, Biddle was compelled to hand over editorial responsibilities to Paul Allen (1775–1826), who supervised the project until its completion and appeared in print as the book&#x27;s official editor.

===Pennsylvania General Assembly===
Biddle was elected as a Republican member of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives in 1810, and then in the Pennsylvania State Senate for the 1st district from 1813 to 1815. He originated a bill favoring a free system of public schools—available to all Pennsylvanians regardless of their economic class—almost a quarter of a century in advance of the times. Though the bill was initially defeated, it resurfaced repeatedly in different forms until, in 1836, the Pennsylvania &quot;common-school&quot; system was inaugurated as an indirect result of his efforts.

==The Bank of the United States==
===Early years===
After Biddle moved to the Pennsylvania State Senate, he lobbied for the rechartering of the First Bank of the United States. It was on this subject that he made his first major speech, which attracted general attention at the time, and was warmly commended by Chief Justice John Marshall and other leaders of public opinion.

The First Bank had been established in 1791 under the administration of President George Washington. Congress opted not to renew its twenty-year charter in 1811, and as a result, the First Bank closed its doors. After economic hardships, monetary pressures, and problems financing the federal government during the War of 1812, Congress and the president granted a new twenty-year charter to the Second Bank of the United States in 1816. The Second Bank was in many ways a revived and reorganized version of the First Bank. President James Monroe subsequently appointed Biddle as a government director. When Bank President Langdon Cheves resigned in 1822, Biddle became the institution&#x27;s new president. During his association with the Bank, President Monroe, under authority from Congress, directed him to prepare a &quot;Commercial Digest&quot; of the laws and trade regulations of the world and the various nations. For many years after, this Digest was regarded as an authority on the subject.

In late 1818, $4 million of interest payments on the bonds previously sold in 1803 to pay for the Louisiana Purchase were due, in either gold or silver, to European investors. The Treasury Department, therefore, had to acquire additional amounts of specie. As the federal government&#x27;s chief fiscal agent, the Bank was obligated to make these payments on behalf of the Treasury. The Bank demanded that private and state-chartered commercial banks, many of which had loaned excessively and previously served as fiscal agents during the War of 1812, now pay the Second Bank in specie, which was then sent to Europe to pay the federal government&#x27;s creditors. This rather sudden contraction of the country&#x27;s monetary base after three years of speculation helped contribute to the financial Panic of 1819.

Meanwhile, in Tennessee, military hero and future presidential candidate Andrew Jackson was hard-pressed to pay his debts during this period. He developed a lifelong hostility to all banks that were not completely backed by gold or silver deposits. This meant, above all, hostility to the new Second Bank of the United States.

As a banker, Biddle promulgated a nationalistic vision with an emphasis on regulation and flexibility. He was also innovative. Biddle occasionally engaged in the relatively new techniques of central banking–-controlling the nation&#x27;s money supply, regulating interest rates, lending to state banks, and acting as the Treasury Department&#x27;s chief fiscal agent. When state banks became excessive in their lending practices, Biddle&#x27;s Bank acted as a restraint. In a few instances, he even rescued state banks to prevent the risk of &quot;contagion&quot; spreading.

In 1823, Biddle started concentrating the Bank&#x27;s facilities in the West, Southwest, and South to meet the demands for credit generated by the expansion of land, cotton, and slavery. He did this by directing his branch officers to circulate large quantities of branch drafts and by buying and selling millions of dollars of bills of exchange. As cotton moved downriver in the winter and spring months, merchants drew up bills of exchange representing the value of cotton exports, presenting them to the Bank&#x27;s southern branches. Using its interregional network of branch offices and the transportation improvements then under way, the Bank would ship these bills to the Northeast where merchants could use them to pay for imported manufactured goods arriving from Great Britain in the summer and fall. The result was that Biddle helped provide an economic infrastructure that facilitated long-distance trade, propagated a relatively stable and uniform currency, and played a major role in integrating and consolidating fiscal operations at the federal level. Indeed, Biddle won praise for the Bank by making steady payments to reduce the country&#x27;s public debt, by preventing a potentially harmful recession in the winter of 1825–1826, and more generally, by smoothing out variations in prices and trade.

He was also important in the 1833 establishment of Girard College, an early free private school for poor orphaned boys in Philadelphia, under the provisions of the will of his friend and former legal client, Stephen Girard (1750–1831), one of the wealthiest men in America. Girard had been the original promoter of the revival and reorganization of the Second Bank and its largest investor.

===Bank War===
The Bank War began when President Jackson started criticizing the Bank early in his first term. Beyond the long list of personal and ideological objections that Jackson maintained toward the Bank, there were rumors that Bank officers at some of the branch offices had interfered in the presidential contest of 1828 by providing financial assistance to the National Republican candidate, John Quincy Adams. Although Biddle traveled to the branch offices to examine the veracity of these claims in person, and denied them unequivocally, Jackson continued to believe that they were true. In January 1832, Biddle submitted an application to Congress for a renewal of the Bank&#x27;s twenty-year charter, four years before the current charter was due to expire. Henry Clay and other Bank supporters hoped to force Jackson into making an unpopular decision that might cost him during an election year, but there were also pressures for an early application emanating from the Bank&#x27;s stockholders and board of directors. President Jackson vetoed the bill in a stunning move that carried significant consequences for the relationship between Congress and the executive branch. The reasons for Jackson&#x27;s veto were legion and included concerns over the Bank&#x27;s monopoly power and concentrated wealth, constitutional scruples, states&#x27; rights, the Bank&#x27;s foreign stockholders and ability to foreclose on large parcels of land, sectional animosity toward eastern financiers, and political patronage. An additional factor was Jackson&#x27;s personality. The president was well known for his stubbornness and continued to harbor resentment toward Clay from the earlier &quot;Corrupt Bargain&quot; accusation following the presidential election of 1824.

At Biddle&#x27;s direction, the Bank poured tens of thousands of dollars into a campaign to defeat Jackson in the presidential election of 1832. This was a continuation of a strategy that one historian has referred to as one of the earliest examples in the country&#x27;s history of an interregional corporate lobby and public relations campaign. Articles, stockholders&#x27; reports, editorials, essays, philosophical treatises, petitions, pamphlets, and copies of congressional speeches were among the diverse forms of media that Biddle transmitted to various sections of the country through loans and Bank expenditures. Reports of unusually generous loans to pro-BUS politicians and even small bribes to sympathetic newspaper editors, the details of which came to light in a congressional report published in April 1832, helped convince hard-line Jacksonians that the corrupt &quot;Monster Bank&quot; must be destroyed. Biddle was told that such vigorous campaign spending would only give credence to Jackson&#x27;s theory that the Bank interfered in the American political process, but chose to dismiss the warning. Ultimately, Clay&#x27;s strategy failed, and in November he lost handily to Jackson, who was reelected to a second term.

In early 1833, Jackson, despite opposition from some members of his cabinet, decided to withdraw the Treasury Department&#x27;s public (or federal) deposits from the Bank. The incumbent secretary of the treasury, Louis McLane, a member of Jackson&#x27;s Cabinet, professed moderate support for the Bank. He therefore refused to withdraw the federal deposits directed by the president and would not resign, so Jackson then transferred him to the State Department. McLane&#x27;s successor, William J. Duane, was also opposed to the Bank, but would not carry out Jackson&#x27;s orders either. After waiting four months, President Jackson summarily dismissed Duane, replacing him with Attorney General Roger B. Taney as a recess appointment when Congress was out of session. In September 1833, Taney helped transfer the public deposits from the Bank to seven state-chartered banks. Faced with the loss of the federal deposits, Biddle decided to raise interest rates. A mild financial panic ensued from late 1833 to mid-1834. Intended to force Jackson into a compromise and demonstrate the utility of a national bank for the nation&#x27;s economy, the move had the opposite effect of increasing anti-Bank sentiment. Meanwhile, Biddle and other Bank supporters attempted to renew the Bank&#x27;s charter on numerous occasions. All their attempts failed because they did not have the two-thirds majorities in Congress to overcome a presidential veto.

===Demise of the bank===

The Second Bank&#x27;s twenty-year charter expired in April 1836, but Biddle worked with the Pennsylvania state legislature to prolong the institution as a state-chartered bank, the United States Bank of Pennsylvania (BUSP). The BUSP remained open for several more years. It was in the later years of his career that Biddle began to invest significant financial resources not only in internal improvement projects, but also in the booming expansion of land, cotton, and slavery in the Old Southwest.

In 1837 and 1838, Biddle secretively dispatched agents into the South to buy up several million dollars worth of cotton with the notes of state-chartered banks, all in an effort to restore the nation&#x27;s credit and pay off foreign debts owed to British merchant bankers. Critics called this an example of illegal cotton speculation and noted that the Bank&#x27;s charter forbid the institution from purchasing commodities. Biddle also invested in and bailed out several state-chartered banks in the South whose capital was derived partially from slave mortgages. Some of these banks, including the Union Bank of Mississippi, financed the dispossession of Native Americans. Indeed, post-notes issued by the BUSP helped conclude one of the treaties that removed the Cherokee from their ancestral lands. In addition, Biddle purchased bonds in the Republic of Texas, opposed territorial expansion into Oregon, and denounced abolitionists.

Meanwhile, in the absence of any regulatory oversight provided by a central bank, state-chartered banks in the West and South relaxed their lending standards, took on greater risks, maintained unsafe reserve ratios, and contributed to a credit bubble that eventually burst with the Panic of 1837. In 1839, after seeing his investment in cotton speculation backfire, Biddle resigned from his post as bank president, and in 1841, with the nation still reeling from depression, the Bank finally collapsed. Because the BUSP had issued loans to financial institutions and individual actors who pledged slave mortgages as collateral, the BUSP tragically became one of the largest owners of plantations, slaves, and slave-grown products in Mississippi as debtors rushed to repay creditors during the economic downturn of the early 1840s.

Biddle and a few of his colleagues had borrowed tens of thousands of dollars of cash from the BUSP on their own account without going through the normal lending process and without informing the Bank&#x27;s board, and as a result, a grand jury indicted Biddle on charges of fraud in December 1841. Biddle was arrested and forced to pay compensation to creditors using the remainder of his personal fortune. The charges were later dismissed. On February 27, 1844, at the age of fifty-eight, Biddle died at the Andalusia estate from complications related to bronchitis and edema. Funds from his wife&#x27;s family supported the ongoing civil lawsuits that plagued Biddle toward the end of his life.

==Family==
Nicholas&#x27;s father, Charles, was noteworthy for his devotion to the cause of American independence and served alongside Benjamin Franklin on the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania. His paternal uncle and namesake, Nicholas Biddle (1750–1778), was a naval hero who died during the American Revolutionary War. Another uncle, Edward Biddle, was a member of the First Continental Congress of 1774.
In 1811, Biddle married Jane Margaret Craig (1793–1856). The couple had six children, including Charles John Biddle, who served in the U.S. Army and in the U.S. House of Representatives, and Edward C. Biddle (1815–1872), with whom Nicholas worked in the international cotton trade during the late 1830s.

Nicholas had a younger brother, Thomas Biddle, a War of 1812 veteran who became a federal pension agent and director at the Second Bank&#x27;s branch office in St. Louis, Missouri. On August 26, 1831, Thomas participated in a duel with U.S. Representative Spencer Pettis of Missouri. The duel took place on &quot;Bloody Island&quot;, in the middle of the Mississippi River, near St. Louis. Because Thomas was nearsighted, the two exchanged shots from a perilously close distance of five feet. Pettis died within hours while Thomas succumbed to his wounds three days later. The origins of the duel can be traced to Pettis&#x27;s criticism of Nicholas&#x27;s management of the Bank, which Thomas defended. After an exchange of letters to the editor of a newspaper, Biddle accosted an ill Pettis in his hotel room. Pettis recovered and then challenged Thomas to a duel. Thomas Biddle should not be confused with his second cousin, Thomas Biddle of Philadelphia, one of the city&#x27;s leading exchange brokers.

==Nicholas Biddle Estate==

The Nicholas Biddle Estate in Bensalem Township, Pennsylvania, also known as &quot;Andalusia&quot;, is a National Historic Landmark, registered with the National Park Service of the U.S. Department of the Interior.

==Notes==
==References==
===Secondary sources===
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 

===Primary sources===
* 

====Attribution====
*

==Further reading==
*
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Article and portrait at &quot;Discovering Lewis &amp; Clark&quot; 
* The Economic Historian: Encyclopedia of Economic History &quot;Nicholas Biddle&quot;
* Genealogy of Nicholas Biddle (1786–1844) 
* James Kendall Hosmer — American history professor and librarian who edited reprinted and published Nicholas Biddle&#x27;s account of Lewis and Clark&#x27;s journal
* The Biddle and Craig family Papers, including business and personal correspondence, are available for research use at the Historical Society of Pennsylvania.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2580098" start="0" end="15" title="Nicholas Biddle" label="Nicholas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q557880" start="67" end="76" title="financier" label="financier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="127" end="159" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="371" end="385" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855994" start="393" end="401" title="Bank War" label="Bank War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904062" start="418" end="431" title="Biddle family" label="Biddle family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="435" end="447" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381657" start="518" end="536" title="John Armstrong Jr." label="John Armstrong Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="541" end="553" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="892" end="902" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092480" start="1481" end="1494" title="Panic of 1837" label="Panic of 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1682" end="1694" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1703" end="1731" title="Pennsylvania" label="Commonwealth of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904062" start="1770" end="1783" title="Biddle family" label="Biddle family"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1848" end="1854" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q209152" start="1867" end="1879" title="William Penn" label="William Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1916" end="1948" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary colonial struggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="2111" end="2137" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2283" end="2292" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="2391" end="2404" title="valedictorian" label="valedictorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2574" end="2591" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="2620" end="2640" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381657" start="2642" end="2660" title="John Armstrong Jr." label="John Armstrong Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2696" end="2701" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2707" end="2725" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="2760" end="2773" title="First French Empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181487" start="2808" end="2813" title="audit" label="audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="2829" end="2847" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="2962" end="2974" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596824" start="3034" end="3052" title="Court of St. James" label="Court of St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="3112" end="3132" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3211" end="3216" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757800" start="3508" end="3518" title="Port Folio (magazine)" label="Port-Folio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282594" start="3577" end="3590" title="Joseph Dennie" label="Joseph Dennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="3731" end="3761" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="3825" end="3851" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3877" end="3893" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313492" start="3976" end="3992" title="Meriwether Lewis" label="Meriwether Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149037" start="4278" end="4288" title="Paul Allen (editor)" label="Paul Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145217" start="4494" end="4531" title="Pennsylvania House of Representatives" label="Pennsylvania House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269864" start="4557" end="4582" title="Pennsylvania State Senate" label="Pennsylvania State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164111" start="4591" end="4603" title="Pennsylvania Senate, District 1" label="1st district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="4924" end="4949" title="public education" label="&amp;quot;common-school&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269864" start="5090" end="5115" title="Pennsylvania State Senate" label="Pennsylvania State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q934187" start="5156" end="5187" title="First Bank of the United States" label="First Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="5338" end="5351" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="5472" end="5489" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="5705" end="5716" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="5786" end="5818" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="5924" end="5936" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804894" start="6013" end="6027" title="Langdon Cheves" label="Langdon Cheves"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="6491" end="6509" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q557728" start="6642" end="6648" title="Bullion coin" label="specie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131100" start="7193" end="7206" title="Panic of 1819" label="Panic of 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="7223" end="7232" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="7282" end="7296" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="7502" end="7534" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="7728" end="7740" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768575" start="9483" end="9497" title="Girard College" label="Girard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q331227" start="9640" end="9654" title="Stephen Girard" label="Stephen Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855994" start="9843" end="9851" title="Bank War" label="Bank War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="10226" end="10243" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="10596" end="10606" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11523" end="11538" title="Corrupt bargain#Election of 1824" label="Corrupt Bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q618127" start="11570" end="11599" title="1824 United States presidential election" label="presidential election of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q534192" start="11716" end="11745" title="1832 United States presidential election" label="presidential election of 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q551362" start="13057" end="13069" title="Louis McLane" label="Louis McLane"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="13289" end="13305" title="United States State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031160" start="13332" end="13348" title="William J. Duane" label="William J. Duane"/>
<link wikidata="Q359470" start="13542" end="13556" title="Roger B. Taney" label="Roger B. Taney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901949" start="13562" end="13580" title="recess appointment" label="recess appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="13814" end="13829" title="financial panic" label="financial panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="14269" end="14286" title="presidential veto" label="presidential veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="15583" end="15591" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="15663" end="15680" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="15739" end="15752" title="abolitionism" label="abolitionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092480" start="16037" end="16050" title="Panic of 1837" label="Panic of 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753518" start="17096" end="17112" title="Andalusia (estate)" label="Andalusia estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075595" start="17320" end="17327" title="Charles Biddle (Pennsylvania statesman)" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="17420" end="17437" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645039" start="17445" end="17486" title="Supreme Executive Council of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania" label="Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025068" start="17521" end="17536" title="Nicholas Biddle (naval officer)" label="Nicholas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="17587" end="17613" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341891" start="17630" end="17643" title="Edward Biddle" label="Edward Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="17665" end="17699" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress of 1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079512" start="17797" end="17816" title="Charles John Biddle" label="Charles John Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787622" start="18038" end="18051" title="Thomas Biddle" label="Thomas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="18055" end="18066" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="18232" end="18236" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308985" start="18262" end="18276" title="Spencer Pettis" label="Spencer Pettis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928068" start="18313" end="18338" title="Bloody Island (Mississippi River)" label="&amp;quot;Bloody Island&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787622" start="18873" end="18886" title="Thomas Biddle" label="Thomas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q583018" start="19073" end="19104" title="Bensalem Township, Pennsylvania" label="Bensalem Township, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753518" start="19126" end="19135" title="Andalusia (estate)" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="19148" end="19174" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="19196" end="19217" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="19225" end="19256" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="U.S. Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137218" start="19631" end="19651" title="James Kendall Hosmer" label="James Kendall Hosmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773954" start="19919" end="19953" title="Historical Society of Pennsylvania" label="Historical Society of Pennsylvania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294737" wikidata="Q1878571" url="?curid=294737" title="Dark fibre">
<text>A dark fibre or unlit fibre is an unused optical fibre, available for use in fibre-optic communication. Dark fibre may be leased from a network service provider. 

Dark fibre originally referred to the potential network capacity of telecommunication infrastructure. Because the marginal cost of installing additional fibre optic cables is very low once a trench has been dug or conduit laid, a great excess of fibre was installed in the US during the telecom boom of the late 1990s and early 2000s. This excess capacity was later referred to as &quot;dark fibre&quot; following the dot-com crash of the early 2000s that briefly reduced demand for high-speed data transmission. 

These unused fibre optic cables later created a new market for unique private services that could not be accommodated on &quot;lit&quot; fibre cables (i.e., cables used in traditional long-distance communication).

==Motivations==
Much of the cost of installing cables is in the civil engineering work required. This includes planning and routing, obtaining permissions, creating ducts and channels for the cables, and finally installation and connection. This work usually accounts for most of the cost of developing fibre networks. For example, in Amsterdam&#x27;s citywide installation of a fibre network, roughly 80% of the costs involved were labour, with only 10% being fibre. It, therefore, makes sense to plan for, and install, significantly more fibre than is needed for current demand, to provide for future expansion and provide for network redundancy in case any of the cables fail. Many fibre-optic cable owners such as railroads and power utilities have always included additional fibres with the intention to lease these to other carriers.

During the dot-com bubble, a large number of telephone companies built optical-fibre networks, each with the business plan of cornering the market in telecommunications by providing a network with sufficient capacity to take all existing and forecast traffic for the entire region served. This was based on the assumption that telecoms traffic, particularly data traffic, would continue to grow exponentially for the foreseeable future. The advent of wavelength-division multiplexing reduced the demand for fibre by increasing the capacity of a single fibre by a factor of as much as 100. 

According to Gerry Butters, the former head of Lucent Technologies&#x27;s Optical Networking Group at Bell Labs, the amount of data that could be carried by an optical fibre was doubling every nine months at the time. This progress in the ability to carry data over fibre reduced the need for more fibres. As a result, the wholesale price for data communications collapsed and a number of these companies filed for bankruptcy protection. Global Crossing and Worldcom are two high-profile examples in the United States. 

Similar to the Railway Mania, the misfortune of one market sector became the good fortune of another, and this overcapacity created a new telecommunications sector.

==Market==
For many years incumbent local exchange carriers would not sell dark fibre to end users, because they believed selling access to this core asset would cannibalize their other, more lucrative services. Incumbent carriers in the United States were required to sell dark fibre to competitive local exchange carriers as unbundled network elements (UNE), but they have successfully lobbied to reduce these provisions for existing fibre, and eliminated it completely for new fibre placed for fibre to the premises (FTTP) deployments.

Fibre swaps between competitive carriers are quite common. This increases the reach of their networks in places where their competitor has a presence, in exchange for the provision of fibre capacity in places where that competitor has no presence. This is a practice known in the industry as &quot;coopetition&quot;.

Meanwhile, other companies arose specializing as dark fibre providers. Dark fibre became more available when there was enormous overcapacity after the telecoms boom years of the late 1990s through 2001. The market for dark fibre tightened up with the return of capital investment to light up existing fibre and with mergers and acquisitions resulting in a consolidation of dark fibre providers.

==Networks==
Dark fibre can be used to create a privately operated optical fibre network that is run directly by its operator over dark fibre leased or purchased from another supplier. This is opposed to purchasing bandwidth or leased line capacity on an existing network. Dark fibre networks may be used for private networking, or as Internet access or Internet infrastructure networking.

Dark fibre networks may be point-to-point, or use star, self-healing ring, or mesh topologies.

Because both ends of the link are controlled by the same organization, dark fibre networks can operate using the latest optical protocols using wavelength division multiplexing to add capacity where needed, and to provide an upgrade path between technologies. Many dark fibre metropolitan area networks use cheap Gigabit Ethernet equipment over CWDM, rather than expensive SONET ring systems.

They offer very high price-performance for network users who require high performance, such as Google, which has dark network capacities for video and search data, or wish to operate their own network for security or other commercial reasons.

However, dark fibre networks are generally only available in high-population-density areas where fibre has already been laid, as the civil engineering costs of installing fibre to new locations is often prohibitive. For these reasons, dark fibre networks are typically run between data centres and other places with existing fibre infrastructure.

==Variations==
Managed dark fibre is a form of wavelength-division multiplexed access to otherwise dark fibre where a pilot signal is beamed into the fibre by the fibre provider for management purposes using a transponder tuned to an assigned wavelength.

Virtual dark fibre using wavelength multiplexing allows a service provider to offer individual wavelengths. Other wavelengths on the same fibre are leased to other customers or used for other purposes. This is typically done using coarse wavelength division multiplexing CWDM because the wider 20 nm spacing of the wavebands makes these systems much less susceptible to interference.

==See also==
* Fiber-optic communication
* Indefeasible rights of use
* Submarine communications cable

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1878571" start="2" end="12" title="Dark fibre" label="dark fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878571" start="16" end="27" title="Dark fibre" label="unlit fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="41" end="54" title="optical fibre" label="optical fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="77" end="102" title="fibre-optic communication" label="fibre-optic communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001190" start="136" end="160" title="network service provider" label="network service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="958" end="975" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204361" start="1531" end="1541" title="Redundancy (engineering)" label="redundancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="1746" end="1760" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="1780" end="1799" title="telephone companies" label="telephone companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134085" start="1861" end="1881" title="cornering the market" label="cornering the market"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="2125" end="2143" title="grow exponentially" label="grow exponentially"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="2186" end="2218" title="wavelength-division multiplexing" label="wavelength-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873176" start="2373" end="2392" title="Lucent Technologies" label="Lucent Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="2428" end="2437" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="2669" end="2687" title="data communication" label="data communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="2741" end="2751" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q597681" start="2764" end="2779" title="Global Crossing" label="Global Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="2784" end="2792" title="Worldcom" label="Worldcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072191" start="2862" end="2875" title="Railway Mania" label="Railway Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770837" start="2899" end="2912" title="market sector" label="market sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405549" start="3039" end="3071" title="incumbent local exchange carrier" label="incumbent local exchange carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156358" start="3301" end="3335" title="competitive local exchange carrier" label="competitive local exchange carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882440" start="3340" end="3365" title="unbundled network element" label="unbundled network element"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="3510" end="3531" title="fibre to the premises" label="fibre to the premises"/>
<link wikidata="Q615782" start="3851" end="3862" title="coopetition" label="coopetition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696102" start="4022" end="4035" title="telecoms boom" label="telecoms boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="4334" end="4347" title="optical fibre" label="optical fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="4482" end="4491" title="bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071196" start="4495" end="4506" title="leased line" label="leased line"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="4602" end="4610" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186620" start="4621" end="4644" title="Internet infrastructure" label="Internet infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4685" end="4699" title="Network topology#Point-to-point" label="point-to-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q841749" start="4708" end="4712" title="Star network" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448107" start="4714" end="4731" title="self-healing ring" label="self-healing ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q25552104" start="4736" end="4740" title="Mesh networking" label="mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="4898" end="4930" title="wavelength division multiplexing" label="wavelength division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q182129" start="5030" end="5055" title="metropolitan area network" label="metropolitan area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="5067" end="5083" title="Gigabit Ethernet" label="Gigabit Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="5099" end="5103" title="CWDM" label="CWDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q51823" start="5127" end="5132" title="SONET" label="SONET"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="5243" end="5249" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q671224" start="5673" end="5684" title="data centre" label="data centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095206" start="5858" end="5870" title="pilot signal" label="pilot signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="6021" end="6044" title="wavelength-division multiplexing" label="wavelength multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="6267" end="6271" title="CWDM" label="CWDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="6396" end="6421" title="Fiber-optic communication" label="Fiber-optic communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149996" start="6424" end="6450" title="Indefeasible rights of use" label="Indefeasible rights of use"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="6453" end="6483" title="Submarine communications cable" label="Submarine communications cable"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294739" wikidata="Q33937" url="?curid=294739" title="Vuelta a España">
<text>The Vuelta a España (; ) is an annual multi-stage bicycle race primarily held in Spain, while also occasionally making passes through nearby countries. Inspired by the success of the Tour de France and the Giro d&#x27;Italia, the race was first organised in 1935. The race was prevented from being run by the Spanish Civil War and World War II in the early years of its existence; however, the race has been held annually since 1955. As the Vuelta gained prestige and popularity the race was lengthened and its reach began to extend all around the globe. Since 1979, the event has been staged and managed by Unipublic, until in 2014, when the Amaury Sport Organisation acquired control. Since then, they have been working together. The peloton expanded from a primarily Spanish participation to include riders from all over the world. The Vuelta is a UCI World Tour event, which means that the teams that compete in the race are mostly UCI WorldTeams, with the exception of the wild card teams that the organizers can invite.

Along with the Tour de France and Giro d&#x27;Italia, the Vuelta is one of cycling&#x27;s prestigious Grand Tours. First held in 1935 and annually since 1955, the Vuelta runs for three weeks in a changing route across Spain. While the route changes each year, the format of the race stays the same, with the appearance of at least two time trials, the passage through the mountain chain of the Pyrenees or the Cantabrian Mountains, and the finish in the Spanish capital Madrid. The modern editions of the Vuelta a España consist of 21 day-long stages over a 23-day period that includes 2 rest days.

It was originally held in the spring, usually late April, with a few editions held in June in the 1940s. In 1995, however, the race moved to September to avoid direct competition with the Giro d&#x27;Italia, held in May. As a result, the Vuelta is now often seen as an important preparation for the World Championships, which moved to October the same year. However, starting in 2023 this is no longer the case as every fourth year the Worlds will now be held in August. A Vuelta was also organized in August and September 1950. The race now usually starts in late August, but the 2020 race started in October due to a delay caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

All of the stages are timed to the finish; after finishing, the riders&#x27; times are compounded with their previous stage times. The rider with the lowest aggregate time is the leader of the race and gets to don the red jersey. While the general classification garners the most attention, there are, or have been, other contests held within the Vuelta: the points classification for the sprinters, the mountains classification for the climbers, the combination classification for the all-round riders, and the team classification for the competing teams.

La Vuelta Femenina, a women&#x27;s edition of the race, was first held in 2023, part of the UCI Women&#x27;s World Tour. This follows smaller races staged in conjunction with the Vuelta between 2015 and 2022.

==History==
===Origins===
The first races in Spain were run at the national level and were promoted by the bicycle manufacturers from Eibar. Consequently, the tour was Eibar – Madrid – Eibar, and called the Grand Prix of the Republic.

===1935–1960===

In early 1935, former cyclist Clemente López Doriga, in collaboration with Juan Pujol, director of the daily newspaper &quot;Informaciones&quot;, organized the Vuelta a España, The inaugural event saw 50 entrants face a 3,411 km (2,119 mi.) course over only 14 stages, averaging over 240 km (149 mi.) per stage. It was inspired by the success of the Tours in France and Italy, and the boost they brought to the circulations of their sponsoring newspapers (&quot;L&#x27;Auto&quot; and &quot;La Gazzetta dello Sport&quot; respectively); Pujol of instigated the race to increase &quot;Informaciones&quot;&#x27;s circulation.

The first stage took the riders from Madrid to Valladolid. That year saw the first great duel in the history of the Vuelta, between Belgium&#x27;s Gustaaf Deloor, who ultimately won, and Mariano Cañardo, Spanish runner-up.

The second edition of the Vuelta, finally held despite the delicate political situation, was also marked by the Deeloor repeat, who this time held the lead from the first day to the last. The 1936 edition remains the longest winning finish time of the Vuelta in 150:07:54, the race consisted of 22 stages with a total length of 4,407 km. Gustaaf finished first and his older brother Alfons finished second overall.

After the first two editions, the Spanish race suffered a hiatus because of the Spanish Civil War.

In 1941, the Vuelta resumed competition with an almost entirely Spanish peloton and very little foreign representation. That year the first time trial was held in the Vuelta. Julián Berrendero was proclaimed the winner, and he recaptured the title the next year. In addition, Berrendero was King of the Mountains for three consecutive years.

With World War II and the precarious economic situation, there was another break in the running of the Vuelta a España.

In 1945, the Journal took over organization of the race and competition resumed, although again with few foreign competitors in the peloton. On this occasion, Delio Rodríguez took the final victory. That year also introduced the points classification, but this was not stable until 1955. Four editions were run until 1950.

Subsequently, there was no Vuelta until 1955, when it was organized by the Basque newspaper &quot;El Correo Español-El Pueblo Vasco&quot;. Since then, the Vuelta a España has been run annually. At this time, the Vuelta is run routinely in August and September, but it was previously run in April and May. Another difference was the number of participants. Previously, there were very few, but the number doubled, with more internationally recognized competitors.

===1960–1970===

The prestige of the Vuelta increased, with more stars from the international cycling scene. During the late 1950s came the first successes in the overall standings of Italian and French riders. In the 1960s, they would also be joined by German and Dutch riders. In 1963, Jacques Anquetil won the general classification, establishing himself as the first rider to win all three Grand Tours. Five years later, in 1968, Felice Gimondi would do the same. Eddy Merckx (1973), Bernard Hinault (1978, 1983), Alberto Contador (2008), Vincenzo Nibali (2010) and Chris Froome (2017) later accomplished the same treble.

Antonio Karmany dominated the mountain classification for three consecutive years, then was replaced by Julio Jiménez, who won it for another three years.

In 1965, Rik Van Looy became the first rider to repeat victory in the points classification. Jan Janssen in 1968 and 1974 Domingo Perurena would do the same, winning this classification twice.

During mid 60&#x27;s the organizer of the Vuelta, &quot;El Correo Español-El Pueblo Vasco&quot;, went through some financial problems that endangered the running of the competition. However, during that time all editions ended normally. In 1968, the Vuelta was hit by a terrorist attack and other events, having to cancel the 15th stage. There were no fatalities.

===1970–1980===

The &#x27;70s began with the triumph of Luis Ocaña, who was already established in the international squad as one of the greats of cycling.

José Manuel Fuente, with victories in 1972 and 1974, became the third rider to win two Tours of Spain. A few years later, Bernard Hinault repeated the feat, which was also achieved by Pedro Delgado during the 1980s.

In 1973, Eddy Merckx won the Vuelta by a landslide, winning six stages and all individual classifications with the exception of the mountains competition: he finished second.

Freddy Maertens in 1977 echoed a similar domination to that demonstrated by Merckx a few years earlier, by winning thirteen stages and all individual classifications except the mountain.

In the mid-1970s, Andrés Oliva managed to earn the King of the Mountains title in three editions of the Vuelta.

Frenchman Bernard Hinault emerged in 1978 as an international cycling star. The same year, Hinault won his first Tour de France. The last stage of that edition also had to be suspended because of riots and barricades that prevented the normal course of it.

When 1979 &quot;El Correo Español-El Pueblo Vasco&quot; left as a sponsor of the race, the Vuelta was once again endangered. However, the company Unipublic took charge of the competition. This, coupled with increased advertising and the beginning of the broadcasts via television, further grew revenue and interest in the Vuelta.

===1980–1990===

In the early 1980s, two names stood out in the secondary classifications: José Luis Laguía, who won the mountain classification five times, and Sean Kelly, who won four times in the points classification.

In 1982 came the first case of disqualification of the winner for doping. Two days after the end of the competition, Ángel Arroyo and a few other riders were disqualified, and Arroyo lost his victory to Marino Lejarreta. Arroyo appealed for a B test of his sample, which again tested positive. Arroyo was given a ten-minute penalty, and ultimately ended up placing thirteenth in the general classification.

Next year&#x27;s edition was the first appearance of the Lagos de Covadonga as a final stage, an ascent that would become, over the years, the most iconic climb of the Vuelta a España. In 1984 it played the issue in a race that ended with the smallest difference between the first and second place. Éric Caritoux, a complete unknown until then, managed to win the Vuelta with only six seconds ahead of Alberto Fernández in second place.

The end of the 80s was marked by the rise of Colombian cycling, which presented a strong challenge particularly in the mountain stages. Names such as Lucho Herrera (winner in 1987) or Fabio Parra (2nd in 1989) appeared in the last editions of the decade. One of the rulers at that time was also Pedro Delgado, with two victories (1985 and 1989), a second place, and two third-place finishes. In the 1988 edition, the start took place in the Canary Islands with 3 stages. The race was won by Irishman Sean Kelly, his only overall victory in a Grand Tour.

===1990–2000===

The first half of the 1990s was marked by the dominance of Swiss rider Tony Rominger, the first rider to win three times and win the race consecutively between 1992 and 1994.

The fiftieth edition of the Vuelta, which was held in 1995, coincided with the change of dates. The Vuelta a España came to be held in September, and near the end of the season as the last of the three Grand Tours of the year. This was done to attract more high-profile riders, who before had preferred to ride the Giro d&#x27;Italia or the Tour de France, which both took place very closely to the Vuelta&#x27;s timeslot. That year Laurent Jalabert won all classifications, the second time this happened in the Vuelta (Rominger had done so in 1993). The Frenchman was also a four-time winner of the points classification, matching the previous record set by Sean Kelly in the &#x27;80s.

In 1997, the tour started for the first time in a foreign country. They began in Lisbon, on the occasion of Expo &#x27;98.

The ascent of the Alto de L&#x27;Angliru was part of a stage for the first time in 1999, with the victory of José María Jiménez, four-time winner of the mountains classification. The reputation of the climb grew rapidly because of its demanding nature.

===2000–2010===
The first editions of the 2000s were marked by the dominance of Roberto Heras, who achieved victory on three occasions, and in 2005 did it for the fourth time. However, as happened with Ángel Arroyo in 1982, Heras was disqualified days after the end of the competition after testing positive in a doping test, this time for use of EPO. This positive development was later ratified by the counter-analysis and Heras was stripped of his title, benefiting the Russian cyclist Denis Menchov until 2012, when the Spanish Courts overturned the positive test and re-awarded the win to Heras. In 2006 Alexander Vinokourov won after a struggle with the then leader of the UCI Pro Tour, Alejandro Valverde. In the 2007 edition Denis Menchov again clinched the overall victory by more than three minutes over the Spanish cyclists Carlos Sastre and Samuel Sánchez. In June 2008, French company Amaury Sport Organisation (ASO), who organize the Tour de France, announced it had bought 49% of Unipublic.

In 2008, the winner was the Spaniard Alberto Contador, who also won that year&#x27;s Giro d&#x27;Italia, and became the first Spaniard to win all three Grand Tours. In 2009, the Vuelta began in Drenthe, Netherlands, continuing through Belgium and Germany. The final winner was Alejandro Valverde, who adopted a conservative stance without winning any stage and sprinting in the final meters to achieve bonuses. His main rivals were Samuel Sánchez (second place), Cadel Evans (third), Ivan Basso, Robert Gesink and Ezequiel Mosquera. All of them suffered critical falls or punctures such as Evans in Monachil.

===2010–2018===

Vincenzo Nibali won the 2010 edition without winning a stage, thanks to consistent high placings on summit stage finishes and the race&#x27;s two time trials. He had inherited the race lead after Igor Antón was forced to abandon after crashing on stage 14. Though Nibali lost the race lead to Joaquim Rodríguez, he later regained it on the final time trial. This marked his first grand tour victory.

The 2011 Vuelta was the 66th edition of the race and was the first Vuelta in 33 years that visited the Basque Country. The 33-year absence from the region was due to fear of political protests. The victory was originally awarded to Juan José Cobo who had a race-winning margin of just 13 seconds over Briton Chris Froome. Neither rider had been marked as a pre-race favourite, and both had gone to the Vuelta as domestiques for their team leaders: Cobo for Denis Menchov, and Froome for Bradley Wiggins; their team leaders originally finished 5th and 3rd respectively. The race was the first time that two Britons had stood on the podium of a Grand Tour, and Froome&#x27;s second-place finish equalled the highest placing by a British rider in a Grand tour, Pippa York finishing second in the race in 1985 and 1986, until Wiggins won the Tour de France the following year. In 2019 Cobo&#x27;s win was annulled for doping violations, and the race awarded to Froome.

In 2012, the race was won for the second time by Alberto Contador of , taking his first overall victory since returning from a doping suspension. Contador, who won the seventeenth stage of the race after a solo attack, won the general classification by 1&#x27; 16&quot; over runner-up Alejandro Valverde of the team. Completing an all-Spanish podium, Joaquim Rodríguez finished the race third overall, 21 seconds behind Valverde and 1&#x27; 37&quot; behind Contador, having led the race for 13 days between the fourth and sixteenth stages. Rodríguez also achieved three stage victories.

The 2013 Vuelta a España saw another shock result when the 41-year-old American Chris Horner defeated Vincenzo Nibali, Alejandro Valverde and Joaquim Rodríguez to become the first North American to win the Vuelta and the oldest rider to win a grand tour. In addition Horner clinched the race&#x27;s combination classification. The race was also notable for Tony Martin&#x27;s all-day solo break on stage 6, when he broke away at the start and led for nearly the entire stage before being caught 20 metres from the finish line, placing seventh behind stage winner Michael Mørkøv.

In March 2014, ASO acquired full control of Unipublic, with both working together with the running of the race.

The 2014 race featured a field described as the strongest in a grand tour in recent memory, as a range of accomplished riders entered the race after suffering injuries or health problems earlier in the season. Contador claimed his third Vuelta, Contador went into the race uncertain of his form after crashing out of the Tour de France on the 10th stage, breaking his tibia. However, Contador found his form in the race earlier than expected, taking the red jersey on the 10th stage individual time trial and taking two key mountain stage wins on his way to victory. He won the race by 1&#x27; 10&quot; over runner-up, Chris Froome. Like Contador, Froome also went into the race uncertain of his form after he crashed three times in two days during the Tour, leading to his withdrawal. However, Froome came to life during the third week, finishing second in three key mountain stages and taking time to move into second place overall. Alejandro Valverde completed the podium, finishing 40 seconds behind Froome and 1 minute and 50 seconds behind Contador.

The 2015 edition saw another strong field contest the race, including the top four finishers at the 2015 Tour de France (Froome, Valverde, Nibali and Nairo Quintana) and two of the podium finishers from the 2015 Giro d&#x27;Italia in the form of Nibali&#x27;s teammates Fabio Aru and Mikel Landa. The early leaders of the race were Esteban Chaves and Tom Dumoulin, who exchanged the leader&#x27;s red jersey several times during the first ten days of racing, with both riders winning summit finishes in the first week. With the withdrawals of Chris Froome and the disqualification of Vincenzo Nibali, Nibali&#x27;s team mate Fabio Aru took over the race lead following the mountainous Stage 11, which took place entirely within Andorra. He kept his lead for five stages as the race entered the mountains of northern Spain, but lost it to Rodríguez on Stage 16. Dumoulin took the lead back on Stage 17 – the race&#x27;s only individual time trial – with Aru three seconds behind in second place. Aru attacked throughout the final stages and, on the penultimate day, finally dropped Dumoulin, who fell to sixth place overall. Aru therefore took the first Grand Tour victory of his career.

Nairo Quintana won the 2016 edition ahead of Froome, with the Colombian Esteban Chaves finishing third. Quintana had gained over minutes over Froome on Stage 15 when he and Contador attacked together from into the stage and blew the race apart, isolating Froome from his teammates. Whilst Froome fought back and managed to gain back nearly all he had lost in a dominant victory on the stage 19 individual time trial to Calp, Quintana was able to follow several attacks by Froome on Stage 20, the final mountain stage to Alto de Aitana, to secure overall victory by 1:23 over Froome. By doing so, Quintana became the second Colombian after Luis Herrera in 1987 to win the Vuelta.

The 2017 edition started in Nîmes, France. It was the first time the race has started in France and only the third time it has started outside Spain, after 1997 (Portugal) and 2009 (Netherlands). The general classification was won by 2017 Tour de France champion Chris Froome from , ahead of Vincenzo Nibali of . 
Froome became the third rider to win the Tour-Vuelta double after Jacques Anquetil (1963) and Bernard Hinault (1978), and the first to do so since the Vuelta was moved to its current calendar position. 
Froome also won the points and combination classifications, becoming the first rider to win three jerseys in a single Vuelta since Denis Menchov in 2007.

In 2018, it was another British rider who won the race, in Simon Yates, riding for the Mitchelton–Scott. Aged 26 this was Yates&#x27; first grand tour win, and meant that for the first time all three grand tours in a year had been won by three different riders from the same country, after Froome won the 2018 Giro d&#x27;Italia and Geraint Thomas won the 2018 Tour de France.

=== 2019–present===

The 2019 Vuelta was won by Primož Roglič, who became the first Slovenian cyclist to win a Grand Tour.

The 2020 Vuelta a España was originally scheduled to be held from 14 August to 6 September 2020. In April 2020, the 2020 Tour de France was rescheduled to run between the 29 August and 20 September, having been postponed in view of the COVID-19 pandemic. On 15 April, UCI announced that both the Giro d&#x27;Italia and the Vuelta would take place in autumn after the 2020 UCI Road World Championships. On 5 May, UCI announced that the postponed Giro and the Vuelta would run between 3 and 25 October and between 20 October and 8 November, respectively. For the first time since 1985, the race was not 21 stages long; instead, it was held in a reduced format over 18 stages. Roglic defended his title in a hard-fought race with Richard Carapaz which was among the closest Vueltas in history with the winning margin being only +0:24. The 2020 Vuelta had the smallest margin of victory since the 1984 Vuelta a España, which was the smallest margin of victory of any grand tour in cycling history. 

In 2021, Roglič returned in the 2021 Vuelta a España and this time dominated the field to take his third consecutive victory in the race. He became only the third rider to win the race in three successive years. He won by 4&#x27; 42&quot;, the largest margin of victory since Alex Zülle won by 5&#x27; 07&quot; in 1997.

The 2022 Vuelta a España was won by the UCI World Road Race champion, Belgian Remco Evenepoel after starting in Utrecht, Netherlands.

The 2023 Vuelta a España was won by Sepp Kuss, who took the red jersey on stage 6 after winning from a breakaway. Kuss held on to win the general classification by 17 seconds over his teammate Jonas Vingegaard. Primoz Roglič, also a member of , finished third, making the race the first time a single team swept the podium of a grand tour.

The 2024 Vuelta a España was won by Primož Roglič, who tied Roberto Heras&#x27;s record for the most general classification wins.

==Classifications==
The overall leader at present wears a red jersey— the Spanish counterpart to the yellow jersey of the Tour de France. Other jerseys honor the best climber (King of the Mountains, awarded a blue-on-white polka dot jersey) and leader of the points competition (for many years awarded a &quot;blue with yellow fish jersey&quot; sponsored by Spain&#x27;s fishing and marine industry, but more recently given a green jersey).

Since the 1950 Vuelta, the leaders of the other race classifications have been permitted to wear identifying jerseys (previously, there was an official mountain classification, but no identifying jersey). For a long time, a blue jersey identified the leader of the points classification, green the leader of the mountain classification, and white the leader of the combination classification (until it ended in 2018). Recently, these other classifications have used jerseys more like those used at the Tour de France, with the points leader using a green jersey, the King of the Mountains using a polka dot jersey (albeit blue-on-white rather than red-on-white as at the Tour) and the best young rider a white jersey.

Usually, other cycling jerseys are awarded, such as for points leaders in the &quot;Metas Volantes&quot; (intermediate sprints) and for the combination category (a point system that honors the best rider with the combined total points in the best overall, points and mountains classifications).

===General Classification===
The leader of the general classification is permitted to wear a jersey of a particular colour signifying the lead (maillot rojo or red jersey), as in the Tour de France (maillot jaune or yellow jersey) and the Giro d&#x27;Italia (maglia rosa or pink jersey).

The colour of the leader&#x27;s jersey of the Vuelta a España has changed several times since the original tour. The organizers who revived the Vuelta following its multiple suspensions since 1936 usually changed the color of the jersey. The leader&#x27;s jersey began as orange in 1935, became white in 1941, then back to orange in 1942. It was white with a horizontal red stripe from 1945 to 1950.

In 1955, when &quot;El Correo&quot; resurrected the Vuelta, yellow became the colour of the leader&#x27;s jersey, the same color as in the Tour de France (known as the &quot;Maillot amarillo&quot;).

Except for the 1977 Vuelta, when the jersey was orange, a yellow jersey was worn until 1998, when the color was deepened to a gold hue (&quot;Jersey de Oro&quot;).

However, for the 2010 edition, the colour of the leader&#x27;s jersey was changed to red.

The record for most wins is held by Roberto Heras of Spain, winner in 2000, 2003, 2004 and 2005. Spaniards have dominated, winning 30 of the 66 runnings of the Vuelta. France, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, Colombia, Ireland, Russia, Kazakhstan, the United States and Great Britain have also had first-place finishers.

===Mountains Classification===
The mountains classification in the Vuelta a España is a secondary classification in the Vuelta a España. For this classification, points are given to the cyclists who cross the mountain peaks first. The classification was established in 1935, when it was won by Italian Edoardo Molinar, and until 2005 the leader in the mountain classification wore a green jersey. In 2006, it became an orange jersey, and in 2010 it became white with blue dots.

Spaniard José Luis Laguía has won this classification a record five times, including three consecutive. Other cyclists who have won this ranking for three consecutive times were Antonio Karmany, Julio Jiménez, José María Jiménez, all Spaniards. Overall, the Spaniards have dominated this classification by 47 out of 68 times. In 2010, David Moncoutié considered retirement, but remained a professional cyclist to try to win his third consecutive mountains classification. In 2011, he became the first rider ever to win this award in four consecutive years.

As of 2010, the leader of the mountains classification is awarded a white jersey with blue dots.
The mountains jersey is third in the rankings of jerseys, behind the jersey for the general classification and points classification in the Vuelta a España but before the combination classification; this means that if a cyclists leads both the general classification and the mountains classification, he wears the jersey for the general classification, and the mountains jersey is passed on to the second cyclist in that ranking.

The organisation of the Vuelta designates which climbs are given points, and in which category they fall. As of 2010, there are 5 categories: most points are scored on the Top Alberto Fernández, the highest point of the Vuelta.
If two or more cyclists have the same number of points, the cyclist who was first on the &#x27;Top Alberto Fernandez&#x27; gets the higher ranking. If that does not solve the problem, the cyclists with the most high climb finishes wins gets the higher ranking. If that does not solve it, the cyclists with the most first category wins, and so on. If after the third category there is still a tie, the order in the general classification is used.

===Points Classification===

The points classification in the Vuelta a España is a secondary classification, in which the cyclists are ranked in a points classification, based on the finish of each rider every stage.

For the first time, a points classification was calculated in 1945, sponsored by Pirelli. It was calculated as follows:
*The winner of a stage received 100 points, the second 99, and so on. If cyclists arrived in a group that was given the same time, they all received the same number of points.
*The first five cyclists in a stage received 12 points for every minute that they arrived ahead of the number six of the stage.
*For every point scored for the mountains classification, two points were given for this points classification.
*On intermediate sprints, points could be won: 8 for the winner, 6 for the second, 4 and 2 for the next.

Although the sponsor said that the classification was a great success, it did not return the next edition.

The next time that a points classification was calculated, was in 1955. Then it used the method of adding the stage ranks, in the same way as the points classification in the Tour de France did then; just like in the Tour de France, the leader of the points classification (with the fewest points) wore a green jersey. In 1963, the points system changed such that from now on points were given to the first cyclists to reach the finish, and the cyclist with the most points was the leader.

Seán Kelly, Laurent Jalabert and Alejandro Valverde, with 4 titles each, share the record of victories.

===Young rider classification===
The young rider classification is awarded based on the young rider with the lowest cumulative time (the same methodology as the general classification). The jersey is also awarded alongside the points and mountains classifications.

In the 2017 and the 2018 editions, the winner only wore a red number bib as the white jersey was awarded to the winner of the Combination classification.

===Team classification===

The team classification has been awarded since the race&#x27;s inception in 1935.

===Defunct classifications===

The combination classification was calculated by adding the numeral ranks of each cyclist in the general, points, and mountains classifications (a rider must have had a score in all classifications possible to qualify for the combination classification), with the lowest cumulative total signifying the leader of this competition.

From 2006 to 2018, the leader of the classification wore a white jersey; in 2005 it was a golden-green jersey.

The award strongly favoured top riders in the competition. Since its re-introduction in 2002, it was only won by someone other than the race&#x27;s overall winner four times: in 2002, 2003, 2012, and 2015. On all four of those occasions, the winning cyclist was placed either second or third in the overall classification.

The combination classification was discontinued in 2019. Now, the white jersey is worn by the best young rider.

The Vuelta was the last major race to feature a combination classification.

==The race route and stages==
Typically, the course includes up to three time trials, and a number of mountain stages. Since 1994, and often before (such as in the inaugural edition), the Vuelta finished in the Spanish capital, Madrid, although Bilbao (in the 1950s) and San Sebastián (in the 1970s) were long both recurring finish cities. Behind Madrid, three cities share second place for the most Vuelta departures: Gijón, Bilbao, and one time finish city Jerez de la Frontera. In 1997, the Vuelta started abroad for the first time, in Lisbon, Portugal. The first ever Vuelta to start outside the Iberian Peninsula took place in 2009, when the Dutch city of Assen hosted the prologue of the 64th Vuelta.

Lagos de Covadonga is one of the most important climb in the modern history of the &quot;Vuelta&quot;. The road that leads to the lakes starts at Covadonga and is 12.6 kilometres long at an average gradient of 7.3% (height gain: 1056 m). The most demanding section is &quot;La Huesera&quot;, 7 kilometres from the top of the climb, with an average gradient of 15% during 800 meters. It was featured for the first time in 1983 with the victory of Marino Lejarreta, who was in a fierce battle with Bernard Hinault for overall victory. This was the same Vuelta that saw Hinault, Greg LeMond and Laurent Fignon all riding on the same team. Stage 7 of the 2023 La Vuelta Femenina ended at Lagos de Covadonga, with Dutch cyclist Demi Vollering placing first.

In 1999, for the first time, the course crossed the Alto de L&#x27;Angliru in Asturias, which climbs 1,573 meters (5,160 feet) over 12.9 km (8 mi.) with grades as steep as 23.6 percent (at &quot;Cueña-les-Cabres&quot;), making it one of the steepest climbs in Europe. Credit for the discovery of this climb and its addition to the Vuelta goes to Miguel Prieto.

===Start and finish of the Vuelta===

;Starts
;Finishes

====Starts abroad====
Most stages are in mainland Spain, although since the mid-1990s it has become common to visit nearby countries: Portugal, Andorra and France. It has also taken place in the Netherlands, Germany and Belgium. Four editions of the Vuelta so far have started outside Spain. A start abroad in Utrecht, Netherlands was planned for the 2020 edition, however this was cancelled in light of the COVID-19 pandemic in Spain and a revised route starting in Irun was used in 2020. Instead, the 2022 Vuelta a España started in Utrecht.

==Stage wins==

===Stage wins per rider===

17 riders have won 10 or more individual stages.

Active riders are in bold.

===Stage wins per country===

==Records==

* Most Vuelta a España victories: Roberto Heras, Primož Roglič, 4

* Most Vuelta a España consecutive victories: Tony Rominger, Roberto Heras, Primož Roglič, 3

* Most Vuelta a España Stage wins: Delio Rodríguez, 39
* Most stage wins in one edition: Freddy Maertens in 1977, 13
* Most individual time trial wins: Abraham Olano, Alex Zülle, and Tony Rominger, 6
* Most number of victories by country: Spain, 32
* Most days as leader: Alex Zülle, 48
* Most mountains classification victories: José Luis Laguía, 5
* Most points classification victories: Sean Kelly, Laurent Jalabert and Alejandro Valverde, 4
* Most number of intermediate sprints classification victories: Miguel Ángel Iglesias, 5
* Largest margin of victory: Delio Rodríguez over Julián Berrendero in 1945, 30&#x27; 8&quot;
* Smallest margin of victory: Éric Caritoux over Alberto Fernández in 1984, 6 seconds
* Most participations: Íñigo Cuesta, 17 (1994–2010).
* Most consecutive participations: Íñigo Cuesta, 17 (1994–2010).
* Most Vueltas finished: Federico Echave, 14 (1982–1995), and Íñigo Cuesta, 14 (1994, 1996–99, 2001–03 and 2005–10)
* Most consecutive Vueltas finished: Federico Echave, 14 (1982–1995).
* Fewest participants: 1941, 32
* Greatest number of participants: 2002, 207
* Fastest average speed: 2001, 42.534 km/h
* Slowest average speed: 1941, 26.262 km/h
* Longest edition: 1941, 4,442 km
* Shortest edition: 1963, 2,419 km
* Youngest general classification winner: Angelino Soler in 1961, age 
* Oldest general classification winner: Chris Horner in 2013, age 

==Related events==
Between 2015 and 2022, a women&#x27;s race (Challenge by La Vuelta) was held in conjunction with the final day(s) of the Vuelta as part of the UCI Women&#x27;s World Tour. Initially a one day race, it became a stage race from 2018 onwards, with the 2022 edition featuring 5 stages. The race was criticised for its lack of difficulty, with winner Annemiek van Vleuten stating &quot;if you look at the [2022] course you can conclude that the Vuelta &quot;(sic)&quot; is not yet ready to call itself a grand tour&quot;.

From 2023, La Vuelta Femenina – a 7-day stage race in the UCI Women&#x27;s World Tour – was held in May.

==References==
==External links==
* Sportlistings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33937" start="4" end="19" title="Vuelta a España" label="Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318941" start="38" end="49" title="stage race" label="multi-stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="50" end="62" title="bicycle racing" label="bicycle race"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="183" end="197" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="206" end="224" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086866" start="258" end="262" title="1935 Vuelta a España" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="309" end="326" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q606328" start="428" end="432" title="1955 Vuelta a España" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550652" start="608" end="617" title="Unipublic" label="Unipublic"/>
<link wikidata="Q372681" start="643" end="668" title="Amaury Sport Organisation" label="Amaury Sport Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174314" start="736" end="743" title="peloton" label="peloton"/>
<link wikidata="Q635366" start="851" end="865" title="UCI World Tour" label="UCI World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154783" start="936" end="949" title="UCI WorldTeam" label="UCI WorldTeam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="978" end="987" title="Wild card (sports)#Road cycling" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="1042" end="1056" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="1061" end="1079" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q866427" start="1129" end="1140" title="Grand Tour (cycling)" label="Grand Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086866" start="1156" end="1160" title="1935 Vuelta a España" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q606328" start="1180" end="1184" title="1955 Vuelta a España" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="1421" end="1429" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q208076" start="1437" end="1457" title="Cantabrian Mountains" label="Cantabrian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="1497" end="1503" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050755" start="1735" end="1739" title="1995 Vuelta a España" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="1815" end="1833" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506424" start="1926" end="1945" title="UCI Road World Championships" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q60776254" start="2208" end="2212" title="2020 Vuelta a España" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2266" end="2283" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532554" start="2504" end="2514" title="List of Vuelta a España general classification winners" label="red jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241695" start="2645" end="2666" title="Points classification in the Vuelta a España" label="points classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118296" start="2690" end="2714" title="Mountains classification in the Vuelta a España" label="mountains classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330008" start="2737" end="2763" title="Combination classification in the Vuelta a España" label="combination classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859582" start="2798" end="2817" title="team classification" label="team classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030967" start="2844" end="2862" title="La Vuelta Femenina" label="La Vuelta Femenina"/>
<link wikidata="Q116303847" start="2918" end="2922" title="2023 La Vuelta Femenina" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q21075974" start="2936" end="2963" title="UCI Women&amp;#x27;s World Tour" label="UCI Women&amp;#x27;s World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849075" start="3038" end="3042" title="2015 La Madrid Challenge by La Vuelta" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q110774961" start="3047" end="3051" title="2022 Challenge by La Vuelta" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q496567" start="3188" end="3193" title="Eibar" label="Eibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q815748" start="3769" end="3780" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipe" label="L&amp;#x27;Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q651988" start="3797" end="3820" title="La Gazzetta dello Sport" label="La Gazzetta dello Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="3977" end="3987" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q559245" start="4077" end="4091" title="Gustaaf Deloor" label="Gustaaf Deloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175632" start="4117" end="4132" title="Mariano Cañardo" label="Mariano Cañardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q491805" start="4537" end="4543" title="Alfons Deloor" label="Alfons"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="4650" end="4667" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q941834" start="4673" end="4677" title="1941 Vuelta a España" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q518572" start="4845" end="4862" title="Julián Berrendero" label="Julián Berrendero"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5018" end="5030" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q723885" start="5293" end="5308" title="Delio Rodríguez" label="Delio Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324043" start="5556" end="5589" title="El Correo" label="El Correo Español-El Pueblo Vasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q936954" start="6204" end="6208" title="1963 Vuelta a España" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q221001" start="6210" end="6226" title="Jacques Anquetil" label="Jacques Anquetil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052068" start="6350" end="6354" title="1968 Vuelta a España" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q313526" start="6356" end="6370" title="Felice Gimondi" label="Felice Gimondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q103756" start="6390" end="6401" title="Eddy Merckx" label="Eddy Merckx"/>
<link wikidata="Q267398" start="6403" end="6407" title="1973 Vuelta a España" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255" start="6410" end="6425" title="Bernard Hinault" label="Bernard Hinault"/>
<link wikidata="Q920602" start="6427" end="6431" title="1978 Vuelta a España" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q936571" start="6433" end="6437" title="1983 Vuelta a España" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q132738" start="6440" end="6456" title="Alberto Contador" label="Alberto Contador"/>
<link wikidata="Q632169" start="6458" end="6462" title="2008 Vuelta a España" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q312322" start="6465" end="6480" title="Vincenzo Nibali" label="Vincenzo Nibali"/>
<link wikidata="Q755135" start="6482" end="6486" title="2010 Vuelta a España" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q319591" start="6492" end="6504" title="Chris Froome" label="Chris Froome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26878348" start="6506" end="6510" title="2017 Vuelta a España" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q936789" start="6549" end="6564" title="Antonio Karmany" label="Antonio Karmany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051059" start="6708" end="6712" title="1965 Vuelta a España" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q445151" start="6714" end="6726" title="Rik Van Looy" label="Rik Van Looy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380930" start="6798" end="6809" title="Jan Janssen" label="Jan Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052068" start="6813" end="6817" title="1968 Vuelta a España" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q936599" start="6822" end="6826" title="1974 Vuelta a España" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170205" start="6827" end="6843" title="Domingo Perurena" label="Domingo Perurena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052068" start="7139" end="7143" title="1968 Vuelta a España" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q358336" start="7321" end="7331" title="Luis Ocaña" label="Luis Ocaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q736875" start="7422" end="7440" title="José Manuel Fuente" label="José Manuel Fuente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050674" start="7460" end="7464" title="1972 Vuelta a España" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q936599" start="7469" end="7473" title="1974 Vuelta a España" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q267398" start="7642" end="7646" title="1973 Vuelta a España" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q103756" start="7648" end="7659" title="Eddy Merckx" label="Eddy Merckx"/>
<link wikidata="Q378319" start="7815" end="7830" title="Freddy Maertens" label="Freddy Maertens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052049" start="7834" end="7838" title="1977 Vuelta a España" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255" start="8126" end="8141" title="Bernard Hinault" label="Bernard Hinault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051050" start="8931" end="8935" title="1982 Vuelta a España" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q582066" start="9045" end="9057" title="Ángel Arroyo" label="Ángel Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q462255" start="9131" end="9147" title="Marino Lejarreta" label="Marino Lejarreta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477016" start="9393" end="9411" title="Lagos de Covadonga" label="Lagos de Covadonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q735776" start="9524" end="9528" title="1984 Vuelta a España" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q288044" start="9635" end="9648" title="Éric Caritoux" label="Éric Caritoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119369" start="9738" end="9755" title="Alberto Fernández (cyclist)" label="Alberto Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q428038" start="9924" end="9937" title="Lucho Herrera" label="Lucho Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q936832" start="9949" end="9953" title="1987 Vuelta a España" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390574" start="9958" end="9969" title="Fabio Parra" label="Fabio Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q640064" start="9978" end="9982" title="1989 Vuelta a España" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q336292" start="10069" end="10082" title="Pedro Delgado" label="Pedro Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q935715" start="10104" end="10108" title="1985 Vuelta a España" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q640064" start="10113" end="10117" title="1989 Vuelta a España" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051718" start="10173" end="10185" title="1988 Vuelta a España" label="1988 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="10215" end="10229" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q156707" start="10274" end="10284" title="Sean Kelly (cyclist)" label="Sean Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q337118" start="10417" end="10430" title="Tony Rominger" label="Tony Rominger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050755" start="10576" end="10580" title="1995 Vuelta a España" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="10837" end="10855" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="10863" end="10877" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q13485" start="10955" end="10971" title="Laurent Jalabert" label="Laurent Jalabert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078635" start="11214" end="11218" title="1997 Vuelta a España" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="11292" end="11298" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139414" start="11319" end="11332" title="Expo &amp;#x27;98" label="Expo &amp;#x27;98"/>
<link wikidata="Q443610" start="11353" end="11375" title="Alto de L&amp;#x27;Angliru" label="Alto de L&amp;#x27;Angliru"/>
<link wikidata="Q919735" start="11444" end="11462" title="José María Jiménez" label="José María Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q282858" start="11669" end="11682" title="Roberto Heras" label="Roberto Heras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048779" start="11732" end="11736" title="2005 Vuelta a España" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q582066" start="11791" end="11803" title="Ángel Arroyo" label="Ángel Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="11936" end="11939" title="Erythropoietin" label="EPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q312283" start="12078" end="12091" title="Denis Menchov" label="Denis Menchov"/>
<link wikidata="Q295991" start="12198" end="12218" title="Alexander Vinokourov" label="Alexander Vinokourov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329578" start="12268" end="12280" title="UCI Pro Tour" label="UCI Pro Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q286183" start="12282" end="12300" title="Alejandro Valverde" label="Alejandro Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q105228" start="12424" end="12437" title="Carlos Sastre" label="Carlos Sastre"/>
<link wikidata="Q298185" start="12442" end="12456" title="Samuel Sánchez" label="Samuel Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q372681" start="12487" end="12512" title="Amaury Sport Organisation" label="Amaury Sport Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="12537" end="12551" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q832939" start="12664" end="12699" title="2008 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="that year&amp;#x27;s Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190919" start="13059" end="13070" title="Cadel Evans" label="Cadel Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q309938" start="13080" end="13090" title="Ivan Basso" label="Ivan Basso"/>
<link wikidata="Q359977" start="13092" end="13105" title="Robert Gesink" label="Robert Gesink"/>
<link wikidata="Q464984" start="13110" end="13127" title="Ezequiel Mosquera" label="Ezequiel Mosquera"/>
<link wikidata="Q312322" start="13223" end="13238" title="Vincenzo Nibali" label="Vincenzo Nibali"/>
<link wikidata="Q755135" start="13247" end="13259" title="2010 Vuelta a España" label="2010 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q363840" start="13419" end="13429" title="Igor Antón" label="Igor Antón"/>
<link wikidata="Q313826" start="13516" end="13533" title="Joaquim Rodríguez" label="Joaquim Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q837649" start="13628" end="13639" title="2011 Vuelta a España" label="2011 Vuelta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="13727" end="13741" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="13798" end="13816" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="political protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q335983" start="13856" end="13870" title="Juan José Cobo" label="Juan José Cobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q319591" start="13932" end="13944" title="Chris Froome" label="Chris Froome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237356" start="14036" end="14047" title="Cycling domestique" label="domestiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q312283" start="14081" end="14094" title="Denis Menchov" label="Denis Menchov"/>
<link wikidata="Q193876" start="14111" end="14126" title="Bradley Wiggins" label="Bradley Wiggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q219414" start="14462" end="14496" title="2012 Tour de France" label="Tour de France the following year."/>
<link wikidata="Q280351" start="14593" end="14597" title="2012 Vuelta a España" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q132738" start="14639" end="14655" title="Alberto Contador" label="Alberto Contador"/>
<link wikidata="Q286183" start="14875" end="14893" title="Alejandro Valverde" label="Alejandro Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q313826" start="14941" end="14958" title="Joaquim Rodríguez" label="Joaquim Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913643" start="15182" end="15202" title="2013 Vuelta a España" label="2013 Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q512051" start="15258" end="15270" title="Chris Horner" label="Chris Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330008" start="15477" end="15503" title="Combination classification in the Vuelta a España" label="combination classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q61049" start="15535" end="15546" title="Tony Martin (cyclist)" label="Tony Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q447816" start="15741" end="15755" title="Michael Mørkøv" label="Michael Mørkøv"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621924" start="15875" end="15879" title="2014 Vuelta a España" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q895853" start="16192" end="16206" title="2014 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="16354" end="16375" title="individual time trial" label="individual time trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752244" start="16932" end="16936" title="2015 Vuelta a España" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220420" start="17028" end="17047" title="2015 Tour de France" label="2015 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q511856" start="17078" end="17092" title="Nairo Quintana" label="Nairo Quintana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18198089" start="17135" end="17158" title="2015 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="2015 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033882" start="17198" end="17207" title="Fabio Aru" label="Fabio Aru"/>
<link wikidata="Q930658" start="17212" end="17223" title="Mikel Landa" label="Mikel Landa"/>
<link wikidata="Q984528" start="17260" end="17274" title="Esteban Chaves" label="Esteban Chaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q958187" start="17279" end="17291" title="Tom Dumoulin" label="Tom Dumoulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532554" start="17325" end="17335" title="General classification in the Vuelta a España" label="red jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17412" end="17427" title="glossary of cycling#summit finish" label="summit finishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033882" start="17553" end="17562" title="Fabio Aru" label="Fabio Aru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="17852" end="17873" title="individual time trial" label="individual time trial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17927" end="17935" title="glossary of cycling#attack" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18001" end="18008" title="glossary of cycling#drop" label="dropped"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882755" start="18139" end="18151" title="2016 Vuelta a España" label="2016 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q984528" start="18188" end="18202" title="Esteban Chaves" label="Esteban Chaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q428038" start="18755" end="18767" title="Luis Herrera (cyclist)" label="Luis Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q936832" start="18771" end="18775" title="1987 Vuelta a España" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q26878348" start="18800" end="18812" title="2017 Vuelta a España" label="2017 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="18824" end="18829" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078635" start="18952" end="18956" title="1997 Vuelta a España" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q426877" start="18972" end="18976" title="2009 Vuelta a España" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532554" start="18996" end="19018" title="List of Vuelta a España general classification winners" label="general classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q21821246" start="19030" end="19049" title="2017 Tour de France" label="2017 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q319591" start="19059" end="19071" title="Chris Froome" label="Chris Froome"/>
<link wikidata="Q312322" start="19088" end="19103" title="Vincenzo Nibali" label="Vincenzo Nibali"/>
<link wikidata="Q221001" start="19176" end="19192" title="Jacques Anquetil" label="Jacques Anquetil"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255" start="19204" end="19219" title="Bernard Hinault" label="Bernard Hinault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241695" start="19333" end="19339" title="Points classification in the Vuelta a España" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330008" start="19344" end="19355" title="Combination classification in the Vuelta a España" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q312283" start="19444" end="19457" title="Denis Menchov" label="Denis Menchov"/>
<link wikidata="Q47295669" start="19471" end="19475" title="2018 Vuelta a España" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328610" start="19527" end="19538" title="Simon Yates (cyclist)" label="Simon Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q266770" start="19555" end="19571" title="Mitchelton–Scott (men&amp;#x27;s team)" label="Mitchelton–Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q40291282" start="19773" end="19796" title="2018 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="2018 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q356327" start="19801" end="19815" title="Geraint Thomas" label="Geraint Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859163" start="19824" end="19843" title="2018 Tour de France" label="2018 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110167" start="19894" end="19907" title="Primož Roglič" label="Primož Roglič"/>
<link wikidata="Q60776254" start="19974" end="19994" title="2020 Vuelta a España" label="2020 Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q50411777" start="20086" end="20105" title="2020 Tour de France" label="2020 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="20206" end="20223" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q63174796" start="20266" end="20284" title="2020 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40071449" start="20337" end="20370" title="2020 UCI Road World Championships" label="2020 UCI Road World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q935715" start="20548" end="20552" title="1985 Vuelta a España" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298132" start="20697" end="20712" title="Richard Carapaz" label="Richard Carapaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q735776" start="20863" end="20883" title="1984 Vuelta a España" label="1984 Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q100333768" start="20998" end="21018" title="2021 Vuelta a España" label="2021 Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q380081" start="21242" end="21252" title="Alex Zülle" label="Alex Zülle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078635" start="21280" end="21284" title="1997 Vuelta a España" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q108541084" start="21291" end="21311" title="2022 Vuelta a España" label="2022 Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q50821956" start="21365" end="21380" title="Remco Evenepoel" label="Remco Evenepoel"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="21399" end="21406" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="21408" end="21419" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q116169539" start="21426" end="21446" title="2023 Vuelta a España" label="2023 Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q29438120" start="21458" end="21467" title="Sepp Kuss" label="Sepp Kuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868933" start="21615" end="21631" title="Jonas Vingegaard" label="Jonas Vingegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q120901095" start="21767" end="21787" title="2024 Vuelta a España" label="2024 Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267539" start="21995" end="22008" title="yellow jersey" label="yellow jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q820524" start="22070" end="22091" title="King of the Mountains" label="King of the Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627215" start="22153" end="22171" title="points classification" label="points competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292236" start="23070" end="23084" title="cycling jersey" label="cycling jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="23590" end="23608" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324043" start="24061" end="24070" title="El Correo" label="El Correo"/>
<link wikidata="Q282858" start="24533" end="24546" title="Roberto Heras" label="Roberto Heras"/>
<link wikidata="Q570307" start="24567" end="24571" title="2000 Vuelta a España" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049617" start="24573" end="24577" title="2003 Vuelta a España" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071704" start="24579" end="24583" title="2004 Vuelta a España" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048779" start="24588" end="24592" title="2005 Vuelta a España" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543022" start="25143" end="25158" title="Edoardo Molinar" label="Edoardo Molinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353753" start="25329" end="25345" title="José Luis Laguía" label="José Luis Laguía"/>
<link wikidata="Q936789" start="25498" end="25513" title="Antonio Karmany" label="Antonio Karmany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352142" start="25515" end="25528" title="Julio Jiménez (cyclist)" label="Julio Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q919735" start="25530" end="25548" title="José María Jiménez" label="José María Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q452417" start="25655" end="25670" title="David Moncoutié" label="David Moncoutié"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532554" start="26059" end="26081" title="general classification in the Vuelta a España" label="general classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241695" start="26086" end="26130" title="points classification in the Vuelta a España" label="points classification in the Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330008" start="26146" end="26172" title="combination classification in the Vuelta a España" label="combination classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119369" start="26582" end="26599" title="Alberto Fernández (cyclist)" label="Alberto Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627215" start="27228" end="27249" title="points classification" label="points classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118296" start="27755" end="27779" title="mountains classification in the Vuelta a España" label="mountains classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077141" start="28030" end="28046" title="1946 Vuelta a España" label="the next edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q175399" start="28195" end="28238" title="points classification in the Tour de France" label="points classification in the Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q156707" start="28540" end="28550" title="Sean Kelly (cyclist)" label="Seán Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13485" start="28552" end="28568" title="Laurent Jalabert" label="Laurent Jalabert"/>
<link wikidata="Q286183" start="28573" end="28591" title="Alejandro Valverde" label="Alejandro Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532554" start="28806" end="28828" title="General classification in the Vuelta a España" label="general classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241695" start="28872" end="28878" title="Points classification in the Vuelta a España" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118296" start="28883" end="28892" title="Mountains classification in the Vuelta a España" label="mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330008" start="29037" end="29063" title="Combination classification in the Vuelta a España" label="Combination classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532554" start="29304" end="29311" title="General classification in the Vuelta a España" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241695" start="29313" end="29319" title="Points classification in the Vuelta a España" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118296" start="29325" end="29334" title="Mountains classification in the Vuelta a España" label="mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="30410" end="30416" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="30436" end="30449" title="San Sebastián" label="San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273" start="30584" end="30589" title="Gijón" label="Gijón"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303" start="30624" end="30644" title="Jerez de la Frontera" label="Jerez de la Frontera"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="30704" end="30710" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="30765" end="30782" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q798" start="30826" end="30831" title="Assen" label="Assen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426877" start="30859" end="30870" title="2009 Vuelta a España" label="64th Vuelta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477016" start="30873" end="30891" title="Lakes of Covadonga" label="Lagos de Covadonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q936571" start="31294" end="31298" title="1983 Vuelta a España" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q462255" start="31319" end="31335" title="Marino Lejarreta" label="Marino Lejarreta"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255" start="31369" end="31384" title="Bernard Hinault" label="Bernard Hinault"/>
<link wikidata="Q312697" start="31449" end="31460" title="Greg LeMond" label="Greg LeMond"/>
<link wikidata="Q13484" start="31465" end="31479" title="Laurent Fignon" label="Laurent Fignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116303847" start="31524" end="31547" title="2023 La Vuelta Femenina" label="2023 La Vuelta Femenina"/>
<link wikidata="Q54436538" start="31596" end="31610" title="Demi Vollering" label="Demi Vollering"/>
<link wikidata="Q950363" start="31630" end="31634" title="1999 Vuelta a España" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q443610" start="31679" end="31701" title="Alto de L&amp;#x27;Angliru" label="Alto de L&amp;#x27;Angliru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="31705" end="31713" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="32356" end="32363" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q60776254" start="32397" end="32409" title="2020 Vuelta a España" label="2020 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q84166704" start="32454" end="32480" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Spain" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200201" start="32513" end="32517" title="Irun" label="Irun"/>
<link wikidata="Q282858" start="32790" end="32803" title="Roberto Heras" label="Roberto Heras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110167" start="32805" end="32818" title="Primož Roglič" label="Primož Roglič"/>
<link wikidata="Q337118" start="32869" end="32882" title="Tony Rominger" label="Tony Rominger"/>
<link wikidata="Q282858" start="32884" end="32897" title="Roberto Heras" label="Roberto Heras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110167" start="32899" end="32912" title="Primož Roglič" label="Primož Roglič"/>
<link wikidata="Q723885" start="32952" end="32967" title="Delio Rodríguez" label="Delio Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q378319" start="33006" end="33021" title="Freddy Maertens" label="Freddy Maertens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052049" start="33025" end="33029" title="1977 Vuelta a España" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="33041" end="33062" title="individual time trial" label="individual time trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q330457" start="33069" end="33082" title="Abraham Olano" label="Abraham Olano"/>
<link wikidata="Q380081" start="33084" end="33094" title="Alex Zülle" label="Alex Zülle"/>
<link wikidata="Q337118" start="33100" end="33113" title="Tony Rominger" label="Tony Rominger"/>
<link wikidata="Q380081" start="33189" end="33199" title="Alex Zülle" label="Alex Zülle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353753" start="33247" end="33263" title="José Luis Laguía" label="José Luis Laguía"/>
<link wikidata="Q156707" start="33307" end="33317" title="Sean Kelly (cyclist)" label="Sean Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13485" start="33319" end="33335" title="Laurent Jalabert" label="Laurent Jalabert"/>
<link wikidata="Q286183" start="33340" end="33358" title="Alejandro Valverde" label="Alejandro Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q723885" start="33480" end="33495" title="Delio Rodríguez" label="Delio Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q518572" start="33501" end="33518" title="Julián Berrendero" label="Julián Berrendero"/>
<link wikidata="Q591452" start="33522" end="33526" title="1945 Vuelta a España" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q288044" start="33575" end="33588" title="Éric Caritoux" label="Éric Caritoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119369" start="33594" end="33611" title="Alberto Fernández (cyclist)" label="Alberto Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q735776" start="33615" end="33619" title="1984 Vuelta a España" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q466082" start="33654" end="33666" title="Íñigo Cuesta" label="Íñigo Cuesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q466082" start="33719" end="33731" title="Íñigo Cuesta" label="Íñigo Cuesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353681" start="33774" end="33789" title="Federico Echave" label="Federico Echave"/>
<link wikidata="Q466082" start="33811" end="33823" title="Íñigo Cuesta" label="Íñigo Cuesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353681" start="33902" end="33917" title="Federico Echave" label="Federico Echave"/>
<link wikidata="Q941834" start="33958" end="33962" title="1941 Vuelta a España" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071113" start="34002" end="34006" title="2002 Vuelta a España" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071096" start="34037" end="34041" title="2001 Vuelta a España" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q941834" start="34080" end="34084" title="1941 Vuelta a España" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q941834" start="34117" end="34121" title="1941 Vuelta a España" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q936954" start="34152" end="34156" title="1963 Vuelta a España" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q535117" start="34209" end="34223" title="Angelino Soler" label="Angelino Soler"/>
<link wikidata="Q936902" start="34227" end="34231" title="1961 Vuelta a España" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q512051" start="34278" end="34290" title="Chris Horner" label="Chris Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913643" start="34294" end="34298" title="2013 Vuelta a España" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849075" start="34333" end="34337" title="2015 La Madrid Challenge by La Vuelta" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q110774961" start="34342" end="34346" title="2022 Challenge by La Vuelta" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q21075974" start="34468" end="34495" title="UCI Women&amp;#x27;s World Tour" label="UCI Women&amp;#x27;s World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q289826" start="34671" end="34691" title="Annemiek van Vleuten" label="Annemiek van Vleuten"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030967" start="34854" end="34872" title="La Vuelta Femenina" label="La Vuelta Femenina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294740" wikidata="Q18966441" url="?curid=294740" title="Leutnant">
<text> () is the lowest junior officer rank in the armed forces of Germany (Bundeswehr), the Austrian Armed Forces, and the military of Switzerland.

==History==

The German noun (with the meaning &quot;&quot; (in English &quot;deputy&quot;) from Middle High German «locum tenens» (in English &quot;place holder&quot;) was derived from the French word about 1500. In most German-speaking armies it is the lowest officer rank (in German-speaking navies (English &quot;Lieutenant at sea&quot;)). In the German Bundeswehr the ranks and belong to the rank group. In some other armed forces (such as the former National People&#x27;s Army) there is the lower grade of Unterleutnant.

From about 1500 until the middle of the 17th century the designation of was commonly used for any deputy to a commanding officer. So at the army level there was the appointment of (English &quot;lieutenant-general&quot;), at the regimental level there was that of (English &quot;lieutenant-colonel&quot;), and at the company level the was deputy to a (English &quot;captain&quot;).

With the formation of standing armies in the second half of the 17th century, the term commonly came to designate the rank of the least senior commissioned officer.

In the 18th and 19th century, at the unit level several served as platoon leaders. At that time the ranks of and came into existence. With effect from January 1, 1899, in the German Empire these ranks were renamed as and .

== Austria ==

In Austria the (short: Lt) is the second lowest commissioned officer rank. Mandatory to be promoted to that rank is a six terms course of high school studies (until August 2008 eight terms) with 180 ECTS points on the Theresian Military Academy in the Wiener Neustadt. The studies are focused on &quot;Military Command and Control&quot; (C2) and the academy-leaver graduate to Bachelor.

The career in the Militia is structured in a different way. Here the modular education comprises the so-called one-year volunteer year (de: [EF]) as well as several courses, seminars, and exercises with a final aptitude test. After an overall service time of five years the promotion to «Leutnant» is possible.

Moreover, the appointment designation is possible for leading officials (E1) of the Austrian executive, e.g. the Austrian Federal Police (ge: ) and prison authority personnel (de: ).

=== Austro-Hungarian Army ===
Until 1918 () was in the Austria-Hungarian Army the lowest CO-rank as well, equivalent to .

== Germany ==

The rank of has been used in the German armed forces since 1899.

=== Bundeswehr ===

In the today, a will be normally appointed as platoon leader. However, the rank of might also be held while a junior officer is studying at the University of the German Federal Armed Forces or at another training or education establishment. The of the belongs to the &quot; rank group&quot; (also: subaltern officer rank group).

==== Rank ====
In Germany, (short.: Lt / on lists also: L) is the designation of a soldier of the lowest officer rank. The equivalent in the German Navy () is the .

Soldiers with that particular rank, are mandated and authorized to provide military orders as to the so-called Superior-subordinate relations to private ranks (de: Mannschaften), NCOs without port épée (de: Unteroffiziere ohne port épée), as well as to Senior NCOs with port épée (de: Unteroffizier mit port épée).

=== National People&#x27;s Army ===
In the GDR National People&#x27;s Army (NPA) the rank was the second lowest commissioned offer (CO) rank until 1990. This was in reference to Soviet military doctrine and in line with other armed forces of the Warsaw Pact.

The equivalent rank of the (en: GDR Navy) was the , often called simply for short. In reference to the Soviet armed forces and to other armed forces of the Warsaw pact was the second lowest officer rank until 1990.

=== Nazi Germany ===

In Nazi Germany, within the SS and Waffen-SS, the rank of was considered to be the equivalent of an in the German Army. However, in the SA the equivalent to was .

== Switzerland ==

In the military of Switzerland the (, ) is the lowest commissioned officer rank. Promotion to the next highest rank, , occurs after three refresher courses (contingent upon good performance) or automatically after six years&#x27; service. 

For missions outside of Switzerland, the rank will be designated in English as Second lieutenant. 

===Swiss Guard===

== References ==
===Works cited===
* 
==Further reading==
* &quot;Die Streitkräfte der Republik Österreich, 1918-1968&quot;, Heeresgeschichtliches Museum, Militärwissenschaftliches Institut, 1968.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18966441" start="0" end="0" title="Leutnant" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1156796" start="18" end="32" title="junior officer" label="junior officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="61" end="68" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="70" end="80" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q248710" start="87" end="108" title="Austrian Armed Forces" label="Austrian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q332844" start="118" end="141" title="military of Switzerland" label="military of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q155740" start="600" end="627" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4475994" start="657" end="670" title="Unterleutnant" label="Unterleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="1509" end="1529" title="commissioned officer" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q568705" start="1679" end="1705" title="Theresian Military Academy" label="Theresian Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131612" start="1713" end="1728" title="Wiener Neustadt" label="Wiener Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1838" end="1846" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1867" end="1874" title="Militia#Austria" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q873492" start="1960" end="1983" title="One-year volunteer" label="one-year volunteer year"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1985" end="1988" title="German language" label="de:"/>
<link wikidata="Q700124" start="2283" end="2297" title="Federal Police (Austria)" label="Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694925" start="2615" end="2629" title="platoon leader" label="platoon leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475244" start="2713" end="2758" title="University of the German Federal Armed Forces" label="University of the German Federal Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q56015" start="3040" end="3051" title="German Navy" label="German Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3176" end="3206" title="Command and obedience in the Bundeswehr#Superior-subordinate relations" label="Superior-subordinate relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="3210" end="3223" title="Private (rank)" label="private ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155740" start="3428" end="3455" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="3627" end="3638" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3882" end="3894" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="3907" end="3909" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="3914" end="3923" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="4015" end="4017" title="Sturmabteilung" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q332844" start="4069" end="4092" title="military of Switzerland" label="military of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="4382" end="4399" title="Second lieutenant" label="Second lieutenant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294743" wikidata="Q7324158" url="?curid=294743" title="Richard Biddle">
<text>Richard Biddle (March 25, 1796 – July 6, 1847) was an American author, politician and lawyer. He served as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from 1837 until 1840.

== Biography ==
Biddle was born on March 25, 1796, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He was the brother of financier Nicholas Biddle, nephew of Congressman Edward Biddle and uncle of Congressman Charles John Biddle. He received a classical education, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania in 1811, and was admitted to the bar, practicing law in Pittsburgh.

He went to England in 1827, and remained three years, publishing while there a critical &quot;Review of Captain Basil Hall&#x27;s Travels in North America.&quot; He also published &quot;A Memoir of Sebastian Cabot, with a Review of the History of Maritime Discovery&quot; (London, 1831).

Biddle was twice elected to Congress, as an Anti-Mason, serving from March 4, 1837, until his resignation on July 21, 1840.

Biddle died on July 6, 1847, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==
*The Political Graveyard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7324158" start="0" end="14" title="Richard Biddle" label="Richard Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="123" end="152" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="230" end="242" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="244" end="256" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580098" start="290" end="305" title="Nicholas Biddle (1786-1844)" label="Nicholas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341891" start="329" end="342" title="Edward Biddle" label="Edward Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079512" start="368" end="387" title="Charles John Biddle" label="Charles John Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="443" end="469" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="526" end="536" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="550" end="557" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q574701" start="872" end="882" title="Anti-Masonic Party (United States)" label="Anti-Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="985" end="995" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="997" end="1009" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="294744" wikidata="Q354000" url="?curid=294744" title="NCO">
<text>NCO may refer to:

* NCO Group, an international corporation
* National Children&#x27;s Orchestra of Great Britain
* Net capital outflow, an economic metric
* NetCDF Operators, software
* Network-centric operations, a theory of war in the information age
* Non-commissioned officer, a category of military rank
* Numerically controlled oscillator, a digital signal generator
* Nuova Camorra Organizzata, a defunct Italian criminal organization
* Isocyanate, a functional group of atoms –N=C=O
* Quonset State Airport, airport with this IATA code
* Indian National Congress (Organisation), a former Political Party in India formally referred as NCO by the Election Commission of India.
* Nevada–California–Oregon Railway, a defunct railway in the western United States</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6953169" start="21" end="30" title="NCO Group" label="NCO Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971477" start="63" end="114" title="National Children&amp;#x27;s Orchestra of Great Britain" label="National Children&amp;#x27;s Orchestra of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998434" start="117" end="136" title="Net capital outflow" label="Net capital outflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998198" start="159" end="175" title="NetCDF Operators" label="NetCDF Operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140666" start="188" end="214" title="Network-centric operations" label="Network-centric operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="257" end="281" title="Non-commissioned officer" label="Non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q992150" start="313" end="346" title="Numerically controlled oscillator" label="Numerically controlled oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879768" start="377" end="402" title="Nuova Camorra Organizzata" label="Nuova Camorra Organizzata"/>
<link wikidata="Q408365" start="446" end="456" title="Isocyanate" label="Isocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272858" start="495" end="516" title="Quonset State Airport" label="Quonset State Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523002" start="548" end="587" title="Indian National Congress (Organisation)" label="Indian National Congress (Organisation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003682" start="687" end="719" title="Nevada–California–Oregon Railway" label="Nevada–California–Oregon Railway"/>
</links>
</doc>
