<doc id="306250" wikidata="Q7310733" url="?curid=306250" title="Relations between the Catholic Church and the state">
<text>The relations between the Catholic Church and the state have been constantly evolving with various forms of government, some of them controversial in retrospect. In its history, the Church has had to deal with various concepts and systems of governance, from the Roman Empire to the medieval divine right of kings, from nineteenth- and twentieth-century concepts of democracy and pluralism to the appearance of left-wing and right-wing dictatorial regimes. The Second Vatican Council&#x27;s decree &quot;Dignitatis humanae&quot; stated that religious freedom is a civil right that should be recognized in constitutional law.

==Catholicism and the Roman Emperors==
Christianity emerged in the 1st century as one of many new religions in the Roman Empire. Early Christians were persecuted as early as 64 A.D. when Nero ordered large numbers of Christians executed in retaliation for the Great Fire of Rome. Christianity remained a growing minority religion in the empire for several centuries. Roman persecutions of Christians climaxed due to Emperor Diocletian till the turn of the 4th century. Following Constantine the Great&#x27;s victory on Milvian Bridge, which he attributed to a Christian omen he saw in the sky, the Edict of Milan declared that the empire would no longer sanction persecution of Christians. Following Constantine&#x27;s deathbed conversion in 337, all emperors adopted Christianity, except for Julian the Apostate who, during his brief reign, attempted unsuccessfully to re-instate paganism.

In the Christian era (more properly the era of the first seven Ecumenical Councils, 325–787) the Church came to accept that it was the emperor&#x27;s duty to use secular power to enforce religious unity. Anyone within the Church who did not subscribe to Catholicism was seen as a threat to the dominance and purity of &quot;the one true faith&quot; and emperors saw it as their right to defend this faith by all means at their disposal.

Beginning with Edward Gibbon in &quot;The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire&quot; some historians have taken the view that Christianity weakened the Roman Empire through its failure to preserve the pluralistic structure of the state. Pagans and Jews lost interest and the Church drew the most able men into its organisation to the detriment of the state.

==The papacy and the Divine Right of Kings==
The doctrine of the divine right of kings came to dominate medieval concepts of kingship, claiming biblical authority (&quot;Epistle to the Romans&quot;, chapter 13). Augustine of Hippo in his work &quot;The City of God&quot; had stated his opinion that while the &quot;City of Man&quot; and the &quot;City of God&quot; may stand at cross-purposes, both of them have been instituted by God and served His ultimate will. Even though the City of Man – the world of secular government – may seem ungodly and be governed by sinners, it has been placed on earth for the protection of the City of God. Therefore, monarchs have been placed on their thrones for God&#x27;s purpose, and to question their authority is to question God. Augustine also said &quot;a law that is not just, seems to be no law at all&quot; and Thomas Aquinas indicated laws &quot;opposed to the Divine good&quot; must not be observed.
This belief in the god-given authority of monarchs was central to the Roman Catholic vision of governance in the Middle Ages, Renaissance and &quot;Ancien Régime&quot;. But this was most true of what would later be termed the ultramontaine party and the Catholic Church has recognized republics, on an exceptional basis, as early as 1291 in the case of San Marino.

During early medieval times, a near-monopoly of the Church in matters of education and of literary skills accounts for the presence of churchmen as their advisors. This tradition continued even as education became more widespread. Prominent examples of senior members of the church hierarchy who advised monarchs were Cardinal Thomas Wolsey in England, and Cardinals Richelieu and Mazarin in France; prominent, devoutly Catholic laymen like Sir Thomas More also served as senior advisors to monarchs.

Besides advising monarchs, the Church held direct power in mediaeval society as a landowner, a power-broker, a policy maker, etc. Some of its bishops and archbishops were feudal lords in their own right, equivalent in rank and precedence to counts and dukes. Some were even sovereigns in their own right, while the Pope himself ruled the Papal States. Three archbishops played a prominent role in Holy Roman Empire as electors. As late as the early 18th century in the era of the Enlightenment, Jacques-Benigne Bossuet, preacher to Louis XIV, defended the doctrine of the divine right of kings and absolute monarchy in his sermons. The Church was a model of hierarchy in a world of hierarchies, and saw the defense of that system as its own defense, and as a defense of what it believed to be a god-ordained system.

During the French Wars of Religion, the monarchomachs began to contest the divine right of kings, setting up the bases for the theory of popular sovereignty and theorizing the right of tyrannicides.

===The French Revolution===
The central principle of the medieval, Renaissance, and &quot;ancien régime&quot; periods, monarchical rule &quot;by God&#x27;s will&quot;, was fundamentally challenged by the 1789 French Revolution. The revolution began as a conjunction of a need to fix French national finances and a rising middle class who resented the privileges of the clergy (in their role as the First Estate) and nobility (in their role as the Second Estate). The pent-up frustrations caused by lack of political reform over a period of generations led the revolution to spiral in ways unimaginable only a few years earlier, and indeed unplanned and unanticipated by the initial wave of reformers. Almost from the start, the revolution was a direct threat to clerical and noble privilege: the legislation that abolished the feudal privileges of the Church and nobility dates from August 4, 1789, a mere three weeks after the fall of the Bastille (although it would be several years before this legislation came fully into effect).

At the same time, the revolution also challenged the theological basis of royal authority. The doctrine of popular sovereignty directly challenged the former divine right of kings. The king was to govern on behalf of the people, and not under the orders of God. This philosophical difference over the basis of royal and state power was paralleled by the rise of a short-lived democracy, but also by a change first from absolute monarchy to constitutional monarchy and finally to republicanism.

Under the doctrine of the divine right of kings, only the Church or God could interfere with the right of a monarch to rule. Thus the attack on the French absolute monarchy was seen as an attack on God&#x27;s anointed king. In addition, the Church&#x27;s leadership came largely from the classes most threatened by the growing revolution. The upper clergy came from the same families as the upper nobility, and the Church was, in its own right, the largest landowner in France.

The revolution was widely seen, both by its proponents and its opponents, as the fruition of the (profoundly secular) ideas of the Enlightenment. The 1789 &quot;Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen&quot;, voted by the National Constituent Assembly, seemed to some in the church to mark the appearance of the antichrist, in that they excluded Christian morality from the new &quot;natural order&quot;. The fast-moving nature of the revolution far outpaced Roman Catholicism&#x27;s ability to adapt or come to any terms with the revolutionaries.

In speaking of &quot;the Church and the Revolution&quot; it is important to keep in mind that neither the Church nor the Revolution were monolithic. There were class interests and differences of opinion inside the Church as well as out, with many of the lower clergy – and a few bishops, such as Talleyrand – among the key supporters of the early phases of the revolution. The Civil Constitution of the Clergy, which turned Church lands into state property and the clergy into employees of the state, created a bitter division within the church between those &quot;jurors&quot; who took the required oath of allegiance to the state (the abbé Grégoire or Pierre Daunou) and the &quot;non-jurors&quot; who refused to do so. A majority of parish priests, but only four bishops, took the oath.

As a large-scale landowner tied closely to the doomed &quot;ancien regime&quot;, led by people from the aristocracy, and philosophically opposed to many of the fundamental principles of the revolution, the Church, like the absolute monarchy and the feudal nobility, was a target of the revolution even in the early phases, when leading revolutionaries such as Lafayette were still well-disposed toward King Louis XVI as an individual. Instead of being able to influence the new political elite and so shape the public agenda, the Church found itself sidelined at best, detested at worst. As the revolution became more radical, the new state and its leaders set up its own rival deities and religion, a Cult of Reason and, later, a deistic cult of the Supreme Being, closing many Catholic churches, transforming cathedrals into &quot;temples of reason&quot;, disbanding monasteries and often destroying their buildings (as at Cluny), and seizing their lands. In this process many hundreds of Catholic priests were killed, further polarising revolutionaries and the Church. The revolutionary leadership also devised a revolutionary calendar to displace the Christian months and the seven-day week with its sabbath. Catholic reaction, in anti-revolutionary risings such as the revolt in the Vendée, were often bloodily suppressed.

===France after the Revolution===
When Napoleon Bonaparte came to power in 1799, he began the process of coming back to terms with the Catholic Church. The Church was reestablished in power during the Bourbon Restoration, with the ultra-royalists voting laws such as the Anti-Sacrilege Act. The Church was then strongly counter-revolutionary, opposing all changes made by the 1789 Revolution. The July Revolution of 1830 marked the end of any hope of a return to the &quot;ancien regime&quot; status of an absolute monarchy, by establishing a constitutional monarchy. The most reactionary aristocrats, in favor of an integral restoration of the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; and known as Legitimists, began to retire from political life.

However, Napoleon III&#x27;s regime did support the Pope, helping to restore Pope Pius IX as ruler of the Papal States in 1849 after there had been a revolt there in 1848. Despite this official move, the process of secularization continued throughout the 20th century, culminating with the Jules Ferry laws in the 1880s and then with the 1905 law on separation of Church and state, which definitively established state secularism (known as &quot;laïcité&quot;).

The Church itself remained associated with the Comte de Chambord, the Legitimist pretender to the throne. It was only under Pope Leo XIII (r: 1878–1903) that the Church leadership tried to move away from its anti-Republican associations, when he ordered the deeply unhappy French Church to accept the Third French Republic (1875–1940) (&quot;Inter innumeras sollicitudines&quot; encyclical of 1892). However, his liberalising initiative was undone by Pope Pius X (r: 1903–1914), a traditionalist who had more sympathy for the French monarchists than for the Third Republic.

===Catholicism in the United Kingdom and Ireland===
Following William of Orange&#x27;s victories over King James II, by 1691 the supremacy of Protestantism was entrenched throughout the kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland. The economic and political power of Catholics, especially in Ireland, was severely curtailed. This was reinforced by the introduction of the Penal Laws. The practice of Catholicism (including the celebration of the Mass) was made illegal as Catholic priests celebrated the sacraments at risk of execution by law.

However, towards the end of the eighteenth century a &quot;rapprochement&quot; began to develop between London and the Vatican. Britain&#x27;s activities abroad and relations with Catholic countries were hampered by the tension that existed between it and the Church, and it was eager to persuade the Church to end its moral support for Irish separatism. Likewise, the Church was keen to send missionaries to the newly conquered colonies of the British Empire, especially Africa and India, and to ease the restrictions on its British and Irish adherents. Britain began to phase out the penal laws, and in 1795 it financed the building of St. Patrick&#x27;s College, Maynooth, a seminary for the training of Catholic priests, in County Kildare. In return, the Church agreed to actively oppose Irish separatism, which it duly did in the Irish Rebellion of 1798. It continued this policy until the early 1900s, condemning each successive attempt by Irish republicanism to achieve independence from Britain through violence.

===Pius IX and Italian unification===
Over the course of the 19th century, Italian nationalism put increasing strain on the Pope&#x27;s rule of the Papal States. Italian unification culminated in Garibaldi&#x27;s capture of Rome in 1870, which ended the Catholic Church&#x27;s temporal sovereignty and led Pope Pius IX to declare himself a prisoner in the Vatican. The conflict between the Italian state and the Papacy continued with the state&#x27;s regulation of the Church and the Pope&#x27;s voting and parliamentary boycott, and was finally resolved in 1929 by the Lateran Treaty between Mussolini and Pope Pius XI, confirming the Vatican City-State and accepting the loss of the Papal States.

===Leo XIII===
Pope Leo XIII, responding to the rise of popular democracy, tried a new and somewhat more sophisticated approach to political questions than his predecessor Pius IX.

On May 15, 1891, Leo issued the encyclical &quot;Rerum novarum&quot; (Latin: &quot;About New Things&quot;). This addressed the transformation of politics and society during the Industrial Revolution of the nineteenth century. The document criticised capitalism, complaining of the exploitation of the masses in industry. However, it also sharply reproved the socialist concept of class struggle, and the proposed solution of eliminating private property. Leo called for strong governments to protect their citizens from exploitation, and urged Roman Catholics to apply principles of social justice in their own lives.

This document was rightly seen as a profound change in the political thinking of the Holy See. It drew on the economic thought of St Thomas Aquinas, who taught that the &quot;just price&quot; in a marketplace should not be allowed to fluctuate due to temporary shortages or gluts.

Seeking a principle to replace the threatening Marxist doctrine of class struggle, &quot;Rerum Novarum&quot; urged social solidarity between the upper and lower classes, and endorsed nationalism as a way of preserving traditional morality, customs, and folkways. In effect, &quot;Rerum Novarum&quot; proposed a kind of corporatism, the organisation of political power along industrial lines, similar to the mediaeval guild system. Under corporatism, the individual&#x27;s place in society is determined by the ethnic, work, and social groups which one was born into or joined. Leo rejected one-person, one-vote democracy in favour of representation by interest groups. A strong government should serve as arbiter among the competing factions.

Forty years later, the corporatist tendencies of &quot;Rerum Novarum&quot; were underscored by Pope Pius XI&#x27;s May 25, 1931, encyclical &quot;Quadragesimo anno&quot; (&quot;In the Fortieth Year&quot;), which restated the hostility of &quot;Rerum Novarum&quot; to both unbridled competition and class struggle. The precepts of Leo and Pius were espoused by the Catholic social movement of Distributism, which later influenced the Fascist and Christian Democratic movements.

==The Church and the twentieth century==
In the 20th century, the Catholic Church embraced a Christian Democratic outlook and promoted &quot;free institutions, the welfare state, and political democracy&quot;. The encyclicals &quot;Au Milieu des Sollicitudes&quot; and Graves de communi re of Pope Leo XIII from the late 19th century established the Church&#x27;s official commitment to both Catholic social teaching and Christian democracy, which promoted democracy as the best type of governance as long as it worked to the &quot;benefit the lower classes of society&quot;, promoted common good and rejected individualism in favor of communitarianism, and opposed what Leo XIII called &quot;individualistic liberal&quot; capitalism.

In that century, the Church&#x27;s writings on democracy were &quot;directly read, read and commented upon&quot; by Christian politicians, inspiring Christian democratic parties and movements in Europe and South America. A visit by Jacques Maritain in Chile provoked a split within the Conservative Party in 1938, with a progressive Catholic faction abandoning the party to found the National Falange. According to Paul E. Sigmund, Catholic social and political thought &quot;became a major source of democratic theory&quot; in Latin America as well as Europe. The church also became a voice of social justice and an advocate for human rights - in the encyclicals Quas primas of 1925 and Quadragesimo Anno of 1931, Pope Pius XI declared that &quot;Christians should defend human rights and work for justice in order to build a Christian society&quot;. His successor, Pope Pius XII, also affirmed that &quot;the church should advocate justice so that society can become more human, but not necessarily more formally Christian&quot;, therefore writing that the Church must accept secularism and works within the realms of it to improve and protect human rights. Pius XII also endorsed parliamentary democracy as a moral necessity in his 1944 address &quot;Benignitas et Humanitas&quot;, and Pope John XXIII explicitly supported religious freedom in Pacem in Terris. These reforms eventually resulted in the Second Vatican Council, which affirmed previous teachings and established the Church as an advocate for human rights - the Catholic clergy actively opposed authoritarian regimes, and cooperated with secular resistance against them.

=== Croatia ===
In Croatia, Axis-aligned Ustaše regime came to power in April 1941. As Kingdom of Yugoslavia was dominated by Orthodox Serbs, especially after the 6 January Dictatorship, religious affiliation became strongly associated with Yugoslav politics. In interwar Yugoslavia, &quot;Catholics, although eminently qualified, were discriminated against in every department of the central government&quot;. This led Roman Catholicism to be linked with Croat nationalism; as a result, &quot;religious conviction and patriotic feelings were often inseparable in the minds of individual Croats&quot;, and the Nazi-aligned Ustaše regime saw Catholicism as a potential tool to gain support of the local population and justify its genocide against Serbs. Immediately after coming to power, the new regime unleashed massacres and systematic genocide of the Serbian and Jewish population of Croatia, with almost 1 million Croat Serbs being massacred by the Ustaše and its allies. Mile Budak, the Minister of Religion of Independent State of Croatia, said on 22 July 1941:

:The Ustashi movement is based on the Catholic Religion. For the minorities, Serbs, Jews and Gypsies, we have three million bullets. A part of these minorities has already been eliminated and many are waiting to be killed. Some will be sent to Serbia and the rest will be forced to change their religion to Catholicism. Our new Croatia will therefore be free of all heretics, becoming purely Catholic for the future years.
Notice the absence of a mention of Bosnian Muslims.
Unlike Serbs, they were considered Croatian brothers whose ancestors converted to Islam.

Interwar Zagreb lecturer Ivan Guberina wrote that the atmosphere in interwar and WW2 was full of bitter feelings of persecution from the Yugoslav government that Croats and Catholics felt. Serbian Orthodoxy was &quot;unrelentingly forced upon the Greek Catholic population&quot;, the government &quot;issued school texts often carried derogatory references to the Catholic Church and the person of the pope&quot; and Catholics were &quot;discriminated against in every department of the central government&quot;.

The issue of clerical fascism in wartime Croatia is further discussed in the article Involvement of Croatian Catholic clergy with the Ustaša regime. However, despite being supported by right-wing Catholic organisations and press within Croatia, Catholic clergy fiercely opposed the regime. Papal legate to Yugoslavia, Ettore Felici, successfully petitioned the Vatican to forbid &quot;active participation in movements of a patriotic and national character&quot; in Croatia, and the Holy See opposed the &quot;Croat rebellion against the Yugoslav state&quot;. Vatican never recognised Ustaše-led Croatia, and continued to maintain official relations with the Yugoslav government-in-exile instead. On 23 April 1941, merely two weeks after the fascist regime took power, the Archbishop of Zagreb Aloysius Stepinac issued his first statement condemning the regime for its anti-Semitic policies. The protests of the Catholic clergy grew, and by 1942, Stepinac wrote to Andrija Artuković: &quot;Recently there has been talk of the arrest of Jews and of their being taken to concentration camps. In so far as there is really something to this, I take the liberty, Mr. Minister, of asking you to prevent, through your power, all unjust proceedings against citizens who individually can be accused of no wrong.&quot; Following this statement, the attitude of the Vatican and the Catholic clergy towards the Ustaša regime &quot;grew increasingly hostile as the Primate&#x27;s requests were thrust aside&quot;.

Archbishop Stepinac and the rest of the Catholic clergy in Croatia also cooperated with the Archbishop of Belgrade Josip Ujčić and petitioned the Croat government to release Serbian prisoners and the Serbian Orthodox clergy, accusing the regime of imprisoning and persecuting Jewish and Serbian Croats for purely political reasons, with Stepinac arguing that &quot;whatever crimes the Serbs had committed against the Croats in the past paled in comparison to the inhuman slaughter which seemed to an integral part of the conduct of the free Croatian state.&quot; Vatican also spoke against forced conversions of Orthodox Croats to Catholicism, denouncing them as invalid and reaffirming the Church&#x27;s absolute authority over all conversions. According to Richard J. Wolff, &quot;although the government continued to force thousands of Orthodox Serbs to convert to Roman Catholicism and to inflict the most outrageous crimes upon countless others, the Croatian hierarchy never ceased to demand an end to this abuse.&quot; Condemnations of the clergy continued, undermining the regime&#x27;s claims of its Political Catholicism, and Archbishop Stepinac &quot;vigorously upheld the rights of the Church and minorities against the Pavelic clique&quot;.

Ivan Grubišić, a Catholic priest and a member of the Croatian Parliament fought for termination or revision of the Treaties between the Republic of Croatia and the Holy See, which were deemed to unbalance the relations between the Church and the Croatian state.

===Spain===

As the Second Spanish Republic was established, the initial attitude of the Church was supportive - the Vatican recognised the new government as legitimate, and the Holy See &quot;gave an order to all bishops within Spain to write a pastoral letter declaring the Republic as legitimate&quot;. However, the relationship between the Church and the Spanish government quickly turned sour as the government enacted aggressive anti-clerical policies, such as forcefully dissolving the Jesuits and nationalizing the Church&#x27;s possessions. The anti-clerical policies were condemned by the clergy, and were &quot;wildly unpopular in all but the most anticlerical circles&quot;. As the situation turned violatile and street violence in Spain continued to escalate, Catholic clergy urged the population to stay calm, and the Cardinal Francisco Vidal y Barraquer strongly condemned calls for violent uprising against the government amongst monarchist and right-wing groups.

Nicola Rooney argues that although support for the Francoist forces amongst Spanish clergy during the Spanish Civil War was mixed, &quot;the regime had managed to exile a significant number of its opponents, thereby giving the illusion of unanimous support from the Church.&quot; Many Catholic priests came to the defense of the Republic - Maximiliano Arboleya urged for peace and asked Spanish Catholics to remain loyal to the Republican regime, José Manuel Gallegos Rocafull stressed the need to preserve Spanish democracy and pressured the Republican government to police anti-clerical socialist militias, and many respected Catholic personalities spoke in favour of the Second Republic as well, such as Ángel Ossorio y Gallardo and José Bergamín. According to Spanish historian Antonio Fernández Garcia, the greater part of the organized Church did not willingly cooperate with the Franco forces during the war. Many Spanish priests, such as Leocadio Lobo of San Gínes denounced the Francoist cooperation with the fascist governments of Germany and Italy, and thus considered backing Franco incompatible with Catholic teachings. Franciscan theologian Luis Sarasola Acarregui (1883–1942) claimed that &quot;all Spanish Catholics - the most eminent ones - condemn the civil war, and have resolutely sided with the Government of the Republic&quot;, while Ángel Ossorio y Gallardo concluded that &quot;a sincere Christian apostolate is much more likely to succeed on the Popular Front than on the opposite side&quot;. The clergy was especially pro-Republican in the Basque provinces, where an overwhelming majority of the clergy endorsed the Republic; as the Basque people were known for being &quot;among the most ardent Catholics in all of Spain&quot;, it made the Francoist forces difficult to present themselves as the Catholic option &quot;when the most concentrated Catholic stronghold in Spain had declared itself for the Republic&quot;.

On 14 September 1936, the issue of the civil war was addressed by the Vatican for the first time - Pope Pius XI made a speech in which he condemned communism as well as the horrors of war. The Pope condemned the part of the clergy that tried to justify the war, ordering them to &quot;alleviate the suffering of the war&quot; instead. According to Benjamin DeLeo, &quot;the Pope said the exact opposite of what the Nationalists in the crowd wanted to hear&quot;, and the apparent lack of support by the Catholic Church dismayed the Nationalist forces. The Vatican also did not recognise the Nationalist government until 1939.

After the end of the Spanish Civil War, the Spanish Catholic Church was severely devastated; over a half of Spanish parishes had their churches burned or their priests murdered. In Catalonia, over one-third of Catholic priest had been murdered. Andrew Dowling wrote that by 1939, the &quot;religious life was almost eradicated&quot; in Catalonia. Most of religious events had to take place outside or in schools because of lack of religious building, while in some parts of Spain religious presence became non-existent. It was in this atmosphere that the Church signed a Concordat with the new regime in 1953, although Vatican was reluctant to do so and forced significant concessions from the regime. The Concordat was seen as an opportunity to avoid further anti-clerical violence or persecution, and was also influenced by the pro-Franco policy of the United States under President Eisenhower.

Beginning in the 1950s, the Catholic Church grew critical of the Francoist regime. In Catalonia, the church used its position to foster Catalan nationalism - while publishing in Catalan language was illegal under the Francoist regime, the Church was exempt from this ban thanks to the Concordat, which meant that &quot;the only way that Catalanism could be expressed would be through the Church.&quot; The Catholic clergy started publishing journals and preaching sermons in Catalan, which became a &quot;launch-pad for a pre-political programme of a Catholic revival of cultural Catalanism.&quot; Because of this, the Church soon became a base of anti-Francoist resistance in Catalonia; in 1957, an exile Catalan nationalist newspaper in Venezuela &quot;Solidaritat Catalana&quot; noted that &quot;There is a strong tendency on the part of many Catholic sectors to adopt a combative attitude against the regime.&quot; With the help of local clergy, Catholic churches served as shelters for illegal trade unions and anti-Francoist parties, as &quot;the sanctity of the church, codified in Franco&#x27;s 1953 Vatican Concordat, assured that the meeting would not be interrupted by the police&quot;. According to Rooney, &quot;members of clergy were to play a leading role in the opposition to the dictatorship&quot;; this was particularly true for the Catholic clergy in &quot;Basque Country and Catalonia, where the clergy were actively involved in regional nationalism, and also for those priests from Catholic worker organisations who took up the defence of striking workers&quot;. As the opposition from the Catholic Church intensified, the Franco regime soon started acting against the clergy, and a prison for Catholic priests called Concordat Prison was created. Hank Johnston and Jozef Figa also argue that in Spain, &quot;the church was crucial in the nationalist and working-class wings of the anti-Francoist movement&quot;, and the growing opposition to the dictatorship intensified in the 1960s thanks to Vatican II, which made the regime start &quot;fining priests for their sermons, jailing members of the clergy, and considering the expulsion of a bishop, thereby risking the excommunication of the government&quot;.

===France===
The pro-Catholic movement Action Française (AF) campaigned for the return of the monarchy and for aggressive action against Jews, as well as a corporatist system. It was supported by a strong section of the clerical hierarchy, eleven out of seventeen cardinals and bishops. On the other hand, many Catholics regarded the AF with distrust, and in 1926, Pope Pius XI explicitly condemned the organization. Several writings of Charles Maurras&#x27;, the leading ideologist of AF and an agnostic, were placed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum at the same time. However, in 1939 Pope Pius XII waived the condemnation. Maurras&#x27; personal secretary, Jean Ousset, later went on to found the Cité catholique fundamentalist organization along with former members of the OAS terrorist group created in defense of &quot;French Algeria&quot; during the Algerian War.

According to John Hellman, &quot;Not long before he died, Lenin told a French Catholic visitor that &quot;only Communism and Catholicism offered two diverse, complete and inconfusible conceptions of human life&quot;. This led Maurice Thorez of the French Communist Party to offer &quot;an outstretched hand&quot; to French Catholics in 1936, wishing &quot;to achieve a tactical alliance to head off fascism in France and Europe and to promote social progress&quot;. A large number of French Catholics did enter a dialogue with the party, but to Thorez&#x27;s surprise, &quot;these Catholics were not, for the most part, the Catholic workers, clerks, artisans, peasants to whom Maurice Thorez had addressed his appeal, but rather Catholic philosophers, &quot;social priests,&quot; journalists, and cardinals&quot;. While Catholics were wary of the socialist concept of the revolution, and strongly opposed to the atheism of most socialist movements, &quot;strong criticism of capitalism and economic liberalism was a persistent theme in episcopal pronouncements and Catholic literature&quot;. The attempt of a Communist-Catholic unity in France is considered successful, as most French Catholics were opposed to fascism and when offered an alliance on grounds of anti-fascist unity, &quot;saw the Communist offer as a religious and moral rather than political issue&quot;.

===Ireland===
The Catholic Church in Ireland played a key role in uniting various strata of the Irish society, forging the unity that allowed Irish nationalism to become a mass movement. The Church gained a reputation of a nationalist and anti-British force in late 19th and early 20th century, as it clashed with the British government and advanced Irish causes. Establishing its identity as a persecuted church that stood opposed to the British presence in Ireland, Catholicism became a source of the Irish identity. As such, when Irish Free State was established in 1922, Catholic and nationalist values were &quot;subscribed to by the vast majority of the population&quot;; the Church had a profound influence on the legislature of the new Irish state. However, although the Church had a marked influence on both Irish state and its identity, &quot;practical politics were, to a great extent, left to the laity under the general supervision of the hierarchy.&quot;

Despite the fact that the Church was &quot;overwhelmingly dominant&quot; in 20th-century Ireland, the Irish Constitution of 1922 was of secular character and followed the ideals of the separation between church and state, and was supported by the Irish clergy. The clergy as well as Catholic nationalist circles and newspapers such as the &quot;Catholic Bulletin&quot; focused on what they considered &quot;the absence of a spirit of Gaelicism or an active sense of nationality&quot;, condemning English-language literature as a sign of Ireland being &quot;shackled by an alien tongue&quot;, attacking perceived non-Gaelic or &quot;adventitious&quot; elements in the post-WWI Irish society and stressing the need to revive the traditional &quot;Hidden Ireland&quot;, devoid of Anglo-Irish influences, as definited by Daniel Corkery. Militant Gaelicism expressed by Catholic circles as well as the clergy itself, such as the Jesuit Timothy Corcoran, actively pressured the government towards Gaelicisation measures.

Early nationalist government of the Free State concerned itself with administrative measures such as the police force (&quot;Gardá Síochána Act of 1923&quot;), the economy (&quot;Finance Act of 1923&quot;) and local governments (&quot;Lo Act of 1923&quot;), with &quot;no trace of the influence of Catholicism&quot;. However, the government did rely heavily on Political Catholicism in social policy, where the government&#x27;s decisions were heavily dictated by the Catholic teaching and the Church&#x27;s will. The government gave the Church profound control over its education, with Thomas Derrig, the Minister for Education, saying in 1938: &quot;I think that I am justified in saying that in no country in the world does a national system of education approach the Catholic ideal system as in the Free State.&quot; As a result, &quot;the Catholic Church became the most powerful ally of the new state, lending the weight of its immense authority to the cause of law and order and placing at the disposal of the new, mainly Catholic state its biggest ecclesiastical stake, namely its schools and system of clerical management.&quot; Once Fianna Fáil emerged in Irish politics in 1926, the opinion in the country was polarising into the middle-class Irish voters who were content with status quo, and rural and working-class voters who felt alienated by liberal capitalism and desired an economic system based on ideals of Christian corporatism and Catholic social teaching. According to Patricia A. Lamoureux, the history of the Catholic Church in Ireland &quot;reeals a tradition of cooperation with organized labor&quot;; the Church was especially popular amongst the Irish working class, more religious than their middle-class counterparts and more involved with the Church by participating in Catholic trade unions. The Catholic Church used its power to organise to found and direct trade unions, which &quot;earned the Catholic church a reputation as a friend of the labor movement&quot;. In 1929, diplomatic representatives were exchanged between the Vatican and the Irish Free State, and the relations between the Irish government and the Holy See grew friendler, with one speaker from the governmental benches saying: &quot;Our whole history has received its dominating characteristics from our adhesion to the principles of the Catholic religion, of which the visible head is the Bishop of Rome. For the vast majority of our people ... this present stage of our history has been pre-determined in all its details by our fidelity to the Church of Rome&quot;. In this atmosphere, Fianna Fáil&#x27;s strategy to gain voters was based on portraying itself as an ultra-Catholic party, even more so than the current government. In the same year, Seán T. O&#x27;Kelly said: &quot;We of the Fianna Fáil party believe that we speak for the big body of Catholic opinion. I think I could say, without qualification of any kind, that we represent the big element of Catholicity&quot;.

In the Irish Free State, the Catholic social movements were &quot;going from strength to strength&quot;, having an overwhelming number of adherents in both the general society as well as the government itself. As the result, the Catholic clergy had powerful, although indirect, influence in Irish politics. Despite this, the influence of the clergy was not necessarily pushing the country in a right-wing or reactionary direction, as Irish priests envisioned political Catholicism as a force that should adhere to the ideals of Christian democracy, Gaelicism and moderation. In 1929, Bishop Patrick Morrisroe advised: &quot;Though not formally Catholic, our Government at the same time legislates for Catholics in the main, so that its laws, while not oppressive in any section, should take special account of the needs of the overwhelming portion of its subjects.&quot; Ultimately, a new constitution was written and put into law in 1937; Éamon de Valera actively sought the advice of Papal Nuncio and Cardinal MacRory on the issue, and under their advice the new Constitution did not contain exclusive recognition of the Catholic Church - along with recognising the &quot;special position&quot; of the Church, other churches in Ireland were also given special recognition, which was seen as necessary for both the democratic process and prevention of sectarian violence.

Ireland remained a highly religious society until 1960s - as late as in the 1950s, the image of Ireland was still one of a Catholic society that &quot;had preserved a purity of faith in the face of persecution and famine&quot;. On his visit to Ireland in 1950s, Archbishop Peter McKeefry praised Ireland as &quot;a land of faith ... a faith that permeates every phase of personal, social and national life. It could be seen every moment of the day, be it in church, on a street car.&quot; However, with the advent of secularism following the end of WW2, both the Church as well as the Irish society itself underwent changes and tilted in liberal direction. Starting in the 1960s, the Catholic Church would rapidly lose its influence on the Irish society - unlike in 1937, the government no longer sought the advice of the clergy on political matters, and even came close to openly defying the Church; while anti-Catholicism amongst the Protestant minorities had mostly faded away by 1960s, it was now replaced by anti-clericalism of liberal groups and movements. However, the Church itself also liberalised thanks to Vatican II - the Church accepted the increasing secularization of the Irish society, and in 1959 Father Peter Connelly wrote: &quot;... the Church ought not compromise her moral authority with the compulsions of civil law nor ought the State intrude into the private moral life unless ‘‘public morality’’ or ‘‘the public order’’ is being menaced. Civil law does not deal formally with sin.&quot; In 1960s and 1970s, many Catholic bishops issued similar statements, clarifying that the Church expects the government to uphold Irish democracy rather than &quot;uphold the Catholic moral order&quot;. According to Louise Fuller of the National University of Ireland, by the time of the Second Vatican Council, Catholic ideology in Ireland became a democratic one that &quot;emphasized love rather than adherence to rules and had a positive rather than a negative view of human nature.&quot; John Henry Whyte writes that &quot;Catholic social teaching remained very active but less ideological&quot; and argues that the Church &quot;became more concerned with the actual needs of people&quot; and no longer sought to dominate various social fields such as education or healthcare, closely cooperating and coordinating its efforts with the state on these issues instead. The Church also liberalised on social matters such as feminism, as the Irish &quot;nuns came to challenge their subordinate role within the Church, criticized the patriarchal traditions of the Church and urged it to become more involved in the concerns of the poor&quot;. As such, political Catholics shifted towards the left, with many embracing liberation theology or progressive Catholicism. Vatican II also urged the need for the Church to advocate for democracy above all else, even if at the cost of hitherto Catholic dominance in Irish society and politics, with Cardinal Cahal Daly writing: &quot;The Catholic Church totally rejects the concept of a confessional State […] the Catholic Church seeks only the freedom to proclaim the Gospel […] We have repeatedly declared that we in no way seek to have the moral teaching of the Catholic Church become the criterion of constitutional change or to have the principles of Catholic faith enshrined in civil law.&quot;

===Elsewhere in Europe===
The association of Roman Catholicism, sometimes in the form of the hierarchical church, sometimes in the form of lay Catholic organisations acting independently of the hierarchy, produced links to dictatorial governments in various states.

* In Austria, Engelbert Dollfuss turned a Roman Catholic political party into the single party of a one-party state. In rural Austria the Catholic Christian Social Party collaborated with the Heimwehr militia and helped bring Dollfuss to power in 1932. In June 1934, he produced his authoritarian constitution which stated &quot;We shall establish a state on the basis of a Christian Weltanschauung&quot;. The Pope described Dollfuss as a &quot;Christian, giant-hearted man ... who rules Austria so well, so resolutely and in such a Christian manner. His actions are witness to Catholic visions and convictions. The Austrian people, Our beloved Austria, now has the government it deserves&quot;.
* In Poland, in 1920s Józef Piłsudski founded a military-style government (Sanacja) that incorporated Catholic corporatism into its ideology. After the Second World War the Catholic Church was a focal point of opposition to the Communist regime. Many Catholic priests were arrested or disappeared for opposing the communist regime of People&#x27;s Republic of Poland. Pope John Paul II encouraged opposition to the Communist regime in such a way that it would not draw retaliation, becoming (in a quote from CNN) &quot;a resilient enemy of Communism and champion of human rights, a powerful preacher and sophisticated intellectual able to defeat Marxists in their own line of dialogue.&quot; After the fall of the Soviet Union, Poland became a multiparty democracy and several parties which professed to defend Catholicism were legalised, like Akcja Wyborcza Solidarność or Liga Polskich Rodzin.

===Fascism===
Commenting on the rise of fascism in interwar Europe, Giuseppe Pizzardo condemned &quot;fascist totalitarianism&quot; as being &quot;at the opposite extreme from the Christian and Catholic conceptions of social existence, the state, and international relations.&quot; Emilio Gentile highlights that Pizzardo was considered highly conservative, which shows hostile attitude towards fascism even among the reactionary circles of the Catholic clergy. According to Gentile, Catholic anti-fascists considered fascism was considered a political religion that inherently competeted with the Catholic Church for social influence; Igino Giordani called fascism a modern version of Caesaropapism that wishes to subjugate the Church, while Luigi Sturzo argued that fascism is fundamentally incompatible with Catholicism because instead of promoting Catholic values and Catholic state, &quot;fascism wants to be worshipped for itself, and wishes to create a Fascist state.&quot;

Historians such as Emilio Gentile, Roger Griffin and Renato Moro argue that Catholics were generally opposed to fascism, and in national contexts the Church either opposed fascism or played a &#x27;moderating&#x27; role in order to assert its position. Philip Morgan of the University of Hull writes that Catholics were considered enemies by Italian fascists, with Roberto Farinacci identifying &quot;the leaders and members of Catholic organisations&quot; as key opponents of the fascist regime. Adrian Lyttelton argues that fascism itself was anti-clerical - Benito Mussolini himself was an atheist &quot;distinguished by his hatred of the Church&quot;, who often attacked the Vatican as well as Catholics themselves; many Italian fascists called for the &quot;de-Vaticanization&quot; of Italy, and the Fascist Manifesto itself was anti-Catholic as well. According to Lyttelton, &quot;the typical Fascist enthusiast ranked the priest only a short way after the Socialist agitator in his list of enemies&quot;. The Church started distancing itself from fascist and nationalist regimes as early in 1926, when the Holy Office published a decree condemning Action Française, and afterwards &quot;Vatican continued to make use of the Index to combat the danger of Fascist deviations in Catholic doctrine&quot;.

In 1929, the Church banned books of a fascist journalist Mario Missiroli who advocated for a &quot;conciliation&quot; between Catholicism and Mussolini&#x27;s fascist state, and in 1934 the works of Giovanni Gentile were banned as well. Particularly offensive to Mussolini was the ban of the books of Alfredo Oriani, whom he considered &quot;a favourite author of the regime&quot;. In 1929, La Civiltà Cattolica, one of the oldest Catholic periodicals in Italy and one that is directly controlled and revised by the Holy See, harshly condemned fascism and compared Mussolini&#x27;s attitude towards the Church to Napoleon&#x27;s. Pope Pius XI also took a firm stand against the concept of fascist and totalitarian regimes, denouncing fascism in his Christmas Allocution of 1926, and again in 1931 in his encyclical Non abbiamo bisogno, where the Pope condemned Italian fascism as anti-Catholic and an ideology of &quot;hatred, violence and irreverence&quot;. Fascist press attacked the Catholic Church as well, denouncing it as an institution of anti-fascism and accusing it of interfering in state affairs. In 1932, The Doctrine of Fascism written by Giovanni Gentile and Mussolini also described fascism as &quot;educating to a spiritual life and promoting it&quot;, which was condemned by the Pope as anti-Christian and seeking to replace Catholicism. Other members of the clergy such as the Cardinal Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster, also attacked fascism, with Schuster describing it as a &quot;philosophical-religious system&quot; and &quot;Hegelian statolatry&quot;. In late 1935, Cardinal Domenico Tardini, who was the Sustituto of the Congregation of Ordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs at the time, released a document called &quot;Thirteen Years of Fascism&quot; on behalf of Pope Pius XI, which strongly condemned the Italian regime as well as the Italian invasion of Ethiopia. The document argued that &quot;a whim of the Duce is the ruin of Italy&quot;, and attacked Italians that were &quot;gripped by the demon of Nationalism and who believe more in Mussolini than in the Pope&quot;.

====Italy====
The relationship between fascist Italy and the Catholic Church can be divided into three periods - prior to the March on Rome, the Church was hostile to the fascist movement and was openly denounced by the clergy as well as Catholic organisations. After the fascist government was formed, relations were steadily improving as Mussolini sought to appease Rome and improve the public as well as foreign opinion of the regime, which eventually led to the Lateran Treaty of 1929. Starting in 1931, the Church was growing increasingly opposed to the regime, particularly in the context of its anti-clerical policies and bans of Catholic organisations such as the Azione Cattolica. The Church became openly hostile towards the Italian fascist regime in mid-1930s, once it started cooperating with the German regime, acquiesced in the annexation of Austria in 1938 and implemented Racial Laws, to which the Church was strongly opposed. In 1938, Pius XI strongly condemned anti-Semitic laws and stated: &quot;Christians are not permitted to take part in anti-Semitism. … Spiritually we are all Semites”; according to Emma Fattorini, Pius &quot;concluded that the aims of fascism and the Catholic Church were incompatible&quot;. Following the implementation of the racial laws, fascist informers remarked that &quot;the clergy and the practising Catholics make clear that they deplore, as persecution, the measures aimed at the Jews&quot;. The Church refused to recognise the Italian Social Republic in 1943, and used its privileged status to give shelter to anti-fascist activists. The Catholic Church became a centre of clandestine anti-fascist resistance in Italy during World War II, which allowed Christian Democrats to emerge as the strongest force in the resistance as well as post-WW2 Italian politics. Adrian Lyttelton argues that &quot;the single most important national institution to make the transition from Fascism to democracy was the Catholic Church&quot;, while Richard A. Webster notes that &quot;in conditions of ever tighter totalitarian control, the Church was one of the few institutions in Italy that Fascism never penetrated&quot;.

During the unstable period in Italy called Biennio Rosso, marked by strikes, protests and clashes between socialist groups and fascist Blackshirts, the Church was strongly critical of Italian fascists, and Catholic media such as the newspaper La Civiltà Cattolica referred to fascism as an evil and anti-Christian movement. In this period, Catholic social and workers&#x27; movements established local control in most of Italy, especially in the northern Areas such as Veneto, Bergamo and Brescia; Catholics formed worker leagues, mutual-aid societies, cooperatives and rural banks. Catholic subculture was dominant in Italy as local priests, Catholic organisations and newspapers had constructed a &quot;Catholic world&quot;. This Catholic subculture and organisations, especially Catholic trade unions that were associated with it, were known as &quot;white&quot; in contrast to &quot;red&quot; worker movements that followed socialism rather than Catholic social teaching or distributism. According to John M. Foot, the Catholic movement was staunchly anti-fascist and leaned towards the political left - Foot remarks that Catholic trade unions were often &quot;more militant than those of the &#x27;reds&#x27; and entered into violent conflict with the landowners or textile bosses&quot;. As such, Catholics in the 1920s Italy were left-wing, largely immune to Blackshirt agitation and were ready to enter &quot;workers&#x27; unity&quot; alliances with socialist trade unions for the sake of anti-fascism. Local Catholic socialist leaders emerged, such as Romano Cocchi at Bergamo and Giuseppe Speranzini in Verona. The presence of such &quot;Left-Catholics&quot; was strong, and a strike organised by left Catholic unions in Verona gathered 150,000 &#x27;white&#x27; workers. Ultimately, no lasting alliance between the &#x27;red&#x27; socialist and &#x27;white&#x27; Catholic organisations was successful as both sides remained largely unwilling to cooperate despite their anti-fascist outlook. Socialist unions would often refuse to participate in strikes organised by white leagues, allowing local landowners to use the Socialist-Catholic split to their advantage and isolate trade unions from each other. Catholic newspapers such as &quot;L&#x27;Italia&quot; criticised &#x27;red&#x27; unions for their neutrality, writing in 1919 that there was a &quot;tight link between our red adversaries and the ruling class&quot;. The PSI maintained a hostile attitude towards the Catholic Left - in 1920, Alfonso Leonetti stated that Catholic workers were a &quot;true obstacle&quot; to the revolution and equated them to fascist Blackshirts, arguing that the PSI would have to &quot;fight the left-catholics with greater force than those on the right&quot;. Foot notes that only individual socialists such as Antonio Gramsci explored the prospect of an anti-fascist alliance with the Catholic left. Catholic leagues and trade unions were condemned by the fascist press as &quot;white Bolshevik&quot; and &quot;communist&quot;. Cladia Baldoli remarked that although no lasting alliances between the &#x27;red&#x27; and &#x27;white&#x27; organisations were made, Catholic organisations fiercely opposed the Blackshirts, and their protests were often &quot;more radical than the ones employed by socialism, and were indeed remembered during Mussolini’s regime as forms of ‘White Bolshevism’.&quot;

====Germany====

The division of Germans between Catholicism and Protestantism has figured into German politics since the Protestant Reformation. The &quot;Kulturkampf&quot; that followed German unification was the defining dispute between the German state and Catholicism.

In Weimar Germany, the Centre Party was the Catholic political party. It disbanded around the time of the signing of the &quot;Reichskonkordat&quot; (1933), the treaty that continues to regulate church-state relations to this day. Pius XI&#x27;s encyclical &quot;Mit brennender Sorge&quot; (1937) protested what it perceived to be violations of the &quot;Reichskonkordat&quot;. The role of Catholic bishops in Nazi Germany remains a controversial aspect of the study of Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust.

According to Robert A. Krieg, &quot;Catholic bishops, priests, and lay leaders had criticized National Socialism since its inception in the early 1920s&quot;, while The Sewanee Review remarked in 1934 that even &quot;when the Hitler movement was still small and apparently insignificant, German Catholic ecclesiastics recognized its inherent threat to certain beliefs and principles of their Church&quot;. Catholic sermons and newspapers vigorously denounced Nazism and accused it of espousing neopaganism, and Catholic priests forbade believers from joining the NSDAP. Waldemar Gurian noted that the upper Catholic bishops issued several condemnations of the NSDAP starting in 1930 and 1931, and describing the relations between the National Socialism and the Catholic Church, concluded that &quot;though there has been no legal declaration of war, a war is nevertheless going on.&quot;

Ludwig Maria Hugo was the first Catholic bishop to condemn membership in the Nazi party, and in 1931 Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber wrote that &quot;[t]he bishops as guardians of the true teachings of faith and morals must issue a warning about National Socialism, so long as and insofar as it maintains cultural-political views that are not reconcilable with Catholic doctrine.&quot; Cardinal Faulhaber&#x27;s outspoken criticism of National Socialism gained widespread attention and support from German Catholic churches, and Cardinal Adolf Bertram called German Catholics to oppose National Socialism in its entirety because it &quot;stands in the most pointed contradiction to the fundamental truths of Christianity&quot;. According to the Sewanee Review, &quot;Catholics were expressly forbidden to become registered members of the National Socialist party; disobedient Catholics were refused admission to the sacraments; groups in Nazi uniform and with Nazi banners were not admitted to church services&quot;. The condemnations of Nazism by Bertram and von Faulhaber reflected the views of most German Catholics, but many of them were also disillusioned with the institutions of the Weimar Republic.

According to Italian historian Emma Fattorini, Vatican was increasingly concerned about the rise of Nazism in Germany, and Pope Pius XI believed that National Socialism is a larger threat to Catholicism than Communism. Hostility between the Vatican and the Nazi Regime resulted in the publication of the papal encyclical Mit Brennender Sorge in 1937. &quot;Mit Brennender Sorge&quot; directly attacked and condemned National Socialism. The encyclical forcefully condemned the Nazi regime as well as its policies, especially anti-Semitic laws as well as numerous breaches of the Reichskonkordat. The encyclical stated that National Socialism is incompatible with both Catholic faith and Catholic ethics, and called upon Catholics to stand against the &quot;so-called myth of blood and race&quot; espoused by Nazism. Frank J. Coppa considers &quot;Mit Brennender Sorge&quot; a &quot;forceful and dramatic condemnation of Nazi policy&quot;. As a result of aggressive stance that the Vatican took against National Socialism, Catholic clergy in Germany opposed the regime, and Catholic churches were often meeting places for the anti-Nazi resistance. In January 1939, Martin Bormann stated that the majority of Catholic clergy &quot;stand in concealed or open opposition to National Socialism and the State led by it.&quot; An annual report by the Reich Security Main Office in 1938 criticised the Catholic Church for not only expressing clear hostility towards the Nazi regime, but also accused German Catholics of &quot;trying to bring about the collapse of the Third Reich&quot;. Reinhard Heydrich considered Catholicism a fierce opponent of National Socialism, citing &quot;the hostility constantly displayed by the Vatican, the negative attitude of the bishops towards the Anschluss as typified by the conduct of Bishop Sproll of Württemberg, the attempt to make the Catholic Eucharistic Congress in Budapest a demonstration of united opposition to Germany, and the continued accusations of Godlessness and of destruction of church life made by Church leaders in their pastoral letters.&quot;

====Slovakia====
During World War II, Jozef Tiso, a Roman Catholic monsigneur, became the Nazi quisling in Slovakia. Tiso was head of state and the security forces, as well as the leader of the paramilitary Hlinka Guard, which wore the Catholic Episcopal cross on its armbands. Slovak nationalists considered Slovakia to be an inherently Catholic nation, and Catholicism was seen as a fundamental part of Slovak identity; to this end, the Catholic clergy was highly active in both social and political scene of the Slovak nation - approximately 80% of Slovaks were members of the Catholic Church during World War II. Slovak government was divided between the clerical-fascist wing of Jozef Tiso, and the pro-German National Socialist wing led by Vojtech Tuka. The Slovak government had a high proportion of Roman Catholic priests as well as religious Catholics; however, Richard J. Wolff argues that this was the result of prominent position of the Catholic Church in the national life of Slovakia, and such situation &quot;may have arisen in a truly democratic state as well&quot;. The Slovak People&#x27;s Party that ruled the First Slovak Republic was founded by a Catholic priest Andrej Hlinka; the party was authoritarian and nationalist, and included elements of Catholic social doctrines as an element of its ideology, along with a Catholic narrative. Although the party used religious imagery, it was unable to gain a Catholic following because of the strong German influence on the regime. As the persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany, Austria and Poland became apparent, the Church in Slovakia was seen as an opponent to influence of Nazi Germany.

Despite its Catholic and clerical nature, the Vatican was critical of the Slovak regime - Pope Pius XI discouraged clerical participation and support of the regime, and monsignor Domenico Tardini informed Tiso that &quot;the Holy See does not look with pleasure&quot; upon his appointment as the president of Slovakia. Wolff notes that &quot;The Vatican consistently demonstrated its uneasiness as Catholic Slovakia drew further into the German web&quot;, and the Catholic hierarchy constantly clashed with Tiso and his government over its pro-German and fascist policies. The Church was concerned with &quot;Nazi advances&quot; that were implemented by the regime, and also sought to preserve its profound social influence. According to Wolff, &quot;the ultimate test of strength between the Church and nazism in Slovakia centered upon the struggle over the fate of the country&#x27;s Jewish population.&quot; The Vatican strongly opposed anti-Semitic legislation that was systematically implemente in Slovakia; the &quot;Jewish Code&quot; based on the Nuremberg Laws introduced in German was declared contrary to Catholic principles - Cardinal Luigi Maglione issued an official protest to the law on behalf of the Vatican, writing that &quot;it is with great sadness that the Holy See witnessed the promulgation of a law which was in open contrast to Catholic principles in an overwhelming Catholic country&quot;. Strong protests of the Vatican emboldened Slovak bishops and Catholic organisations, which strongly criticised the government for persecuting Slovak Jews; in a Catholic newspaper Katolícke Noviny, Catholic hierarchy condemned anti-Semitic actions of the regime. In response, Vojtek Tucha criticised the Slovak clergy for protecting the &quot;interests of the Jews and in many cases non-baptized Jews&quot;.

According to John S. Conway, although the representatives of the Slovak government claimed to follow Catholic values and presented themselves as independent from Germany, Slovak Catholics were largely unsupportive of the regime. Conway remarks that &quot;the Christian tradition increasingly came to be seen as an element of resistance against Nazi influence&quot;, and the Sicherheitsdienst reports often mentioned widespread &quot;anti-German or anti-Nazi attitudes of the Slovak clergy&quot;. A report by the German intelligence service in Slovakia in May 1940 stated that &quot;the activity of the Catholic Church in Slovakia must be described as completely anti-German&quot;. The Church used its influence to direct rescue efforts for Slovak Jews, spread anti-German sentiments and often tried to prevent the introduction of further anti-Semitic laws. Humanitarian efforts by the clergy were in conflict with the racial policies of the Slovak government, and anti-Semitic actions of the regime were often presented as a product of German interference, imposed on Slovakia against the will of the population. According to Livia Rothkirchen, the Catholic Church was considered a formidable obstacle to Holocaust in Slovakia, with a German report from 12 January 1943, reporting that &quot;a final solution of the Jewish question in Slovakia will in particular be opposed by the Catholic Church, which under the disguise of love of one&#x27;s neighbour and other humanitarian sentiments, hinders any decisive steps against the plague of Jewry in Slovakia&quot;. Local clergy supported the anti-Nazi resistance, which eventually culminated in the Slovak National Uprising. Conway notes that the Catholic clergy were ready to join the insurgents, and after the German suppression of the uprising, many in Slovakia saw the country as having to choose between submission to Germany or surrender to the advancing Russian armies. In this situation, Catholic churchmen &quot;often welcomed the latter development&quot;.

====Belgium====
The Constitution of Belgium established Belgium as a liberal democracy, with the constitution being one of the most liberal at the time. According to Bruno De Wever, the Catholic Church was supportive of liberal democracy in Belgium, as no anti-clerical policies were implemented unlike in France or Italy. De Wever notes that even &quot;the ultramontane movement in Belgian Catholicism signed up to the Belgian constitutional institutions&quot;, and the constitutional freedoms provided a possibility for the Church to build a Catholic network of political and social movements and organisations. Political Catholicism was strong and dominating force in Belgium, as Catholic faith was widespread - in the 1930s, 98% of Belgian children were baptised, 80% of marriages were consecrated, and an overwhelming majority of Belgians attended Mass.

From 1884 to 1914, Belgium was ruled by a pro-clerical Catholic Party, with the Church enjoying both profound support and influence on Belgian politics. As Catholics were not alienated by political liberalism, the Catholic Party fully respected the liberal constitution of 1830, and despite its very strong influence, the Catholic hierarchy respected the division between religious and political matters. However, despite liberal leanings of Belgian Catholicism, ultramontanism and conservatism also became widespread within the Flemish movement, which emerged as a response to the domination of French-speaking elite in Belgian politics. The Flemish movement demanded equal rights for Dutch language and advocated for Flemish independence while also incorporating anti-liberalism. The Flemish movement grew dominant following the First World War, particularly in response to rising socialism and anti-clericalism. In Wallonia, radicalized French-speaking Catholic conservatives and veterans started founding fascist and far-right parties and organisations, with a far-right Rexist Party emerging in 1935.

The Rexist Party of Léon Degrelle promoted rhetoric that combined fascist tendencies with Political Catholicism, courting radicalised Catholics - De Wever describes Rexist rhetoric as &quot;a right-wing populist mash&quot;. In Flanders, radicalised Flemish nationalists founded Verdinaso in 1931, a far-right party that modelled itself on Catholic social teaching while also promoting ultra-nationalism. In 1933, the Flemish National League was found, which also tried to combine Political Catholicism with a fascistic programme, promoting xenophobia and anti-Semitism as well. Both Rexists and the FNL won seats in the 1936 Belgian general election at the expense of the Christian democrat Catholic Party. Despite this, the Catholic Party rejected to form a coalition with far-right movements, and the Catholic hierarchy denounced the Rexists and continued to support the Catholic Party; in the 1939 Belgian general election, electoral support of both the Rexist Party and FNL greatly declined. In 1930s Belgium, the Vatican and the local clergy promoted Christian democracy as the basis of political Catholicism - far-right movements were often denounced as foreign and German; De Wever notes that &quot;the socialists, liberals and Christian movements fought the FNL as a fascist and pro-German party – for good reason: Staf De Clercq and some of the other FNL leaders had secret contacts with the Abwehr, the German military secret service&quot;.

During the German occupation of Belgium during World War II, the Catholic clergy engaged in passive resistance, avoiding confrontation with German authorities while remaining hostile to Catholic collaborators. When the leader of collaborationist FNL, Staf De Clercq, died in 1942, the Catholic Church refused to organise his funeral, forcing the ceremony to be secular and open-air. According to De Wever, collaborationist and far-right movements were shunned by Catholic political elites, with fascism and Catholicism remaining separate and hostile social networks within Belgium; when Rexists were facing a dilemma between collaborating with Germany and joining the Catholic resistance, &quot;their ultra-nationalism prevailed over Catholic solidarity&quot;.

===United States===
Prior to 1961, the U.S. had never had a Catholic president. Many Protestants were afraid that if a Catholic were elected president, he would take orders directly from the Pope. This was one reason why Al Smith, the Democratic governor of New York, lost the 1928 presidential election to Herbert Hoover. The surprise bestseller of 1949–1950 was &quot;American Freedom and Catholic Power&quot; by Paul Blanshard. Blanshard accused the Catholic Church hierarchy of having an undue influence on legislation, education and medical practice. Years later, John F. Kennedy, spoke to a convention of Baptist pastors in Louisiana during his election campaign. He assured them that, if elected, he would put his country before his religion.

Since the late 1960s, the Catholic Church has been politically active in the U.S. around the &quot;life issues&quot; of abortion, assisted suicide and euthanasia, with some bishops and priests refusing communion to Catholic politicians who publicly advocate for legal abortion. This has created a stigma within the Church itself however. The church has also played significant roles in the fights over capital punishment, gay marriage, welfare, state secularism, various &quot;peace and justice&quot; issues, among many others. Its role varies from area to area depending upon the size of the Catholic Church in a particular region and on the region&#x27;s predominant ideology. For example, a Catholic church in the Southern U.S. would be more likely to be against universal health care than a Catholic church in New England.

Robert Drinan, a Catholic priest, served five terms in Congress as a Democrat from Massachusetts before the Holy See forced him to choose between giving up his seat in Congress or being laicized. The 1983 Code of Canon Law forbids Catholic priests from holding political office anywhere in the world.

=== Argentina ===
Secularism was enforced in Argentina in 1884 when President Julio Argentino Roca passed Law 1420 on secular education. In 1955, the Catholics nationalists overthrew General Perón in the &quot;Revolución Libertadora&quot;, and a concordat was signed in 1966. Catholic nationalists continued to play an important role in the politics of Argentina, while the Church itself was accused of having set up ratlines to organize the escape of former Nazis after WWII. Furthermore, several important Catholic figures have been accused of having supported the &quot;Dirty War&quot; in the 1970s, including Pope Francis, then-Archbishop of Buenos Aires. Antonio Caggiano, Archbishop of Buenos Aires from 1959 to 1975, was close to the fundamentalist Cité catholique organisation, and introduced Jean Ousset (former personal secretary of Charles Maurras, the leader of the Action française)&#x27;s theories on counter-revolutionary warfare and &quot;subversion&quot; in Argentina.

=== Brazil ===
===Australia===
Traditionally, Catholics in Australia had been predominantly of Irish descent and working-class. This was noticeable in civic society and politics, where the increasingly urban Irish Catholic population played a disproportionate role in the labour movement, including the foundation of the Australian Labor Party, and were in direct political opposition to the disproportionate role in business played by Anglicans and Presbyterians who were typically involved in conservative politics. This tendency was sustained until the 1950s for most Catholics to vote Labor and for most Anglicans, Presbyterians and Methodists to vote for their conservative opponents. This divide became starkly and bitterly apparent during the First World War: Anglo-Saxon Protestants were reflexively enthusiastic supporters of the war and conscription, in line with the establishment culture of loyalism; conversely, Irish and Scottish Catholics were reflexively critical of both. When the Australian government tried to introduce conscription it was defeated, on two occasions by referendum. Prominent Irish Catholic campaigners against the war and conscription such as Archbishop Daniel Mannix were widely denounced in public as traitors by Protestants.

=== International law ===
In 2003, Pope John Paul II became a prominent critic of the 2003 US-led invasion of Iraq. He sent his &quot;Peace Minister&quot;, Cardinal Pio Laghi, to talk with US President George W. Bush to express opposition to the war. John Paul II said that it was up to the United Nations to solve the international conflict through diplomacy and that a unilateral aggression is a crime against peace and a violation of international law.

==Communism==
Pope John Paul II offered support to the Polish Solidarity movement. Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev once said the collapse of the Iron Curtain would have been impossible without John Paul II. But Catholic attitudes toward communism have evolved and Pope Francis has taken the focus off ideologies and placed it on the sufferings of people under both systems, with the hope-filled conclusion.

== See also ==

*Caesaropapism
*Category:Catholic political parties
*Estates of the realm
*Gallicanism
*Guelph
*History of the Roman Catholic Church
*&quot;Missi dominici&quot;
*Separation of church and state
*Theocracy
*Weiblingen
*Integralism § Catholic integralism

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7310733" start="4" end="55" title="Relations between the Catholic Church and the state" label="relations between the Catholic Church and the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="263" end="275" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="292" end="313" title="divine right of kings" label="divine right of kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="380" end="389" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="411" end="420" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="425" end="435" title="right-wing" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="461" end="483" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q905362" start="504" end="522" title="Dignitatis humanae" label="Dignitatis humanae"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="541" end="558" title="religious freedom" label="religious freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="564" end="575" title="civil right" label="civil right"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="605" end="623" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="665" end="677" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="693" end="704" title="Christianity in the 1st century" label="1st century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="741" end="753" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="755" end="771" title="Early Christians" label="Early Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="813" end="817" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q215231" start="886" end="904" title="Great Fire of Rome" label="Great Fire of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="1050" end="1060" title="Diocletianic Persecution" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="1105" end="1126" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127325" start="1145" end="1159" title="Milvian Bridge" label="Milvian Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="1224" end="1238" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="1419" end="1438" title="Julian the Apostate" label="Julian the Apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="1507" end="1515" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543393" start="1569" end="1600" title="first seven Ecumenical Councils" label="first seven Ecumenical Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1615" end="1621" title="Catholic Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093607" start="1842" end="1860" title="One true church" label="the one true faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="1971" end="1984" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313030" start="1994" end="2049" title="The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" label="The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="2395" end="2416" title="divine right of kings" label="divine right of kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2434" end="2442" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="2474" end="2482" title="Bible" label="biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="2500" end="2521" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Epistle to the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="2542" end="2560" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212318" start="2579" end="2594" title="City of God (book)" label="The City of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="2761" end="2764" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="2838" end="2845" title="secularism" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="3187" end="3201" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3391" end="3402" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="3404" end="3415" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="3426" end="3439" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="3504" end="3517" title="Ultramontanism" label="ultramontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="3631" end="3641" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="3971" end="3984" title="Thomas Wolsey" label="Thomas Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3988" end="3995" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="4011" end="4020" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q166056" start="4025" end="4032" title="Cardinal Mazarin" label="Mazarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="4089" end="4100" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="4288" end="4294" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="4300" end="4310" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12552047" start="4324" end="4328" title="lord" label="lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="4387" end="4392" title="count" label="count"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="4398" end="4402" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="4420" end="4429" title="monarch" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="4484" end="4496" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4543" end="4560" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="4564" end="4572" title="prince-elector" label="electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="4622" end="4639" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q294100" start="4641" end="4664" title="Jacques-Benigne Bossuet" label="Jacques-Benigne Bossuet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="4678" end="4687" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="4744" end="4761" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="4769" end="4775" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="4804" end="4813" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="4974" end="4997" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944060" start="5003" end="5016" title="monarchomachs" label="monarchomachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="5100" end="5119" title="popular sovereignty" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369583" start="5148" end="5159" title="tyrannicide" label="tyrannicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="5372" end="5389" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5446" end="5452" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="5484" end="5496" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="5532" end="5538" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207304" start="5561" end="5573" title="Estates General (France)" label="First Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="5579" end="5587" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q207304" start="5610" end="5623" title="Estates General (France)" label="Second Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="5990" end="5996" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="6091" end="6111" title="fall of the Bastille" label="fall of the Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="6305" end="6324" title="popular sovereignty" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="6574" end="6583" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="6617" end="6634" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="6638" end="6661" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="6677" end="6690" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="7299" end="7316" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="7333" end="7384" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="7495" end="7505" title="antichrist" label="antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160499" start="8028" end="8038" title="Talleyrand" label="Talleyrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q206979" start="8109" end="8141" title="Civil Constitution of the Clergy" label="Civil Constitution of the Clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206979" start="8323" end="8363" title="Civil Constitution of the Clergy" label="required oath of allegiance to the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q561218" start="8369" end="8382" title="abbé Grégoire" label="abbé Grégoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178991" start="8386" end="8399" title="Pierre Daunou" label="Pierre Daunou"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="8583" end="8596" title="ancien regime" label="ancien regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="8627" end="8638" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="8883" end="8892" title="Gilbert du Motier, marquis de Lafayette" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="8930" end="8939" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275961" start="9225" end="9239" title="Cult of Reason" label="Cult of Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="9254" end="9261" title="deism" label="deistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277069" start="9262" end="9287" title="cult of the Supreme Being" label="cult of the Supreme Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q192982" start="9448" end="9453" title="Cluny" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q181974" start="9639" end="9661" title="French Revolutionary Calendar" label="revolutionary calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116511" start="9727" end="9734" title="Sabbath in Christianity" label="sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q8628" start="9797" end="9817" title="revolt in the Vendée" label="revolt in the Vendée"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="9891" end="9909" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="10053" end="10072" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526084" start="10083" end="10097" title="ultra-royalist" label="ultra-royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258621" start="10123" end="10141" title="Anti-Sacrilege Act" label="Anti-Sacrilege Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="10172" end="10193" title="counter-revolutionary" label="counter-revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="10249" end="10264" title="July Revolution" label="July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="10395" end="10418" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877884" start="10536" end="10546" title="Legitimist" label="Legitimist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="10596" end="10608" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="10664" end="10676" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q999206" start="10877" end="10893" title="Jules Ferry laws" label="Jules Ferry laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518944" start="10925" end="10967" title="1905 law on separation of the Church and the state" label="1905 law on separation of Church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220111" start="11033" end="11040" title="laïcité" label="laïcité"/>
<link wikidata="Q88851" start="11097" end="11114" title="Comte de Chambord" label="Comte de Chambord"/>
<link wikidata="Q877884" start="11120" end="11130" title="Legitimist" label="Legitimist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="11174" end="11187" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="11351" end="11372" title="Third French Republic" label="Third French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q719704" start="11392" end="11422" title="Inter innumeras sollicitudines" label="Inter innumeras sollicitudines"/>
<link wikidata="Q719704" start="11429" end="11447" title="List of Encyclicals of Pope Leo XIII" label="encyclical of 1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="11501" end="11512" title="Pope Pius X" label="Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="11687" end="11704" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="11727" end="11740" title="James II of England" label="King James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="11767" end="11780" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="11823" end="11830" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="11832" end="11840" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="11845" end="11852" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="11915" end="11922" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738523" start="11995" end="12005" title="Penal Laws against Irish Catholics" label="Penal Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q132612" start="12069" end="12073" title="Mass (Catholic Church)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="12272" end="12278" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="12287" end="12294" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="12296" end="12303" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="12561" end="12573" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="12597" end="12605" title="colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="12613" end="12627" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="12640" end="12646" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12651" end="12656" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556206" start="12806" end="12842" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Maynooth" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Maynooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q173332" start="12896" end="12910" title="County Kildare" label="County Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="13003" end="13026" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="Irish Rebellion of 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="13114" end="13133" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093359" start="13265" end="13284" title="Italian nationalism" label="Italian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="13338" end="13350" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="13352" end="13371" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="13386" end="13395" title="Garibaldi" label="Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604547" start="13403" end="13418" title="capture of Rome" label="capture of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="13501" end="13508" title="Pius IX" label="Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236289" start="13530" end="13553" title="prisoner in the Vatican" label="prisoner in the Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351925" start="13559" end="13567" title="Roman Question" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="13580" end="13593" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13641" end="13665" title="Roman Question#Law of Papal Guarantees" label="regulation of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q283990" start="13686" end="13718" title="Non Expedit" label="voting and parliamentary boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="13760" end="13774" title="Lateran Treaty" label="Lateran Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="13783" end="13792" title="Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="13802" end="13809" title="Pius XI" label="Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="13826" end="13838" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="13905" end="13918" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907480" start="13946" end="13963" title="popular democracy" label="popular democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335987" start="14121" end="14134" title="Rerum novarum" label="Rerum novarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="14142" end="14147" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="14249" end="14270" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="14322" end="14332" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="14431" end="14440" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="14517" end="14525" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="14776" end="14784" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="14824" end="14838" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q291043" start="14866" end="14876" title="just price" label="just price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="15020" end="15027" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="15040" end="15054" title="class struggle" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="15156" end="15167" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="15203" end="15211" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="15213" end="15219" title="convention (norm)" label="custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115221" start="15226" end="15234" title="Folkways (sociology)" label="folkways"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="15292" end="15303" title="corporatism" label="corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="15390" end="15402" title="guild" label="guild system"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="15812" end="15824" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q596381" start="15863" end="15880" title="Quadragesimo anno" label="Quadragesimo anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="15989" end="16010" title="Laissez-faire" label="unbridled competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229663" start="16109" end="16121" title="Distributism" label="Distributism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573585" start="16150" end="16157" title="Economics of fascism" label="Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="16162" end="16182" title="Christian Democratic" label="Christian Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="16359" end="16372" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="16409" end="16419" title="encyclical" label="encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q659648" start="16427" end="16453" title="Au Milieu des Sollicitudes" label="Au Milieu des Sollicitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227289" start="16464" end="16484" title="Graves de communi re" label="Graves de communi re"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="16488" end="16501" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="16587" end="16611" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="16616" end="16635" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q324530" start="16831" end="16847" title="communitarianism" label="communitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45723" start="17163" end="17179" title="Jacques Maritain" label="Jacques Maritain"/>
<link wikidata="Q639673" start="17217" end="17235" title="Conservative Party (Chile)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248639" start="17252" end="17272" title="progressive christianity" label="progressive Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393880" start="17315" end="17331" title="National Falange" label="National Falange"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="17526" end="17540" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="17583" end="17593" title="encyclical" label="encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121008" start="17595" end="17606" title="Quas primas" label="Quas primas"/>
<link wikidata="Q596381" start="17619" end="17636" title="Quadragesimo Anno" label="Quadragesimo Anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="17646" end="17658" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="17798" end="17811" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="18220" end="18235" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q968895" start="18278" end="18293" title="Pacem in Terris" label="Pacem in Terris"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="18336" end="18358" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="18610" end="18616" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="18656" end="18677" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436252" start="18732" end="18754" title="6 January Dictatorship" label="6 January Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265120" start="19025" end="19042" title="Croat nationalism" label="Croat nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="19585" end="19613" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="19643" end="19650" title="Ustashi" label="Ustashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="20096" end="20111" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosnian Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="20212" end="20218" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20228" end="20241" title=":hr:Ivan Guberina" label="Ivan Guberina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123231" start="20730" end="20746" title="clerical fascism" label="clerical fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q722675" start="20802" end="20864" title="Involvement of Croatian Catholic clergy with the Ustaša regime" label="Involvement of Croatian Catholic clergy with the Ustaša regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733921" start="21035" end="21048" title="Ettore Felici" label="Ettore Felici"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="21200" end="21208" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882050" start="21376" end="21404" title="Yugoslav government-in-exile" label="Yugoslav government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261961" start="21490" end="21510" title="Archbishop of Zagreb" label="Archbishop of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q310505" start="21511" end="21528" title="Aloysius Stepinac" label="Aloysius Stepinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q511329" start="21682" end="21699" title="Andrija Artuković" label="Andrija Artuković"/>
<link wikidata="Q40741" start="22311" end="22333" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Belgrade" label="Archbishop of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q20525230" start="22334" end="22345" title="Josip Ujčić" label="Josip Ujčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="23327" end="23348" title="Political Catholicism" label="Political Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271876" start="23473" end="23486" title="Ivan Grubišić" label="Ivan Grubišić"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="23526" end="23545" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770342" start="23588" end="23645" title="Treaties between the Republic of Croatia and the Holy See" label="Treaties between the Republic of Croatia and the Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="23756" end="23779" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q958778" start="24577" end="24604" title="Francisco Vidal y Barraquer" label="Francisco Vidal y Barraquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="24819" end="24836" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195448" start="25057" end="25077" title="Maximiliano Arboleya" label="Maximiliano Arboleya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293006" start="25164" end="25193" title="José Manuel Gallegos Rocafull" label="José Manuel Gallegos Rocafull"/>
<link wikidata="Q251832" start="25424" end="25448" title="Ángel Ossorio y Gallardo" label="Ángel Ossorio y Gallardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q332850" start="25453" end="25466" title="José Bergamín" label="José Bergamín"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25499" end="25523" title=":es:Antonio Fernández García (historiador)" label="Antonio Fernández Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25663" end="25676" title=":es:Leocadio Lobo" label="Leocadio Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117097" start="25680" end="25689" title="San Ginés, Madrid" label="San Gínes"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="25850" end="25860" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q251832" start="26073" end="26097" title="Ángel Ossorio y Gallardo" label="Ángel Ossorio y Gallardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q623601" start="26139" end="26149" title="Lay apostolate" label="apostolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q246708" start="26188" end="26201" title="Popular Front (Spain)" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="26762" end="26774" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="27311" end="27328" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158930" start="29927" end="29943" title="Concordat Prison" label="Concordat Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="30459" end="30475" title="Action Française" label="Action Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="30576" end="30587" title="corporatist" label="corporatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="30785" end="30797" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="30857" end="30872" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="31008" end="31021" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173816" start="31081" end="31092" title="Jean Ousset" label="Jean Ousset"/>
<link wikidata="Q62108595" start="31121" end="31136" title="Cité catholique" label="Cité catholique"/>
<link wikidata="Q918356" start="31198" end="31217" title="Organisation armée secrète" label="OAS terrorist group"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="31278" end="31290" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q345408" start="31519" end="31533" title="Maurice Thorez" label="Maurice Thorez"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="31541" end="31563" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="32808" end="32825" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="33199" end="33215" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070762" start="33738" end="33764" title="Irish Free State Constitution Act 1922" label="Irish Constitution of 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216860" start="34453" end="34467" title="Daniel Corkery (author)" label="Daniel Corkery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="34560" end="34566" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647184" start="34567" end="34583" title="Timothy Corcoran (cultural historian)" label="Timothy Corcoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099820" start="34627" end="34640" title="Gaelicisation" label="Gaelicisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="34777" end="34791" title="Garda Síochána" label="Gardá Síochána"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="35013" end="35034" title="Political Catholicism" label="Political Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q945705" start="35239" end="35252" title="Thomas Derrig" label="Thomas Derrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865816" start="35258" end="35280" title="Minister for Education (Ireland)" label="Minister for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="35795" end="35806" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110314" start="36079" end="36100" title="Christian corporatism" label="Christian corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="36105" end="36129" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q327203" start="37406" end="37426" title="Seán T. O&amp;#x27;Kelly" label="Seán T. O&amp;#x27;Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="38099" end="38120" title="political Catholicism" label="political Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="38168" end="38187" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18910621" start="38231" end="38248" title="Patrick Morrisroe" label="Patrick Morrisroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="38580" end="38595" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="38626" end="38638" title="nuncio" label="Papal Nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707550" start="38643" end="38659" title="Joseph MacRory" label="Cardinal MacRory"/>
<link wikidata="Q962426" start="39287" end="39301" title="Peter McKeefry" label="Peter McKeefry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063123" start="39921" end="39937" title="anti-Catholicism" label="anti-Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860208" start="40763" end="40793" title="National University of Ireland" label="National University of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238990" start="41019" end="41035" title="John Henry Whyte" label="John Henry Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="41744" end="41763" title="liberation theology" label="liberation theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248639" start="41767" end="41790" title="Progressive Christianity" label="progressive Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q628738" start="41976" end="41986" title="Cahal Daly" label="Cahal Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="42593" end="42601" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="42642" end="42649" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734" start="42651" end="42669" title="Engelbert Dollfuss" label="Engelbert Dollfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="42737" end="42752" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q692131" start="42784" end="42806" title="Christian Social Party (Austria)" label="Christian Social Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q695513" start="42829" end="42837" title="Heimwehr" label="Heimwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="43338" end="43344" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="43355" end="43370" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q586557" start="43408" end="43415" title="Sanacja" label="Sanacja"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="43667" end="43699" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="43701" end="43718" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409928" start="44035" end="44059" title="History of the Soviet Union (1985–1991)" label="fall of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="44088" end="44097" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q416916" start="44177" end="44203" title="Solidarity Electoral Action" label="Akcja Wyborcza Solidarność"/>
<link wikidata="Q687574" start="44207" end="44227" title="League of Polish Families" label="Liga Polskich Rodzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q966293" start="44298" end="44315" title="Giuseppe Pizzardo" label="Giuseppe Pizzardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229044" start="44512" end="44526" title="Emilio Gentile" label="Emilio Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424401" start="44773" end="44791" title="political religion" label="political religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792221" start="44866" end="44880" title="Igino Giordani" label="Igino Giordani"/>
<link wikidata="Q273665" start="44916" end="44929" title="Caesaropapism" label="Caesaropapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q735770" start="44973" end="44985" title="Luigi Sturzo" label="Luigi Sturzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229044" start="45231" end="45245" title="Emilio Gentile" label="Emilio Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q705817" start="45247" end="45260" title="Roger Griffin" label="Roger Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45265" end="45276" title=":it:Renato Moro" label="Renato Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474019" start="45486" end="45504" title="University of Hull" label="University of Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q707580" start="45577" end="45594" title="Roberto Farinacci" label="Roberto Farinacci"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45709" end="45725" title=":it:Adrian Lyttelton" label="Adrian Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="45773" end="45789" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088649" start="46017" end="46034" title="Fascist Manifesto" label="Fascist Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="46325" end="46336" title="Holy Office" label="Holy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="46367" end="46383" title="Action Française" label="Action Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="46443" end="46448" title="Index Librorum Prohibitorum" label="Index"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46578" end="46593" title=":it:Mario Missiroli (giornalista)" label="Mario Missiroli"/>
<link wikidata="Q312295" start="46720" end="46736" title="Giovanni Gentile" label="Giovanni Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q547749" start="46822" end="46836" title="Alfredo Oriani" label="Alfredo Oriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066344" start="46912" end="46932" title="La Civiltà Cattolica" label="La Civiltà Cattolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q644545" start="47037" end="47045" title="Secretariat of State (Holy See)" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="47151" end="47163" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="47325" end="47335" title="encyclical" label="encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q773838" start="47336" end="47355" title="Non abbiamo bisogno" label="Non abbiamo bisogno"/>
<link wikidata="Q212143" start="47638" end="47661" title="The Doctrine of Fascism" label="The Doctrine of Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q312295" start="47673" end="47689" title="Giovanni Gentile" label="Giovanni Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q733546" start="47925" end="47951" title="Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster" label="Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="48062" end="48070" title="Hegelian" label="Hegelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528346" start="48071" end="48081" title="statolatry" label="statolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q504478" start="48112" end="48128" title="Domenico Tardini" label="Domenico Tardini"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="48371" end="48399" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Italian invasion of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="48738" end="48751" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="49078" end="49092" title="Lateran Treaty" label="Lateran Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318304" start="49284" end="49300" title="Azione Cattolica" label="Azione Cattolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="49454" end="49483" title="Anschluss" label="annexation of Austria in 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q541880" start="49500" end="49511" title="Italian racial laws" label="Racial Laws"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49735" end="49749" title=":it:Emma Fattorini" label="Emma Fattorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="50093" end="50116" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q391511" start="50817" end="50830" title="Biennio Rosso" label="Biennio Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="50909" end="50920" title="Blackshirts" label="Blackshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066344" start="51017" end="51037" title="La Civiltà Cattolica" label="La Civiltà Cattolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229663" start="51752" end="51764" title="distributism" label="distributism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809268" start="51779" end="51791" title="John Foot (historian)" label="John M. Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="53208" end="53211" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="PSI"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53279" end="53295" title=":it:Alfonso Leonetti" label="Alfonso Leonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q83003" start="53584" end="53599" title="Antonio Gramsci" label="Antonio Gramsci"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="54293" end="54315" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159879" start="54327" end="54338" title="Kulturkampf" label="Kulturkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="54359" end="54377" title="German unification" label="German unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="54449" end="54463" title="Weimar Germany" label="Weimar Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="54469" end="54481" title="Centre Party (Germany)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q126528" start="54573" end="54588" title="Reichskonkordat" label="Reichskonkordat"/>
<link wikidata="Q162663" start="54709" end="54729" title="Mit brennender Sorge" label="Mit brennender Sorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053281" start="54836" end="54868" title="Catholic bishops in Nazi Germany" label="Catholic bishops in Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848020" start="54916" end="54947" title="Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust" label="Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q20985457" start="54963" end="54978" title="Robert A. Krieg" label="Robert A. Krieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="55044" end="55062" title="Nazism" label="National Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694661" start="55115" end="55133" title="The Sewanee Review" label="The Sewanee Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="55444" end="55455" title="neopaganism" label="neopaganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108932" start="55520" end="55535" title="Waldemar Gurian" label="Waldemar Gurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q95867" start="55839" end="55856" title="Ludwig Maria Hugo" label="Ludwig Maria Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45160" start="55949" end="55970" title="Michael von Faulhaber" label="Michael von Faulhaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q61308" start="56376" end="56389" title="Adolf Bertram" label="Adolf Bertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="57028" end="57043" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57077" end="57091" title=":it:Emma Fattorini" label="Emma Fattorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="57169" end="57181" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q162663" start="57367" end="57387" title="Mit Brennender Sorge" label="Mit Brennender Sorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q126528" start="57624" end="57639" title="Reichskonkordat" label="Reichskonkordat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712981" start="57861" end="57875" title="Frank J. Coppa" label="Frank J. Coppa"/>
<link wikidata="Q327401" start="58170" end="58190" title="German resistance to Nazism" label="anti-Nazi resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="58209" end="58223" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="58389" end="58415" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="58624" end="58641" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="58819" end="58828" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q87680" start="58859" end="58872" title="Joannes Baptista Sproll" label="Bishop Sproll"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455048" start="58913" end="58942" title="Eucharistic congress" label="Catholic Eucharistic Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="59164" end="59176" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154346" start="59178" end="59188" title="Jozef Tiso" label="Jozef Tiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q854905" start="59207" end="59217" title="monsigneur" label="monsigneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="59235" end="59243" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="59247" end="59255" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696012" start="59347" end="59359" title="Hlinka Guard" label="Hlinka Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q367181" start="59886" end="59898" title="Vojtech Tuka" label="Vojtech Tuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q693985" start="60227" end="60253" title="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="60269" end="60290" title="First Slovak Republic" label="First Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467797" start="60324" end="60337" title="Andrej Hlinka" label="Andrej Hlinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="60897" end="60909" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q504478" start="60986" end="61002" title="Domenico Tardini" label="Domenico Tardini"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="61861" end="61875" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q918739" start="61953" end="61967" title="Luigi Maglione" label="Luigi Maglione"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62402" end="62418" title=":sk:Katolícke noviny (1940)" label="Katolícke Noviny"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989922" start="62644" end="62658" title="John S. Conway (historian)" label="John S. Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="63005" end="63022" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q16856001" start="63757" end="63774" title="Livia Rothkirchen" label="Livia Rothkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q163780" start="64279" end="64303" title="Slovak National Uprising" label="Slovak National Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q633629" start="64667" end="64690" title="Constitution of Belgium" label="Constitution of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64813" end="64827" title=":nl:Bruno De Wever" label="Bruno De Wever"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="65005" end="65017" title="ultramontanism" label="ultramontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q792293" start="65562" end="65576" title="Catholic Party (Belgium)" label="Catholic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q290209" start="66036" end="66052" title="Flemish movement" label="Flemish movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q314493" start="66582" end="66594" title="Rexist Party" label="Rexist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q158844" start="66634" end="66647" title="Léon Degrelle" label="Léon Degrelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135095" start="66892" end="66901" title="Verdinaso" label="Verdinaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337095" start="67031" end="67054" title="Flemish National League" label="Flemish National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014872" start="67234" end="67263" title="1936 Belgian general election" label="1936 Belgian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051481" start="67510" end="67539" title="1939 Belgian general election" label="1939 Belgian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="67670" end="67689" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="67706" end="67727" title="political Catholicism" label="political Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557876" start="68077" end="68125" title="German occupation of Belgium during World War II" label="German occupation of Belgium during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q591695" start="68317" end="68331" title="Staf De Clercq" label="Staf De Clercq"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="68867" end="68871" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="68888" end="68896" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="68913" end="68923" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="69019" end="69023" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="69049" end="69057" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="69105" end="69131" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="1928 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149409" start="69243" end="69257" title="Paul Blanshard" label="Paul Blanshard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="69397" end="69412" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="69439" end="69446" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="69458" end="69467" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="69699" end="69707" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q689846" start="69709" end="69725" title="assisted suicide" label="assisted suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="69730" end="69740" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="69981" end="69999" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="70001" end="70013" title="gay marriage" label="gay marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="70015" end="70022" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q859563" start="70024" end="70040" title="Secular state" label="state secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="70296" end="70309" title="Southern U.S." label="Southern U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="70393" end="70404" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856944" start="70407" end="70420" title="Robert Drinan" label="Robert Drinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="70476" end="70484" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="70490" end="70503" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="70515" end="70523" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800765" start="70593" end="70601" title="defrocking" label="laicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q356659" start="70787" end="70807" title="Julio Argentino Roca" label="Julio Argentino Roca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789408" start="70815" end="70823" title="Argentine Law 1420" label="Law 1420"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="70900" end="70905" title="Juan Perón" label="Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042919" start="70919" end="70941" title="Revolución Libertadora" label="Revolución Libertadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154647" start="71050" end="71071" title="politics of Argentina" label="politics of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q699862" start="71126" end="71134" title="ratlines (World War II)" label="ratlines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71161" end="71172" title="former Nazi" label="former Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q75984" start="71282" end="71291" title="Dirty War" label="Dirty War"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="71322" end="71334" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364224" start="71341" end="71367" title="Archbishop of Buenos Aires" label="Archbishop of Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q601068" start="71369" end="71385" title="Antonio Caggiano" label="Antonio Caggiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q62108595" start="71465" end="71480" title="Cité catholique" label="Cité catholique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173816" start="71510" end="71521" title="Jean Ousset" label="Jean Ousset"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="71552" end="71567" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="71587" end="71603" title="Action française" label="Action française"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="71624" end="71653" title="counter-revolutionary warfare" label="counter-revolutionary warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060330" start="71664" end="71674" title="Subversion (politics)" label="subversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="71904" end="71918" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="71968" end="71983" title="labour movement" label="labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="72017" end="72039" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="72132" end="72140" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="72146" end="72158" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163006" start="72362" end="72384" title="Conservatism in Australia" label="conservative opponents"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="72446" end="72461" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="72463" end="72474" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="72543" end="72555" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="72694" end="72715" title="Australian government" label="Australian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="72785" end="72795" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161669" start="72886" end="72899" title="Daniel Mannix" label="Daniel Mannix"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="73047" end="73075" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 US-led invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q527095" start="73126" end="73135" title="Pio Laghi" label="Pio Laghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="73163" end="73177" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="73252" end="73266" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="73398" end="73415" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="73437" end="73449" title="John Paul II" label="John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="73480" end="73490" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="73515" end="73532" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="73563" end="73575" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="73682" end="73694" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273665" start="73843" end="73856" title="Caesaropapism" label="Caesaropapism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73858" end="73893" title=":Category:Catholic political parties" label="Category:Catholic political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="73895" end="73915" title="Estates of the realm" label="Estates of the realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="73917" end="73928" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="73930" end="73936" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517265" start="73938" end="73974" title="History of the Roman Catholic Church" label="History of the Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370258" start="73982" end="73996" title="Missi dominici" label="Missi dominici"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="74004" end="74034" title="Separation of church and state" label="Separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="74036" end="74045" title="Theocracy" label="Theocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140" start="74047" end="74057" title="Weiblingen" label="Weiblingen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74059" end="74093" title="Integralism#Catholic integralism" label="Integralism § Catholic integralism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306254" wikidata="Q765706" url="?curid=306254" title="Spearfishing">
<text>Spearfishing is fishing using handheld elongated, sharp-pointed tools such as a spear, gig, or harpoon, to impale the fish in the body. It was one of the earliest fishing techniques used by mankind, and has been deployed in artisanal fishing throughout the world for millennia. Early civilizations were familiar with the custom of spearing fish from rivers and streams using sharpened sticks.

Modern spearfishing usually involves the use of underwater swimming gear and slingshot-like elastic spearguns or compressed gas powered pneumatic spearguns, which launch a tethered dart-like projectile to strike the target fish. Specialised techniques and equipment have been developed for various types of aquatic environments and target fish. Spearfishing uses no bait and is highly selective, with no by-catch, but inflicts lethal injury to the fish and thus precludes catch and release.

Spearfishing may be done using free-diving, snorkelling, or scuba diving techniques, but spearfishing while using scuba equipment is illegal in some countries. The use of mechanically powered spearguns is also outlawed in some countries and jurisdictions such as New Zealand.

==History==
Spearfishing with barbed poles (harpoons) was widespread in palaeolithic times. Cosquer Cave in Southern France contains cave art over 16,000 years old, including drawings of seals which appear to have been harpooned.

There are references to fishing with spears in ancient literature; though, in most cases, the descriptions do not go into detail. An early example from the Bible is in Job 41:7: &quot;Canst thou fill his [Leviathan] skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?&quot;.

The Greek historian Polybius (&quot;ca&quot; 203 BC–120 BC), in his Histories, describes hunting for swordfish by using a harpoon with a barbed and detachable head.

Greek author Oppian of Corycus wrote a major treatise on sea fishing, the &quot;Halieulica&quot; or &quot;Halieutika&quot;, composed between 177 and 180. This is the earliest such work to have survived intact. Oppian describes various means of fishing including the use of spears and tridents.

In a parody of fishing, a type of gladiator called retiarius carried a trident and a casting-net. He fought the murmillo, who carried a short sword and a helmet with the image of a fish on the front.

Copper harpoons were known to the seafaring Harappans well into antiquity. Early hunters in India include the Mincopie people, aboriginal inhabitants of India&#x27;s Andaman and Nicobar islands, who have used harpoons with long cords for fishing since early times.

===Traditional===

Spear fishing is an ancient method of fishing and may be conducted with an ordinary spear or a specialised variant such as an eel spear or the trident. A small trident-type spear with a long handle is used in the American South and Midwest for gigging bullfrogs with a bright light at night, or for gigging carp and other fish in the shallows.

===Modern===
Traditional spear fishing is restricted to shallow waters, but the development of the speargun, diving mask and swimfins allows fishing in deeper waters. Some freedivers are able to hold their breath for more than five minutes, a diver with underwater breathing equipment can dive for much longer periods.

In the 1920s, sport spearfishing using only watertight swimming goggles became popular on the Mediterranean coast of France and Italy. This led to development of the modern diving mask, fins and snorkel. The world&#x27;s first English- and French-language modern spearfishing books, Guy Gilpatric&#x27;s &quot;The Compleat Goggler&quot; and Raymond Pulvénis&#x27;s &quot;La Chasse aux Poissons&quot;, appeared in 1938 and 1940 respectively. Modern scuba diving had its genesis in the systematic use of rebreathers by Italian sport spearfishers during the 1930s. This practice came to the attention of the Italian Navy, which developed its frogman unit, which affected World War II.

By 1940 small groups of people in California, USA had been spearfishing for less than 10 years. Most used imported gear from Europe, while innovators Charlie Sturgill, Jack Prodanovich, and Wally Potts invented and built innovative equipment for California&#x27;s divers.

In the aftermath of World War II, as the supply of the necessary raw materials improved and peacetime encouraged the development of public leisure pursuits and international tourism, the pioneers of modern spearfishing began serial production of underwater hunting equipment. Featured at length in Gilpatric&#x27;s &quot;The Compleat Goggler&quot;, expatriate Russian Alec Kramarenko and American Charles Wilen founded their United Service Agency in the southern French city of Nice to manufacture a wide range of spearfishing gear, including diving masks with built-in snorkels enabling swimmers to breathe face down on the surface of the water for long periods while stalking their prey unencumbered by the constant oral presence of a mouthpiece.

During the 1960s, attempts to have spearfishing recognised as an Olympic sport were unsuccessful. Instead, two organisations, the International Underwater Spearfishing Association (IUSA) and the International Bluewater Spearfishing Records Committee (IBSRC), list world record catches by species according to rules to ensure fair competition. Spearfishing is illegal in many bodies of water, and some locations only allow spearfishing during certain seasons.

====Conservation====
Spearfishing has been implicated in local disappearances of some species, including the Atlantic goliath grouper on the Caribbean island of Bonaire, the Nassau grouper in the barrier reef off the coast of Belize and the giant black sea bass in California, which have all been listed as endangered.
Modern spearfishing has shifted focus onto catching only what one needs and targeting sustainable fisheries. As gear evolved in the 1960s and 1970s spearfishers typically viewed the ocean as an unlimited resource and often sold their catch. This practice is now heavily frowned upon in prominent spearfishing nations for promoting unsustainable methods and encouraging taking more fish than is needed. In countries such as Australia and South Africa where the activity is regulated by state fisheries, spearfishing has been found to be the most environmentally friendly form of fishing due to being highly selective, having no by-catch, causing no habitat damage, nor creating pollution or harm to protected endangered species. In 2007, the Australian Bluewater Freediving Classic became the first spearfishing tournament to be accredited and was awarded 4 out of 5 stars based on environmental, social, safety and economic indicators.

====Shore diving====
Shore diving is perhaps the most common form of spearfishing and simply involves entering and exiting the sea from beaches or headlands and hunting around ocean structures, usually reef, but also rocks, kelp or sand. Usually shore divers hunt at depths of , depending on location. In some locations, divers can experience drop-offs from close to the shore line. Sharks and reef fish can be abundant in these locations. In subtropical areas, sharks may be less common, but other challenges face the shore diver, such as managing entry and exit in the presence of big waves. Headlands are favoured for entry because of their proximity to deeper water, but timing is important so the diver does not get pushed onto rocks by waves. Beach entry can be safer, but more difficult due to the need to repeatedly dive through the waves until the surf line is crossed. Divers may enter from a relatively exposed headland, for convenience, then swim to a more protected part of the shore for their exit from the water.

Shore dives produce mainly reef fish, but oceangoing pelagic fish are also caught from shore dives in some places, and can be specifically targeted.

Shore diving can be done with trigger-less spears such as pole spears or Hawaiian slings, but more commonly triggered devices such as spearguns. Speargun setups to catch and store fish include speed rigs and fish stringers.

====Boat diving====
Boats, ships, kayaks, or even jetski can be used to access offshore reefs or ocean structure. Man-made structures such as oil rigs and Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs) are also fished. Sometimes a boat is necessary to access a location that is close to shore, but inaccessible by land.

Methods and gear used for boat diving are similar to shore diving or blue water hunting, depending on the target prey.

Boat diving is a worldwide activity. Hot spots include Mozambique, the Three Kings islands of New Zealand (yellowtail), Gulf of Mexico oil rigs (cobia, grouper) and the Great Barrier Reef (wahoo, dogtooth tuna). The deepwater fishing grounds off Cape Point, (Cape Town, South Africa) have become popular with trophy hunting, freediving spearfishers in search of Yellowfin Tuna.

====Blue water hunting====
Blue water hunting involves diving in open ocean waters for pelagic species. It involves accessing usually very deep and clear water and chumming for large pelagic fish species such as marlin, tuna, wahoo, or giant trevally. Blue water hunting is often conducted in drifts; the boat driver drops divers and allow them to drift in the current for up to several kilometres before collecting them. Blue water hunters can go for hours without seeing any fish, and without any ocean structure or a visible bottom the divers can experience sensory deprivation and have difficulty determining the size of a solitary fish. One technique to overcome this is to note the size of the fish&#x27;s eye in relation to its body. Large specimens have a proportionally smaller eye.

The creation of the Australian Bluewater Freediving Classic in 1995 in northern New South Wales was a way of creating interest and promotion of this format of underwater hunting, and contributed to the formation of the International Bluewater Spearfishing Records Committee. The IBSRC formed in 1996, was the first dedicated organization worldwide, created by recognized world leaders in blue-water hunting, to record the capture of pelagic species by blue-water hunters.

The Blue Water World Cup in La Ventana, BCS, Mexico has also brought a large amount of notoriety to the sport. Started in 2006 by Dennis Haussler. Elite spearfishers from all over the world compete in a 4 day format that involves very selective spearing of pelagic species, with Wahoo, AmberJack, Dorado, Roosterfish, Marlin and Tuna being the target species. The diving is dynamic and challenging with depths that vary from 15 ft to over 100 ft.

Notably, some blue water hunters use large multi-band wooden guns and make use of breakaway rigs to catch and subdue their prey. If the prey is large and still has fight left after being subdued, a second gun can provide a kill shot at a safe distance. This is acceptable to IBSRC and IUSA regulations as long as the spearo loads it himself in the water.

Blue water hunting is conducted worldwide, but notable hot spots include Baja Mexico (yellowfin tuna, wahoo), Southern California (bluefin tuna), Tanzania (dogtooth tuna, wahoo and yellowfin tuna), Mozambique (dogtooth tuna, wahoo and giant turrum), South Africa (Yellowfin tuna, Spanish Mackerel, wahoo, marlin and giant turrum), Australia (dogtooth tuna, wahoo and Spanish Mackerel) and the South Pacific (dogtooth tuna).

====Freshwater hunting====
Many US states allow spearfishing in lakes and rivers, but most of them restrict divers to shooting only rough fish such as carp, gar, bullheads, suckers, etc. Some US states do allow the taking of certain gamefish such as sunfish, crappies, striped bass, catfish and walleyes. Freshwater hunters typically have to deal with widely varying seasonal changes in water clarity due to flooding, algae blooms and lake turnover. Some especially hardy midwestern and north central scuba divers go spearfishing under the ice in the winter when water clarity is at its best.

In the summer the majority of freshwater spearfishers use snorkelling gear rather than scuba since many of the fish they pursue are in relatively shallow water. Carp shot by freshwater spearfishers typically end up being used as fertilizer, bait for trappers, or are occasionally donated to zoos.

====Without diving====

Spearfishing with a hand-held spear from land, shallow water or boat has been undertaken for thousands of years. The fisher must account for optical refraction at the water&#x27;s surface, which makes fish appear higher in their line of sight than they are. By experience, the fisher learns to aim lower. Calm and shallow waters are favored for spearing fish from above the surface, as water clarity is of utmost importance. Many people who grew up on farms in the midwest U.S. in the 1940s-&#x27;60s recall going spearing for carp with pitchforks when their fields flooded in the spring. Spearfishing in this manner has some similarities to bowfishing.

==Equipment==
This is a list of equipment commonly used in spearfishing. Not all of it is necessary and spearfishing is often undertaken with minimal gear.

=== Speargun ===
A speargun is an underwater fishing tool designed to launch a tethered short spear at a fish or other marine animal (e.g. a lobster). The most popular spearguns are elastically powered by natural latex rubber bands like a slingshot, while pneumatic powered spearguns are also used, but are less powerful.

=== Polespear ===
Polespears or hand spears consist of a long shaft with point at one end and an elastic loop at the other for propulsion. They also come in a wide variety, from aluminum or titanium metal, to fiberglass or carbon fiber. Often they are screwed together from smaller pieces or able to be folded down for ease of transport. In 1951 Charlie Sturgill beat the competition (who were all using spearguns) with his own pole spear design.

=== Hawaiian slings ===
Hawaiian slings consist of an elastic band attached to a tube, through which a spear is launched.

=== Wetsuit ===
Wetsuits designed specifically for spearfishing are often two-piece (jacket and high waisted pants or &#x27;long-john&#x27; style pants with shoulder straps) and are black or are fully or partially camouflage.

=== Weight belt or vest ===
Weight belt and vest are used to compensate for wetsuit buoyancy and help the diver descend to depth. Rubber belts which can be quickly released in an emergency have proven to be particularly popular for spearfishing worldwide. This is because the rubber stretches when fitted and retracts as the body and wetsuit compress underwater, keeping them in place more effectively than non-stretch webbing belts, which tend to slide around more underwater as they loosen with depth. Most spearfishing equipment manufacturers now offer rubber weight belts.

=== Fins ===
Longfins are the most common type of fins used by modern freedivers and spearfishermen. The length of the freediving longfin blade provides energy and oxygen consumption benefits during all phases of the dive. Longfin blades are constructed with a variety of materials, including plastic, fiberglass, and carbon fiber. Many hunters chose longfins with camouflage color patters. The foot pocket is closed and not adjustable. For many decades, women divers faced significant difficulty finding proper fitting foot pockets for freediving longfins, as the industry is vastly dominated by men. Only in recent years have more companies offered foot pockets that fit women and youth divers. The industry also offers more variety in fin blades that vary in thickness to offer different levels of kicking resistance for divers. Properly fitting foot pockets and appropriately matched fin blades are essential for freediving form. 

The types of fins used by SCUBA divers are generally shorter, bulky, and not favored for freediving. SCUBA diving fins usually feature an open heel design with buckles and straps. The fin blades often have bright colors and may be split down the middle. 

Bodysurfing fins have also been used successfully by many spearfishermen. 

=== Diving knife or cutters ===
A utility knife or side cutter (typically made of saltwater corrosion-resistant material such as stainless steel or titanium alloy) is carried as a safety precaution in case the diver becomes tangled in a spearline or floatline. It can also be used to deliver a &quot;coup de grâce&quot; and kill the fish quickly.

=== Kill spike ===
In lieu of a knife, a sharpened metal spike can be used to kill the fish quickly and humanely upon capture. &quot;Ikejime&quot; is a Japanese term for kill-spiking a fish, a method traditionally used by Japanese fishermen. Killing the fish quickly is believed to improve the flavor of the flesh by limiting the buildup of lactic acid in the fish&#x27;s muscles. It also reduces chance of attracting opportunistic sharks by stopping the fish thrashing.

=== Buoy and floatline ===
A buoy is usually tethered to the spearfisher&#x27;s speargun or directly to the spear. A buoy helps to subdue large fish. It can also assist in storing fish. But is more importantly used as a safety device to warn boat drivers there is diver in the area - usually by being large, brightly colored and flying a dive flag (the red flag with white diagonal stripe in the USA or the blue &amp; white &quot;alpha&quot; flag elsewhere in the world). A typical spearo dive float will be torpedo-shaped, orange or red in colour with a volume of between 7 and 36 litres and display a dive flag on a short mast. However, other designs, such as inflatable mini-dinghy, planche (box), Tommy Botha (big game) and body-boards are also used.

A floatline connects the buoy to the speargun or to the weight-belt. Often made from braided polyester, they are also frequently made from mono-filament encased in an airtight plastic tube, or made from stretchable bungee cord.

=== Gloves ===
Cut-resistant gloves protect the hands when retrieving fish from coral or rock crevices, when loading the bands on rubber powered spearguns and from the teeth and spines of struggling fish. They are also used for thermal protection in colder water.

=== Stringer ===
Fish stringers are used to store speared fish while diving. Usually a length of cable, cord, string or monofilament terminated by a loop (and sometimes a swivel) at one end and a large stainless steel pin/spike at the other. The pin is typically 15–30 cm long, 4-8mm diameter, with a sharp point at one end, and with the cable threaded through a hole, usually in the middle, so the spike functions as a toggle once threaded. The pin can optionally be used as an iki jime spike, to dispatch speared fish. It can alternatively be a large, shaped loop of stainless steel. The stringer may be attached to the dive float, especially in areas of high shark activity, although some divers will use a clip to attach their stringer to their weight belt, or the base of their speargun.

=== Snorkel and diving mask ===
Spearfishing snorkels and diving masks are similar to those used for scuba diving, although spearfishing masks usually have two eye lenses and a lower internal volume.

=== Diver down flag ===
The &quot;Diver Down&quot; flag (also called a &quot;dive flag&quot;) is a warning flag floating on the water to indicate to other boats, personal watercrafts and aircraft that there is a diver below. When in use, it signals to other boats to keep clear, watch for divers in the water, and approach at a slow speed.

==Management==

Spearfishing is intensively managed throughout the world.

The use of SCUBA equipment for spearfishing is now illegal in many parts of the world, although it remains legal and popular within many parts of the United States. Within the EU, the use of SCUBA for spearfishing is now illegal, in addition to a ban on spearfishing at night. European countries that are not within EU law do not have this regulation. The use of SCUBA is banned from CMAS Spearfishing Competition events. 

Australia allows only recreational spearfishing and generally only breath-hold free diving. State &amp; territory governments impose numerous restrictions, demarcating Marine Protected Areas, Closed Areas, Protected Species, size/bag limits and equipment. Most of the authorities have different set of rules, recommendations, and regulations to be followed when it comes to spearfishing; for example; Dive Newcastle recommends spearfishing being accompanied by a friend. The body principally concerned with spearfishing is the Australian Underwater Federation, Australia&#x27;s peak recreational diving body. The AUF&#x27;s vision for spearfishing is &quot;Safe, Sustainable, Selective, Spearfishing&quot;. The AUF provides membership, advocacy and organises competitions.

Regulations governing spearfishing in Tanzania have been the subject of controversy. Commercial spearfishing is illegal while spearfishing for sport is legal but requires that Tanzanian citizens hold a specific sport spearfishing license. Foreigners may spearfish for sport only if they are accompanied by a registered and authorized sport spearfishing charter operator.

Norway has a relatively large ratio of coastline to population, and has one of the most liberal spearfishing rules in the northern hemisphere. Spearfishing with scuba gear is widespread among recreational divers. Restrictions in Norway are limited to anadrome species, like Atlantic salmon, sea trout, and lobster.

In Mexico a regular fishing permit allows spearfishing, but not electro-mechanical spearguns. Spearfishing with scuba gear is illegal and the use of power heads as well. Penalties are severe and include fines, confiscation of gear and even imprisonment.

United States has different spearfishing regulations for each state. In Florida spearfishing is restricted to several hundred yards offshore in many areas and the usage of a powerhead is prohibited within state waters. Many types of fish are currently under heavy bag restrictions. In California only recreational spearfishing is allowed. California also imposes numerous restrictions, demarcating Marine protected areas, closed areas, protected species, size/bag limits and equipment.

Spearfishing in Puerto Rico has its own set of rules. Here you are allowed to freedive with a speargun in marine waters. Spearfishing with scuba gear or in freshwater is not allowed.

In the UK, while spearfishing is not explicitly regulated, it is instead subject to both local (typically bye-laws) and national-level legislation relating to permitted fish species and minimum size limits. For example, it is not permitted to spearfish in freshwater and the non-tidal reaches of rivers.

Under recent EU guidelines, recreational spearfishing is now explicitly permitted in the EU&#x27;s Atlantic waters.

==Competitive spearfishing==

Competitive spearfishing is defined by the world governing body CMAS as &quot;the hunting and capture of fish underwater without the aid of artificial breathing devices, using gear that depends entirely on the physical strength of the competitor.&quot; They publish a set of competition rules that are used by affiliated organisations.

Since 1994, spearfishing has been at the Micronesian Games, with modern spearfishing making its debut in 2006.

== Notable spearfishers ==
This is an alphabetic list of spearfishers who are confirmed by a reliable source or an existing Wikipedia article.
* Rob Allen - South Africa
* Olivier Bardoux - France
* James Borja - Guam
* Tommy Botha - South Africa
* Mike Cassidy - Guam
* Peter Crawford - England, 13 times UK champion
* Ray Flores - Guam
* Michael Genereux - Guam
* Wally Gibbons
* James Grant - New Zealand
* David J. Hochman - World Record Holder, Men&#x27;s Speargun, Striped Bass, 31.0 kg/68.4 lbs; Men&#x27;s Polespear, Striped Bass, 23.8 kg/52.4 lbs
* - Australian prime minister
* Cameron Kirkconnell - 12x world record holder
* Mohammed Jassim Al-Kuwari - Qatar
* Terry Maas - USA
* Clint Madracheluib - Palau
* Barry Paxman - Australia
* Raymond Pulvénis - France; equipment inventor and manufacturer; author of first French book entirely dedicated to spearfishing (&quot;La chasse aux poissons&quot;, 1940)
* Felix Sasamoto - Northern Mariana Islands
* Gérard Ségura - France
* Moy Shmull - Palau
* Dr Adam Smith - Australian national champion, scientist, author of Underwater fishing in Australia and New Zealand 
* Charlie Sturgill - USA; US National spearfishing champion 1951; innovator of modern spearfishing equipment
* 
* Valentine Thomas - former Lawyer and current spearfisher and sustainability advocate
* Daryl Wong - USA equipment maker

==See also==
* 

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* &quot;Spearfishing is it ecologically sustainable?&quot; A paper given at the World Recreational Fishing Conference, Darwin, Australia by Adam Smith and Seji Nakaya
* Best locations for Spearfishing in the UK</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q765706" start="0" end="12" title="Spearfishing" label="Spearfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="16" end="23" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="80" end="85" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412590" start="87" end="90" title="gigging" label="gig"/>
<link wikidata="Q207574" start="95" end="102" title="harpoon" label="harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162621" start="107" end="113" title="penetrating trauma" label="impale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455089" start="163" end="181" title="fishing techniques" label="fishing techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="190" end="197" title="mankind" label="mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801210" start="224" end="241" title="artisanal fishing" label="artisanal fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="284" end="296" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q852784" start="442" end="466" title="diving gear" label="underwater swimming gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q13672" start="471" end="480" title="slingshot" label="slingshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682006" start="494" end="502" title="speargun" label="speargun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539331" start="507" end="521" title="compressed gas" label="compressed gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602034" start="575" end="579" title="dart (missile)" label="dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="585" end="595" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q803978" start="760" end="764" title="fishing bait" label="bait"/>
<link wikidata="Q814689" start="798" end="806" title="by-catch" label="by-catch"/>
<link wikidata="Q588332" start="866" end="883" title="catch and release" label="catch and release"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="917" end="928" title="free-diving" label="free-diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471422" start="930" end="941" title="snorkelling" label="snorkelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="946" end="958" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1149" end="1160" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q207574" start="1207" end="1214" title="harpoon" label="harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q747992" start="1255" end="1267" title="Cosquer Cave" label="Cosquer Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1550" end="1555" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577" start="1562" end="1570" title="Book of Job" label="Job 41:7"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="1692" end="1700" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q250816" start="1740" end="1749" title="The Histories (Polybius)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q207574" start="1794" end="1801" title="harpoon" label="harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116508" start="1851" end="1868" title="Oppian" label="Oppian of Corycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="2167" end="2176" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123770" start="2184" end="2193" title="retiarius" label="retiarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="2204" end="2211" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676707" start="2218" end="2229" title="Net casting" label="casting-net"/>
<link wikidata="Q737612" start="2245" end="2253" title="murmillo" label="murmillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173603" start="2287" end="2293" title="helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="2334" end="2340" title="Copper" label="Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="2378" end="2385" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2444" end="2452" title="Mincopie" label="Mincopie"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2487" end="2492" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="2500" end="2519" title="Andaman and Nicobar" label="Andaman and Nicobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="2703" end="2708" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="2762" end="2769" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412590" start="2863" end="2870" title="Frog gigging" label="gigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q159404" start="2871" end="2879" title="American bullfrog" label="bullfrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="2926" end="2930" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682006" start="3063" end="3071" title="speargun" label="speargun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079255" start="3218" end="3248" title="Scuba set" label="underwater breathing equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3378" end="3391" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3401" end="3407" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3412" end="3417" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116441" start="3457" end="3468" title="diving mask" label="diving mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q752296" start="3470" end="3474" title="swimfin" label="fins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389713" start="3479" end="3486" title="Snorkel (swimming)" label="snorkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239682" start="3567" end="3587" title="Guy Gilpatric" label="Guy Gilpatric&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="3732" end="3744" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428339" start="3786" end="3796" title="rebreather" label="rebreather"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3801" end="3808" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q833040" start="3889" end="3901" title="Italian Navy" label="Italian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638425" start="3919" end="3935" title="Decima Flottiglia MAS" label="its frogman unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3952" end="3964" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="4718" end="4722" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5120" end="5169" title="International Underwater Spearfishing Association" label="International Underwater Spearfishing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039968" start="5185" end="5239" title="International Bluewater Spearfishing Records Committee" label="International Bluewater Spearfishing Records Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920243" start="5559" end="5583" title="Atlantic goliath grouper" label="Atlantic goliath grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="5591" end="5600" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="5611" end="5618" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q943193" start="5624" end="5638" title="Nassau grouper" label="Nassau grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="5676" end="5682" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070009" start="5697" end="5711" title="Giant sea bass" label="black sea bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5715" end="5725" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6192" end="6201" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="6206" end="6218" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="6853" end="6862" title="headlands" label="headlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="6908" end="6912" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="6930" end="6934" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="7089" end="7094" title="Shark" label="Shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809317" start="7788" end="7800" title="pelagic fish" label="pelagic fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684617" start="7958" end="7972" title="Hawaiian sling" label="Hawaiian sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029296" start="8265" end="8288" title="Fish Aggregating Device" label="Fish Aggregating Device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="8591" end="8601" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="8630" end="8641" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144888" start="8643" end="8653" title="yellowtail (fish)" label="yellowtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q833940" start="8681" end="8686" title="cobia" label="cobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559352" start="8688" end="8695" title="grouper" label="grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="8705" end="8723" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q614252" start="8725" end="8730" title="wahoo" label="wahoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307292" start="8732" end="8745" title="dogtooth tuna" label="dogtooth tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q640682" start="8845" end="8859" title="trophy hunting" label="trophy hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116174" start="9079" end="9087" title="chumming" label="chumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q123478185" start="9127" end="9133" title="marlin" label="marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="9135" end="9139" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q614252" start="9141" end="9146" title="wahoo" label="wahoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q501728" start="9157" end="9165" title="trevally" label="trevally"/>
<link wikidata="Q944333" start="9476" end="9495" title="sensory deprivation" label="sensory deprivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="9788" end="9803" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039968" start="9927" end="9981" title="International Bluewater Spearfishing Records Committee" label="International Bluewater Spearfishing Records Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="11058" end="11069" title="Baja California Peninsula" label="Baja Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q269781" start="11071" end="11085" title="yellowfin tuna" label="yellowfin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q614252" start="11087" end="11092" title="wahoo" label="wahoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="11095" end="11114" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975916" start="11116" end="11128" title="bluefin tuna" label="bluefin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="11131" end="11139" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307292" start="11141" end="11154" title="dogtooth tuna" label="dogtooth tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q614252" start="11156" end="11161" title="wahoo" label="wahoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q269781" start="11166" end="11180" title="yellowfin tuna" label="yellowfin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="11183" end="11193" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307292" start="11195" end="11208" title="dogtooth tuna" label="dogtooth tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q614252" start="11210" end="11215" title="wahoo" label="wahoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002788" start="11220" end="11232" title="Carangoides fulvoguttatus" label="giant turrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="11235" end="11247" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q269781" start="11249" end="11263" title="Yellowfin tuna" label="Yellowfin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q311047" start="11265" end="11281" title="Spanish Mackerel" label="Spanish Mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123478185" start="11290" end="11296" title="marlin" label="marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11316" end="11325" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="11378" end="11391" title="Pacific" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="11561" end="11565" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q506144" start="11567" end="11570" title="gar" label="gar"/>
<link wikidata="Q601085" start="11572" end="11581" title="Ameiurus" label="bullheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q251730" start="11660" end="11667" title="Lepomis" label="sunfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063438" start="11669" end="11677" title="crappies" label="crappies"/>
<link wikidata="Q842647" start="11679" end="11691" title="striped bass" label="striped bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="11693" end="11700" title="catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="11705" end="11713" title="walleyes" label="walleyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116233598" start="11797" end="11810" title="water clarity" label="water clarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q116233598" start="11973" end="11986" title="water clarity" label="water clarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="12475" end="12485" title="refraction" label="refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q116233598" start="12712" end="12725" title="water clarity" label="water clarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714542" start="12968" end="12978" title="bowfishing" label="bowfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682006" start="13157" end="13165" title="speargun" label="speargun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="13279" end="13286" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q244680" start="13351" end="13356" title="latex" label="latex"/>
<link wikidata="Q256817" start="13357" end="13368" title="rubber band" label="rubber band"/>
<link wikidata="Q13672" start="13377" end="13386" title="slingshot" label="slingshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209330" start="13479" end="13488" title="Polespear" label="Polespear"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="13639" end="13647" title="aluminum" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="13651" end="13659" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="13670" end="13680" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="13684" end="13696" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684617" start="13933" end="13947" title="Hawaiian sling" label="Hawaiian sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450283" start="14048" end="14055" title="Wetsuit" label="Wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144175" start="14287" end="14298" title="Weight belt" label="Weight belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14303" end="14307" title="weighted clothing#Vest" label="vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23769" start="16139" end="16152" title="utility knife" label="utility knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q245934" start="16156" end="16167" title="side cutter" label="side cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="16187" end="16196" title="saltwater" label="saltwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="16197" end="16216" title="corrosion-resistant" label="corrosion-resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="16234" end="16249" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300719" start="16253" end="16267" title="titanium alloy" label="titanium alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q524931" start="16405" end="16418" title="coup de grâce" label="coup de grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995805" start="16586" end="16593" title="Ikejime" label="Ikejime"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="16794" end="16805" title="lactic acid" label="lactic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="16885" end="16890" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q30026" start="16954" end="16958" title="buoy" label="buoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q629113" start="17263" end="17272" title="dive flag" label="dive flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q373795" start="17414" end="17424" title="dive float" label="dive float"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="17774" end="17783" title="polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413188" start="17896" end="17907" title="bungee cord" label="bungee cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778231" start="17925" end="17945" title="Cut-resistant gloves" label="Cut-resistant gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245689" start="18192" end="18205" title="Fish stringer" label="Fish stringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995805" start="18654" end="18662" title="iki jime" label="iki jime"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389713" start="19014" end="19021" title="snorkel (swimming)" label="snorkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q116441" start="19027" end="19038" title="diving mask" label="diving mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="19070" end="19082" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q629113" start="19198" end="19225" title="diver down flag" label="&amp;quot;Diver Down&amp;quot; flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q35872" start="19325" end="19329" title="boat" label="boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175316" start="19332" end="19351" title="personal watercraft" label="personal watercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="19357" end="19365" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="20010" end="20019" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824774" start="20537" end="20569" title="Australian Underwater Federation" label="Australian Underwater Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="20822" end="20830" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="21156" end="21162" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q852569" start="21407" end="21415" title="Fish migration" label="anadrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="21439" end="21445" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="21447" end="21456" title="trout" label="sea trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="21462" end="21469" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="21475" end="21481" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="21727" end="21740" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="21799" end="21806" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236712" start="21901" end="21910" title="Powerhead (firearm)" label="powerhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="22012" end="22022" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="22125" end="22147" title="Marine protected areas" label="Marine protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018492" start="22504" end="22512" title="Byelaws in the United Kingdom" label="bye-laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q845773" start="22914" end="22918" title="World Underwater Federation" label="CMAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336295" start="23199" end="23245" title="Spearfishing at the Micronesian Games" label="spearfishing has been at the Micronesian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350787" start="23471" end="23486" title="Olivier Bardoux" label="Olivier Bardoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q130284405" start="23498" end="23509" title="James Borja" label="James Borja"/>
<link wikidata="Q130301277" start="23548" end="23560" title="Mike Cassidy (spearfisher)" label="Mike Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q87602263" start="23619" end="23629" title="Ray Flores" label="Ray Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q130265420" start="23639" end="23655" title="Michael Genereux" label="Michael Genereux"/>
<link wikidata="Q130270893" start="23990" end="24008" title="Clint Madracheluib" label="Clint Madracheluib"/>
<link wikidata="Q130276189" start="24218" end="24232" title="Felix Sasamoto" label="Felix Sasamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310922" start="24262" end="24275" title="Gérard Ségura" label="Gérard Ségura"/>
<link wikidata="Q130270895" start="24287" end="24297" title="Moy Shmull" label="Moy Shmull"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306260" wikidata="Q6796667" url="?curid=306260" title="Maya Bazar, Ayodhya">
<text>Maya is a town of Ayodhya district of the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, India. Maya is 24 km away from district headquarters Ayodhya city.

Maya Bazar is also a block in Ayodhya district in Uttar Pradesh.

In Dalpatpur Uparhar village, Famous Hathiram Baba Mutt situated for pilgrims who play Dice game with Tirupati Bala Ji.

==Demographics==
As of the 2011 Census of India, Maya had a population of 19,690. Males constitute 51% of the population and females 49%. Maya has an average literacy rate of 62%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 71%, and female literacy is 52%. In Maya, 17% of the population is under 6 years of age.

==Transport ==
===Road===
Maya Bazar is well connected with nearby cities Ayodhya and Sultanpur. And also with Goshainganj, Chaure Bazar and Bikapur towns of Ayodhya district.

===Railway===
Goshainganj, Ayodhya Junction, Ayodhya Cantt, Bharatkund and Chaure Bazar are the nearby railway stations from Maya Bazar (Ayodhya).

===Air===
Ayodhya International Airport is the nearest airport to Maya Bazar.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6796667" start="0" end="4" title="Maya Bazar, Ayodhya" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814132" start="18" end="34" title="Ayodhya district" label="Ayodhya district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="58" end="71" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q186040" start="126" end="133" title="Ayodhya" label="Ayodhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012040" start="244" end="257" title="Hathiram Bhavaji" label="Hathiram Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9375937" start="309" end="325" title="Venkateswara Temple, Tirumala" label="Tirupati Bala Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861882" start="355" end="375" title="2011 Census of India" label="2011 Census of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q186040" start="732" end="739" title="Ayodhya" label="Ayodhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707229" start="769" end="780" title="Goshainganj" label="Goshainganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q795718" start="799" end="806" title="Bikapur" label="Bikapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431355" start="993" end="1022" title="Ayodhya International Airport" label="Ayodhya International Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306270" wikidata="Q423520" url="?curid=306270" title="Perphenazine">
<text>Perphenazine is a typical antipsychotic drug. Chemically, it is classified as a piperazinyl phenothiazine. Originally marketed in the United States as Trilafon, it has been in clinical use for decades.

Perphenazine is roughly ten times as potent as chlorpromazine at the dopamine-2 (D2) receptor; thus perphenazine is considered a medium-potency antipsychotic.

==Medical uses==
In low doses it is used to treat agitated depression (together with an antidepressant). Fixed combinations of perphenazine and the tricyclic antidepressant amitriptyline in different proportions of weight exist (see Etrafon below). When treating depression, perphenazine is discontinued as fast as the clinical situation allows. Perphenazine has no intrinsic antidepressive activity. Several studies show that the use of perphenazine with fluoxetine (Prozac) in patients with psychotic depression is most promising, although fluoxetine interferes with the metabolism of perphenazine, causing higher plasma levels of perphenazine and a longer half-life. In this combination the strong antiemetic action of perphenazine attenuates fluoxetine-induced nausea and vomiting (emesis), as well as the initial agitation caused by fluoxetine. Both actions can be helpful for many patients.

Perphenazine has been used in low doses as a &#x27;normal&#x27; or &#x27;minor&#x27; tranquilizer in patients with a known history of addiction to drugs or alcohol, a practice which is now strongly discouraged.

Perphenazine has sedating and anxiolytic properties, making the drug useful for the treatment of agitated psychotic patients.

A valuable off-label indication is the short-time treatment of hyperemesis gravidarum, in which pregnant women experience violent nausea and vomiting. This problem can become severe enough to endanger the pregnancy. As perphenazine has not been shown to be teratogenic and works very well, it is sometimes given orally in the smallest possible dose.

===Effectiveness===
Perphenazine is used to treat psychosis (e.g. in people with schizophrenia and the manic phases of bipolar disorder and OCD). Perphenazine effectively treats the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, such as hallucinations and delusions, but its effectiveness in treating the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, such as flattened affect and poverty of speech, is unclear. Earlier studies found the typical antipsychotics to be ineffective or poorly effective in the treatment of negative symptoms, but two recent, large-scale studies found no difference between perphenazine and the atypical antipsychotics. A 2015 systematic review compared perphenazine with other antipsychotic drugs:
==Side effects==
As a member of the phenothiazine type of antipsychotics, perphenazine shares in general all allergic and toxic side-effects of chlorpromazine. A 2015 systematic review of the data on perphenazine conducted by the Cochrane Collaboration concluded that &quot;there were no convincing differences between perphenazine and other antipsychotics&quot; in the incidence of adverse effects. Perphenazine causes early and late extrapyramidal side effects more often than placebo, and at a similar rate to other medium-potency antipsychotics and the atypical antipsychotic risperidone.

When used for its strong antiemetic or antivertignosic effects in cases with associated brain injuries, it may obscure the clinical course and interferes with the diagnosis. High doses of perphenazine can cause temporary dyskinesia. As with other typical antipsychotics, permanent or lasting tardive dyskinesia is a risk.

===Discontinuation===
The British National Formulary recommends a gradual withdrawal when discontinuing antipsychotics to avoid acute withdrawal syndrome or rapid relapse. Symptoms of withdrawal commonly include nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite. Other symptoms may include restlessness, increased sweating, and trouble sleeping. Less commonly there may be a feeling of the world spinning, numbness, or muscle pains. Symptoms generally resolve after a short period of time.

There is tentative evidence that discontinuation of antipsychotics can result in psychosis. It may also result in reoccurrence of the condition that is being treated. Rarely tardive dyskinesia can occur when the medication is stopped.

==Pharmacology==

===Pharmacodynamics===
Perphenazine has the following binding profile towards cloned human receptors unless otherwise specified:
Acronyms:
RS — Rat striatum receptor.
RB — Rat brain receptor.

Mechanisms

Perphenazine is a typical antipsychotic medication of midrange or moderate potency (the 15-fold of a chlorpromazinedosage, also a typical antipsychotic medication). Compared with the highpotent typical antipsychotic drug haloperidol (50-fold), it despite is considered by some to have similar extralyramidalmotoric side-effects. This is propably because it has similar affinityvalues at the D2/3 receptors (0.7, 0.3).

===Pharmacokinetics===
Perphenazine has an oral bioavailability of approximately 40% and a half-life of 8 to 12 hours (up to 20 hours), and is usually given in 2 or 3 divided doses each day. It is possible to give two-thirds of the daily dose at bedtime and one-third during breakfast to maximize hypnotic activity during the night and to minimize daytime sedation and hypotension without loss of therapeutic activity.

==Formulations==
It is sold under the brand names Trilafon (single drug) and Etrafon/Triavil/Triptafen (contains fixed dosages of amitriptyline). A brand name in Europe is Decentan pointing to the fact that perphenazine is approximately 10-times more potent than chlorpromazine. Usual oral forms are tablets (2, 4, 8, 16 mg) and liquid concentrate (4 mg/ml).

The &#x27;Perphenazine injectable USP&#x27; solution is intended for deep intramuscular (i.m.) injection, for patients who are not willing to take oral medication or if the patient is unable to swallow. Due to a better bioavailability of the injection, two-thirds of the original oral dose is sufficient. The incidence of hypotension, sedation and extrapyramidal side-effects may be higher compared to oral treatment. The i.m.-injections are appropriate for a few days, but oral treatment should start as soon as possible.

In many countries, depot forms of perphenazine exist (as perphenazine enanthate and perphenazine decanoate). One injection works for 1 to 4 weeks depending on the dose of the depot-injection. Depot-forms of perphenazine should not be used during the initial phase of treatment as the rare neuroleptic malignant syndrome may become more severe and uncontrollable with this form. Extrapyramidal side-effects may be somewhat reduced due to constant plasma-levels during depot-therapy. Also, patient compliance is sure, as many patients do not take their oral medication, particularly if feeling better once improvement in psychosis is achieved.

==Interactions==
Fluoxetine causes higher plasma levels and a longer elimination half-life of perphenazine, therefore a dose reduction of perphenazine might be necessary.

Perphenazine intensifies the central depressive action of drugs with such activity (tranquilizers, hypnotics, narcotics, antihistaminics, OTC-antiemetics etc.). A dose reduction of perphenazine or the other drug may be necessary.

In general, all neuroleptics may lead to seizures in combination with the opioid tramadol (Ultram).

Perphenazine may increase the insulin needs of diabetic patients. Monitor blood glucose levels of insulin-dependent patients regularly during long-term treatment.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423520" start="0" end="12" title="Perphenazine" label="Perphenazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554162" start="18" end="39" title="typical antipsychotic" label="typical antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8386" start="40" end="44" title="drug" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q410846" start="92" end="105" title="phenothiazine" label="phenothiazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="134" end="147" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q423520" start="151" end="159" title="Perphenazine" label="Trilafon"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="250" end="264" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15335165" start="272" end="296" title="Dopamine receptor D2" label="dopamine-2 (D2) receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="413" end="432" title="clinical depression" label="agitated depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="451" end="465" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q908843" start="511" end="535" title="tricyclic antidepressant" label="tricyclic antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q58397" start="536" end="549" title="amitriptyline" label="amitriptyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="819" end="829" title="fluoxetine" label="fluoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="1064" end="1074" title="antiemetic" label="antiemetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="1128" end="1134" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="1139" end="1147" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="1417" end="1424" title="Alcoholism" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="1503" end="1513" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q391556" start="1663" end="1685" title="hyperemesis gravidarum" label="hyperemesis gravidarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="1857" end="1868" title="teratogenic" label="teratogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="2032" end="2045" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="2054" end="2059" title="mania" label="manic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="2070" end="2086" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973381" start="2289" end="2305" title="flattened affect" label="flattened affect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484024" start="2310" end="2327" title="poverty of speech" label="poverty of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="2584" end="2601" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="2800" end="2814" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="2886" end="2908" title="Cochrane Collaboration" label="Cochrane Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385411" start="3091" end="3117" title="extrapyramidal side effect" label="extrapyramidal side effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="3135" end="3142" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q412443" start="3236" end="3247" title="risperidone" label="risperidone"/>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="3275" end="3285" title="antiemetic" label="antiemetic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3289" end="3304" title="antivertignosic" label="antivertignosic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546328" start="3542" end="3560" title="tardive dyskinesia" label="tardive dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756347" start="3599" end="3625" title="British National Formulary" label="British National Formulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="3663" end="3691" title="discontinuing antipsychotics" label="discontinuing antipsychotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="4979" end="4994" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailability"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="5287" end="5295" title="sedation" label="sedation"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="5300" end="5311" title="hypotension" label="hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="5785" end="5798" title="intramuscular" label="intramuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q27295080" start="6292" end="6314" title="perphenazine enanthate" label="perphenazine enanthate"/>
<link wikidata="Q423520" start="6319" end="6341" title="perphenazine decanoate" label="perphenazine decanoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="6524" end="6554" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="6947" end="6968" title="biological half-life" label="elimination half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="7171" end="7186" title="histamine antagonist" label="antihistaminics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154971" start="7188" end="7191" title="over-the-counter drug" label="OTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="7192" end="7202" title="antiemetic" label="antiemetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="7297" end="7308" title="neuroleptic" label="neuroleptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407592" start="7362" end="7370" title="tramadol" label="tramadol"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="7412" end="7419" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="7429" end="7437" title="diabetic" label="diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="7456" end="7475" title="blood glucose level" label="blood glucose level"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306273" wikidata="Q731814" url="?curid=306273" title="Catholic League (German)">
<text>The Catholic League (, ) was a coalition of Catholic states of the Holy Roman Empire formed 10 July 1609. While initially formed as a confederation to act politically to negotiate issues vis-à-vis the Protestant Union (formed 1608), modelled on the more intransigent ultra-Catholic French Catholic League (1576), it was subsequently concluded as a military alliance &quot;for the defence of the Catholic religion and peace within the Empire&quot;.

Notwithstanding the league&#x27;s founding, as had the founding of the Protestant Union, it further exacerbated long standing tensions between the Protestant reformers and the adherents of the Catholic Church which thereafter began to get worse with ever more frequent episodes of civil disobedience, repression, and retaliation that would eventually ignite into the first phase of the Thirty Years&#x27; War roughly a decade later with the act of rebellion and calculated insult known as the Third Defenestration of Prague on 23 May 1618.
== Background ==
=== Peace of Augsburg ===

In 1555, the Peace of Augsburg was signed, which confirmed the result of the Diet of Speyer (1526) and ended the violence between the Catholics and the Lutherans in the Holy Roman Empire.

It stated that:
* Princes of the Holy Roman Empire (numbering 225) could choose the religion (Catholicism or Lutheranism) for their realms according to their conscience (the principle of &quot;cuius regio, eius religio&quot;).
* Lutherans living in an &quot;ecclesiastical state&quot; (under the control of a Catholic prince-bishop) could remain Lutherans.
* Lutherans could keep the territory that they had captured from the Catholic Church since the Peace of Passau (1552).
* The ecclesiastical leaders of the Catholic Church (bishops) that converted to Lutheranism had to give up their territory (the principle called &quot;reservatum ecclesiasticum&quot;).
Those occupying a state that had officially chosen either Catholicism or Lutheranism could not practice the religion differing to that of the state.

Although the Peace created a temporary end to hostilities, the underlying basis of the religious conflict remained unsolved. Both parties interpreted it at their convenience, the Lutherans in particular considering it only a momentary agreement. Further, Calvinism spread quickly throughout the Holy Roman Empire, adding a third major Christian worldview to the region, but its position was not supported in any way by the Augsburg terms, since Catholicism and Lutheranism were the only permitted creeds.

=== Motivations for a Catholic alliance ===
==== Donauwörth processions ====
The best documented reason of the foundation of the Catholic League was an incident called the () in Donauwörth, a Free Imperial City within the territory of Bavaria. On 25 April 1606, the Lutheran majority of the town barred the Catholic residents of the town from holding an annual procession on St. Mark&#x27;s Day, to show the rule of their confession over the town. The Catholics, led by five monks, wanted to pass through the town and on to the nearby village of Ausesheim, showing their flags and singing hymns. They were permitted to do so by the terms of the Peace of Augsburg. The city council would only allow them to re-enter town without flags and singing. The conflict ended in a brawl.

On protest of the bishop of Augsburg, Catholic Emperor Rudolf II of Habsburg threatened an Imperial ban in case of further violation of the rights of the Catholic citizens. Nevertheless, next year similar anti-Catholic incidents of civil disobedience took place, and the participants of the Markus procession were thrown out of town.

Emperor Rudolf then declared an Imperial ban on the town and ordered Maximilian I, Duke of Bavaria to execute the ban. Facing his army, the town surrendered. According to Imperial law, the disciplinary measures should not have been executed by the Catholic duke of Bavaria, but by the Protestant duke of Württemberg, who, like Donauwörth, was a member of the Swabian Imperial Circle. Maximilian &quot;de facto&quot; absorbed the former Free Imperial City, which was a violation of Imperial law as well.

==== Protestant Union formed ====
In the same year, 1607, the Catholic majority of the Reichstag meeting in the Diet of Augsburg resolved that the renewal of the Peace of Augsburg of 1555 should be conditional on the restoration of all church land appropriated since 1552. Acting on these events, the Protestant princes formed a military alliance on 14 May 1608, the Protestant Union, whose leader was Frederick IV of Wittelsbach, the Elector Palatine.

== The foundation of the Catholic League ==
To create a union of Catholic states as a counterpart to this Protestant Union, early in 1608 Maximilian started negotiations with other Catholic princes. On 5 July 1608, the spiritual electors manifested a tendency in favour of the confederacy suggested by Maximilian. Opinions were even expressed as to the size of the confederate military forces to be raised.

=== Munich Diet ===

In July 1609, the representatives of the Prince-Bishops of Augsburg, Constance, Passau, Regensburg, and Würzburg assembled at Munich. The Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg, having shown disapproval, was not invited, and the Prince-Bishop of Eichstädt hesitated. On 10 July 1609, the participating states concluded an alliance &quot;for the defence of the Catholic religion and peace within the Empire.&quot; The most important regulation of the League was the prohibition of attacks on one another. Instead of fighting, conflicts had to be decided by the laws of the Empire or, if these failed to solve the conflict, by arbitration within the League. Should one member be attacked, it had to be helped with military or alternatively legal support. Duke Maximilian was to be the president, and the Prince-Bishops of Augsburg, Passau, and Würzburg his councillors. The League was to continue for nine years.

The Munich Diet failed to erect a substantial structure for the newly formed League. On 18 June 1609, the Electors of Mainz, Cologne, and Trier had proposed an army of 20,000 men. They had also considered making Maximilian president of the alliance, and on August 30 they announced their adhesion to the Munich agreement, provided that Maximilian accepted the Elector of Mainz, arch-chancellor of the Empire, as co-president.

=== Meeting at Würzburg ===
To create a structure, several general meetings of the members were arranged. On 10 February 1610, the representatives of all the important Catholic states, except for Austria and Salzburg — and a great number of the smaller ones — met at Würzburg to decide the organization, funding and arming of the League. This was the real beginning of the Catholic League. The Pope, the Emperor and the King of Spain, who had been informed by Maximilian, were all favorably disposed towards the undertaking.

The main problem of the League was the unreadiness of its members. In April 1610, the contributions of all its members were not yet paid; Maximilian threatened to resign. To prevent him from doing so, Spain, which had made the giving of a subsidy dependent on Austria&#x27;s enrollment in the League, waived this condition, and the pope promised a further contribution.

== Pre-war years ==

=== War of the Jülich Succession ===
The conduct of the Union in the Jülich dispute and the warlike operations of the Union army in Alsace seemed to make a battle between League and Union inevitable.

=== House Habsburg joins ===

In the year 1613 at Regensburg (Ratisbon), the Austrian Habsburgs joined the League. The assembly now appointed no less than three war-directors: Duke Maximilian, and Archdukes Albert and Maximilian of Austria. The object of the League was now declared &quot;a Christian legal defense&quot;.

The membership of the Habsburg monarchy made the League part of the struggles between the emperor and his Protestant vassals in Bohemia and Lower Austria, that would lead to the beginning of the Thirty Years&#x27; War.
The first half of the war would see the emperor using the Catholic League forces as the most important part of his Imperial army.

=== Bavaria leaves in protest ===
Duke Maximilian refused to accept the resolutions of Ratisbon and even resigned the post as president, when Archduke Maximilian III of Austria, the Prince Elector of Mainz and the Prince Elector of Trier, protested the inclusion of the Bishop of Augsburg, and the Provost of Ellwangen in the Bavarian Directory. On 27 May 1617, with the Prince-Bishops of Bamberg, Eichstädt, Würzburg, and the Prince-Provost of Ellwangen, Bavaria formed a separate league for nine years.

=== Bohemian revolt ===
Already having been crowned King of Bohemia in 1617, Ferdinand II and his Catholic governors were deposed by rebelling Protestant Czech nobles in the second defenestration of Prague in 1618. The Bohemian estates went on to elect Frederick V, Elector Palatine as their king, on 26 and 27 August 1619. After his election as German Emperor on August 28, Ferdinand conferred with the spiritual electors at Frankfurt, asking for the support of the League.

=== Catholic League reestablished ===
At the end of 1618, the position of the Emperor in Bohemia as in Lower and Upper Austria gradually became critical. Searching for help, the Emperor tried to restore the League. A meeting of several of the ecclesiastical Princes decided to reconstruct the League on its original basis. It would consist of two groups: the Rhenish district under the presidency of Mainz, and the Oberland district, presided by Bavaria; the treasury and the military command were to be considered separate. Maximilian could only lead the whole of the troops when he had to appear in the Rhenish district. On 31 May, the Oberland both groups were established and bound themselves to render mutual help for six years.

==== Treaty of Munich ====
The Treaty of Munich was signed on 8 October 1619 between Emperor Ferdinand II and Duke Maximilian of Bavaria. Spanish ambassador Oñate persuaded Ferdinand to grant Maximilian any part of the Electoral Palatinate to occupy, as well as the electoral seat of Frederick V. Moreover, Oñate exceeded his duties by guaranteeing Ferdinand Spanish support in dealing with the Bohemian rebels. Based on the terms of the treaty, Maximilian, leader of the Catholic League, made his Bavarian forces available to Emperor Ferdinand.
Now the formation of a confederate army began. With 7,000 men, Bavaria supplied the largest contribution to the army, whose strength was fixed at Würzburg in December 1619, as 21,000 infantry and 4000 cavalry. Commander in chief was Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly, a descendant of a Catholic Brabantine family.

=== Decline and end of the Protestant Union ===
Facing the superiority of the League army of 30,000 men confronting the Protestant Union&#x27;s army of 10,000, on 3 July 1620, the Union agreed to cease all hostilities between both parties during the war in Austria and Bohemia in the Treaty of Ulm and dissolved the following year.

== The League in War ==
=== Bohemian campaign ===
Without the risk of an attack the League could use all its military forces to support the emperor. The same month, the army was relocated to Upper Austria. Tilly won the Battle of White Mountain north of Prague on 8 November 1620, in which half of the enemy forces were killed or captured, losing only 700 men. The Emperor regained control over Bohemia and the first stage of the League&#x27;s activity during the Thirty Years&#x27; War ended.

=== Palatinate campaigns ===

==== 1622 campaign ====
In the spring of 1622 General Tilly moved the League&#x27;s army to invade the Electoral Palatinate. They were defeated by General Mansfeld&#x27;s troops at the Battle of Mingolsheim on 27 April 1622. Retreating eastwards they were joined by a Spanish army under General Córdoba. When another Protestant army under Georg Friedrich, Margrave of Baden attacked on May 6, Tilly&#x27;s League force convincingly won the Battle of Wimpfen, scattering the enemy. The Battle of Höchst on June 20 proved to be the decisive victory for 1622.

After that battle the Protestant forces still fighting for Frederick V of the Palatinate withdrew over the Rhine and allowed the Catholic League army freedom of action. Consequently, Tilly captured the city of Heidelberg, Frederick&#x27;s main city, following an eleven-week siege on September 19. Mannheim followed on November 2, after a ten day siege.

This could have meant the end of the war. With the exception of the still besieged fortress of Frankenthal, the Electoral Palatinate was occupied by League forces while Count Frederick was in Dutch exile.

==== Stadtlohn campaign ====
Alas, in 1623, Frederick had Christian of Brunswick, raise another army to continue the fight.
However, Christian found little success and no allies on his short campaign. When Tilly approached with the League army, the Protestants made for the Dutch border. Tilly cut them off five miles short of it in the Battle of Stadtlohn on August 6, destroying another Protestant army.

This victory marked the end of the &quot;Bohemian-Palatinate phase&quot; of the war. Armed opposition against the Emperor and his anti-Protestant policies had ceased.

=== Danish War ===
This caused Denmark&#x27;s king Christian IV to enter the Thirty Years&#x27; War in 1625 to protect Protestantism and also in a bid to make himself the primary leader of Northern Europe.

The league&#x27;s army fought and defeated the Danish on 26–27 August 1626 at the Battle of Lutter, destroying more than half the fleeing Danish army.
Because this and other victories by Wallenstein, Denmark was forced to sue for peace at the Treaty of Lübeck.

=== Edict of Restitution ===

Supported by the Catholic princes and their victorious League army, the emperor now moved to denounce Protestantism as illegal in many territories of Northern Germany.

In March 1629, emperor Ferdinand II passed the Edict of Restitution. It was specifically aimed at restoring the situation of the 1555 Peace of Augsburg in ecclesiastical territories that had strayed from &quot;legal&quot; Catholic faith and rule, in the decades since then.

Bremen and Magdeburg were the biggest examples of territories to be restituted. Afraid that the Catholic League&#x27;s army would be sent to enforce this new law, if challenged, their protestant authorities again looked abroad for allies to protect them.

=== Swedish War ===

==== Sack of Magdeburg ====

While the Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus landed his army in Pomerania and tried to make alliances with the leaders of Northern Germany, the League&#x27;s army laid siege to the city of Magdeburg for two months from 20 March 1631, as the city had promised to support Sweden. On May 20, 40,000 successfully attacked Magdeburg. A massacre of the populace ensued in which 25,000 of the 30,000 inhabitants of the city perished while fires destroyed much of the city.

==== The Catholic League in defeat ====
In 1630, Ferdinand II dismissed his Generalissimus Wallenstein. Now, the Catholic League was in control of all the Catholic armed forces.

At the First Battle of Breitenfeld, the Catholic League led by General Tilly was defeated by the Swedish forces. A year later (1632), they met again in the Battle of Rain, and this time General Tilly was killed. The upper hand had now switched from the league to Sweden and her allies, who were able to attack and capture or destroy the territories of the Catholic League. Even Munich, the capital of the most powerful member state, Electoral Bavaria, was conquered.

== Decline of importance and dissolution ==
Thereafter, the German Catholic League did not play a major role in later events.

The Peace of Prague of 30 May 1635, was a treaty between the Holy Roman Emperor, Ferdinand II, and most of the Protestant states of the Empire. It effectively ended the civil war aspect of the Thirty Years&#x27; War. The Edict of Restitution of 1629, was effectively revoked, with the terms of the Peace of Augsburg of 1555 being reestablished.

One of the most important regulations was that formal alliances between states of the Empire were prohibited. The armies of the various states were to be unified with those of the Emperor as an army for the Empire as a whole. The result of this clause was the end of the Catholic League, a now prohibited alliance between states of the Empire.

As well as ending the fighting between the various states, the treaty also ended religion as a source of national conflict; the principle of &quot;cuius regio, eius religio&quot; was established for good within the Empire.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q731814" start="4" end="19" title="Catholic League (German)" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="31" end="40" title="coalition" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="44" end="52" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q460334" start="53" end="59" title="List of states in the Holy Roman Empire" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="67" end="84" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="134" end="147" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q527814" start="201" end="217" title="Protestant Union" label="Protestant Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="282" end="304" title="French Catholic League" label="French Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127126" start="348" end="365" title="military alliance" label="military alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="596" end="606" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="607" end="616" title="Protestant Reformation" label="reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="642" end="657" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="730" end="748" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="750" end="760" title="Political repression" label="repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="766" end="777" title="retaliation" label="retaliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="835" end="857" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q374696" start="942" end="972" title="Third Defenestration of Prague" label="Third Defenestration of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="1046" end="1063" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q595337" start="1110" end="1131" title="Diet of Speyer (1526)" label="Diet of Speyer (1526)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1185" end="1194" title="Lutherans" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18244" start="1240" end="1247" title="Fürst" label="Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q707722" start="1415" end="1440" title="cuius regio, eius religio" label="cuius regio, eius religio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22881" start="1540" end="1553" title="prince-bishop" label="prince-bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q703081" start="1674" end="1689" title="Peace of Passau" label="Peace of Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q625160" start="1704" end="1726" title="ecclesiastical province" label="ecclesiastical leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="2288" end="2297" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q53742" start="2717" end="2727" title="Donauwörth" label="Donauwörth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="2731" end="2749" title="Free Imperial City" label="Free Imperial City"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="2774" end="2781" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="3184" end="3201" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q837110" start="3336" end="3354" title="bishop of Augsburg" label="bishop of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150586" start="3373" end="3382" title="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Rudolf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="3386" end="3394" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q583733" start="3409" end="3421" title="Imperial ban" label="Imperial ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q57206" start="3722" end="3751" title="Maximilian I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Maximilian I, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q632782" start="3949" end="3968" title="duke of Württemberg" label="duke of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q741966" start="4012" end="4035" title="Swabian Circle" label="Swabian Imperial Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282872" start="4244" end="4253" title="diet (assembly)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q828750" start="4269" end="4285" title="Diet of Augsburg" label="Diet of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="4319" end="4336" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q527814" start="4524" end="4540" title="Protestant Union" label="Protestant Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746" start="4559" end="4571" title="Frederick IV, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q315710" start="4592" end="4608" title="Elector Palatine" label="Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173863" start="5099" end="5107" title="Prince-Bishopric of Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q896856" start="5109" end="5118" title="Bishopric of Constance" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q262415" start="5120" end="5126" title="Bishopric of Passau" label="Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q329522" start="5128" end="5138" title="Bishopric of Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427044" start="5144" end="5152" title="Bishopric of Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="5166" end="5172" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q701614" start="5178" end="5207" title="Archbishopric of Salzburg" label="Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q707655" start="5277" end="5286" title="Bishopric of Eichstädt" label="Eichstädt"/>
<link wikidata="Q284667" start="6061" end="6066" title="Archbishopric of Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904317" start="6068" end="6075" title="Electorate of Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794352" start="6081" end="6086" title="Electorate of Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q373085" start="6326" end="6336" title="chancellor" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="6764" end="6768" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="6774" end="6781" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="6790" end="6803" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q568727" start="7357" end="7371" title="War of the Jülich Succession" label="Jülich dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="7420" end="7426" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="7539" end="7549" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="7566" end="7584" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austrian Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="7834" end="7851" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="7940" end="7947" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="7952" end="7965" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721681" start="8146" end="8159" title="Imperial Army of the Holy Roman Emperor" label="Imperial army"/>
<link wikidata="Q477732" start="8234" end="8257" title="Diet of Regensburg (1541)" label="resolutions of Ratisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q283909" start="8304" end="8327" title="Maximilian III, Archduke of Austria" label="Archduke Maximilian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q837110" start="8432" end="8450" title="Bishop of Augsburg" label="Bishop of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q876826" start="8460" end="8480" title="Provost of Ellwangen" label="Provost of Ellwangen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8488" end="8506" title="Bavarian Directory" label="Bavarian Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q44330" start="8720" end="8735" title="King of Bohemia" label="King of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150599" start="8745" end="8757" title="Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand II"/>
<link wikidata="Q374696" start="8842" end="8873" title="Second Defenestration of Prague" label="second defenestration of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195" start="8921" end="8950" title="Frederick V, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick V, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41967" start="9257" end="9270" title="Upper Austria" label="Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837158" start="9910" end="9926" title="Treaty of Munich (1619)" label="Treaty of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q291900" start="10036" end="10041" title="Íñigo Vélez de Guevara, 7th Count of Oñate" label="Oñate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="10098" end="10118" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Electoral Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792924" start="10145" end="10159" title="Electoral College (Holy Roman Empire)" label="electoral seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155534" start="10658" end="10690" title="Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly" label="Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="10719" end="10729" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Brabantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q527814" start="11023" end="11036" title="Treaty of Ulm (1620)" label="Treaty of Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373" start="11292" end="11316" title="Battle of White Mountain" label="Battle of White Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="11326" end="11332" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="11700" end="11720" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Electoral Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q441405" start="11752" end="11760" title="Ernst von Mansfeld" label="Mansfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q835585" start="11782" end="11803" title="Battle of Mingolsheim" label="Battle of Mingolsheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537353" start="11892" end="11899" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Córdoba (1585–1645)" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q65236" start="11936" end="11970" title="Georg Friedrich, Margrave of Baden-Durlach" label="Georg Friedrich, Margrave of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q661764" start="12037" end="12054" title="Battle of Wimpfen" label="Battle of Wimpfen"/>
<link wikidata="Q661686" start="12082" end="12098" title="Battle of Höchst" label="Battle of Höchst"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195" start="12214" end="12243" title="Frederick V of the Palatinate" label="Frederick V of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="12365" end="12375" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510077" start="12430" end="12435" title="Siege of Heidelberg (1622)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037030" start="12502" end="12507" title="Capture of Mannheim" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377865" start="12605" end="12616" title="Siege of Frankenthal" label="Frankenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="12622" end="12642" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Electoral Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q77229" start="12774" end="12796" title="Christian the Younger of Brunswick" label="Christian of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q708574" start="13053" end="13072" title="Battle of Stadtlohn" label="Battle of Stadtlohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q153586" start="13342" end="13354" title="Christian IV of Denmark" label="Christian IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q629302" start="13580" end="13596" title="Battle of Lutter" label="Battle of Lutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q708862" start="13741" end="13757" title="Treaty of Lübeck" label="Treaty of Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q150599" start="13982" end="13994" title="Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="14093" end="14110" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="14234" end="14240" title="Archbishopric of Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q636389" start="14245" end="14254" title="Archbishopric of Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="14563" end="14580" title="Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden" label="Gustavus Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997919" start="14581" end="14596" title="Treaty of Stettin (1630)" label="landed his army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="14725" end="14734" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153545" start="15094" end="15105" title="Wallenstein" label="Wallenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q205379" start="15189" end="15216" title="Battle of Breitenfeld (1631)" label="First Battle of Breitenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q703436" start="15338" end="15352" title="Battle of Rain" label="Battle of Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="15560" end="15566" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q256961" start="15615" end="15632" title="Electoral Bavaria" label="Electoral Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455240" start="15781" end="15796" title="Peace of Prague (1635)" label="Peace of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="15838" end="15856" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q703097" start="15998" end="16018" title="Edict of Restitution" label="Edict of Restitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="16075" end="16092" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q707722" start="16615" end="16640" title="cuius regio, eius religio" label="cuius regio, eius religio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306279" wikidata="Q293074" url="?curid=306279" title="Holy League">
<text>Commencing in 1332, the numerous Holy Leagues were a new manifestation of the Crusading movement in the form of temporary alliances between interested Christian powers. Successful campaigns included the capture of Smyrna in 1344, at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571 and the recovery of some parts of the Balkans between 1684 and 1697.

According to Arnaud Blin, &quot;the Holy Leagues retained both the spirit and the language of the Crusades&quot; while in practical terms being quite different. The initiative for a holy league often came from a secular power, not the pope, but papal involvement was inevitable if it was to have the same spiritual benefits to participants as a crusade. Several factors encouraged the transition away from supranational crusades to state alliances, including the rise of the great powers in Europe and the unification of the Muslim enemy in the form of the Ottoman Empire.

==Holy Leagues==
*Holy League (1332), an alliance of Christian states (including the Orthodox Byzantine Empire) raised to combat the naval threat of Turkish beyliks in the Eastern Mediterranean
* Holy League (1495) or League of Venice, an alliance of several opponents of French hegemony in Italy
*Holy League (1511), a Papal-Venetian-Spanish-Imperial-English alliance against France
*Holy League (1526), or League of Cognac, formed by France, the papacy, England, Venice and Milan against Emperor Charles V
* Holy League (1535), a short-lived alliance of Catholic states
* Holy League (1538), a short-lived alliance of Catholic states against the Ottoman Empire
* Holy League (1571), an alliance of major Catholic maritime states which defeated the Ottomans in the Battle of Lepanto
* Holy League (1594), a military alliance of Christian countries against the Ottoman Empire
* Holy League (1684), composed of the Holy Roman Empire, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, Venice and Russia against the Ottoman Empire 
* Holy League (1717), an alliance of the Papal States, Portugal, Venice and Malta against the Ottoman Empire

==See also==
* Catholic League (disambiguation)
* War of the Holy League (disambiguation)

==References==
==Bibliography==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q293074" start="33" end="45" title="Holy League" label="Holy Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q105628259" start="78" end="96" title="Crusading movement" label="Crusading movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="151" end="160" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q638850" start="203" end="220" title="Smyrniote crusades" label="capture of Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q165425" start="237" end="254" title="Battle of Lepanto" label="Battle of Lepanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="301" end="308" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863061" start="346" end="357" title="Arnaud Blin" label="Arnaud Blin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="808" end="820" title="great powers" label="great powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="890" end="904" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q97516098" start="925" end="943" title="Holy League (1332)" label="Holy League (1332)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355145" start="1103" end="1121" title="Holy League (1495)" label="Holy League (1495)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1205" end="1223" title="War of the League of Cambrai#Holy League" label="Holy League (1511)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429256" start="1292" end="1310" title="War of the League of Cognac" label="Holy League (1526)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97473598" start="1417" end="1435" title="Holy League (1535)" label="Holy League (1535)"/>
<link wikidata="Q682631" start="1481" end="1499" title="Holy League (1538)" label="Holy League (1538)"/>
<link wikidata="Q698215" start="1572" end="1590" title="Holy League (1571)" label="Holy League (1571)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639732" start="1693" end="1711" title="Holy League (1594)" label="Holy League (1594)"/>
<link wikidata="Q702316" start="1785" end="1803" title="Holy League (1684)" label="Holy League (1684)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844397" start="1924" end="1942" title="Holy League (1717)" label="Holy League (1717)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226091" start="2047" end="2079" title="Catholic League (disambiguation)" label="Catholic League (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968689" start="2082" end="2121" title="War of the Holy League (disambiguation)" label="War of the Holy League (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306280" wikidata="Q364730" url="?curid=306280" title="Archibald Yell">
<text>Archibald Yell (August 9, 1797 – February 23, 1847) was an American politician and lawyer who served as the U.S. representative from Arkansas from 1836 to 1839, and 1845 to 1846. He was the second governor of Arkansas, serving from 1840 to 1844. Yell was killed in action during the Mexican-American War at the Battle of Buena Vista on February 23, 1847.

==Early life==
Yell was likely born in Kentucky or Tennessee, although his headstone lists North Carolina as his birthplace. His family first settled in Jefferson County in East Tennessee, then moved to Rutherford County in Middle Tennessee, and finally settled in Bedford County to the south. As a youth, Yell participated in the Creek War, serving in 1813 and early 1814 under General Andrew Jackson. In 1814 and 1815, during the War of 1812, he served with Jackson in Louisiana, including in the Battle of New Orleans. He returned to Tennessee, and read law as a legal apprentice. He was admitted to the bar in Fayetteville, Tennessee. In 1818, he joined Jackson&#x27;s army during the First Seminole War in Florida. He was active in freemasonry, and was the Grand Master of the Tennessee Lodge in 1830.

By 1840, Yell owned 800 acres of land and 8 slaves.

==Political career==

Active in the Democratic Party, Yell moved to the Arkansas Territory in 1831 to head the federal land office in Little Rock. The federal government offered him the governorship of the Florida Territory the following year, but he declined. On March 21, 1832, Yell was appointed adjutant general of the Arkansas Territory with the rank of Colonel in place of Colonel Whorton Rector who had resigned. His time as adjutant general was apparently cut short by malaria.&quot; Yell left Arkansas for a time to recoup back home in Tennessee, but by 1835, returned to Arkansas, having been appointed as a Judge of the Superior Court, the highest court in the territory. He was a strong supporter and personal friend of President James K. Polk. Just prior to taking office in 1845, Polk sent Yell to Texas to advocate for its annexation to the union. He is reported to have single-handedly retrieved a criminal from a local saloon and physically brought him to his court.

Yell was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1836, after Arkansas was admitted to the Union. He served one term, from December 5, 1836, to March 3, 1839. While in Washington, he was a strong supporter of Texan statehood and favored a stronger military. Around this time that he formed the first Masonic lodge in Arkansas at Fayetteville.

In 1840, Yell was elected Governor of Arkansas. He focused on internal improvements, as infrastructure was needed to benefit planters and farmers. He also worked to better control banks and supported public education. Yell resigned his post as governor to run again for Congress in 1844 at age 47, and won the seat. He is reported to have been the consummate campaigner. At one stop during the campaign, he is said to have won a shooting match, donated meat to the poor, and bought a jug of whiskey for the crowd.

Soon after he took his seat in Congress, the Mexican War began. Yell returned to Arkansas and formed the Arkansas Mounted Infantry Regiment. His men included the future governor John Selden Roane, and future Confederate generals Albert Pike, Solon Borland, and James Fleming Fagan. His cavalry compiled a record of insubordination. General John E. Wool, commander of the Arkansas mounted volunteers, said they were, &quot;wholly without instruction, and Colonel Yell is determined to leave (them) in that condition.&quot; Yell, he continued, had a &quot;total ignorance of his duties as Colonel.&quot; During the Mexican War, he was brevetted a brigadier general of United States Volunteers.

On February 23, 1847, Yell was killed in action at the Battle of Buena Vista at age 49. He was originally buried on the battlefield in Mexico. His body was removed and returned to Arkansas for burial at Waxhaws Cemetery in Fayetteville. When Evergreen Cemetery was established in the city, the Freemasons arranged for his body to be relocated and reinterred in the Masonic section of that cemetery.

==Personal life==
Yell met Mary Scott in Bedford County, Tennessee, where they were neighbors. They married in 1821 after he had started to establish his law practice. She had one daughter, Mary, who was born January 5, 1823. Mary Scott Yell died from complications following their daughter&#x27;s birth. A few years later in 1828, he married Nancy Moore of Danville, Kentucky. They had four children before her death. He later married Maria (McIlvaine) Ficklin, a widow. They had no children. Maria died on October 15, 1838, while he was serving in Congress. His nephew James Yell became Major-General of the Arkansas Militia during the American Civil War.

==Honors==
Yell County and Yellville, Arkansas, are named after him, as was the &quot;Yell Rifles&quot;, an antebellum militia company from Helena. A small segment of former US Highway 71 Business (US 71B) was named Archibald Yell Boulevard in Fayetteville until 2022. Yell&#x27;s legacy was reexamined during a construction project on the roadway; the city council renamed the road Nelson Hackett Boulevard. Hackett escaped slavery in Arkansas and fled to Canada in 1841, where he remained until extradited back to Arkansas at the request of Yell on behalf of the slaveowner.

==See also==
* List of Arkansas adjutants general
* List of Freemasons
* List of governors of Arkansas

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* 
* Archibald Yell at The Political Graveyard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q364730" start="0" end="14" title="Archibald Yell" label="Archibald Yell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="108" end="127" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="133" end="141" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="197" end="217" title="List of governors of Arkansas" label="governor of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="255" end="271" title="killed in action" label="killed in action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="283" end="303" title="Mexican-American War" label="Mexican-American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808450" start="311" end="332" title="Battle of Buena Vista" label="Battle of Buena Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="395" end="403" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="407" end="416" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="447" end="461" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q494768" start="509" end="525" title="Jefferson County, Tennessee" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502348" start="559" end="576" title="Rutherford County, Tennessee" label="Rutherford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841610" start="580" end="596" title="Middle Tennessee" label="Middle Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q495052" start="621" end="635" title="Bedford County, Tennessee" label="Bedford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186260" start="687" end="696" title="Creek War" label="Creek War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="743" end="757" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="788" end="799" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="827" end="836" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="855" end="876" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q588257" start="970" end="982" title="Fayetteville, Tennessee" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q900693" start="1045" end="1063" title="Seminole Wars" label="First Seminole War"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1067" end="1074" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="1093" end="1104" title="freemasonry" label="freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940122" start="1118" end="1130" title="Grand Master (Masonic)" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473613" start="1138" end="1153" title="Grand Lodge of Tennessee" label="Tennessee Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1253" end="1269" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="1289" end="1307" title="Arkansas Territory" label="Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="1351" end="1362" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187087" start="1423" end="1440" title="Florida Territory" label="Florida Territory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1516" end="1558" title="Arkansas National Guard#List of adjutants general" label="adjutant general of the Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575503" start="1848" end="1862" title="Superior Court of the Arkansas Territory" label="Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11891" start="1959" end="1972" title="James K. Polk" label="James K. Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2226" end="2264" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2518" end="2525" title="Masonic" label="Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219526" start="2547" end="2559" title="Fayetteville, Arkansas" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="2588" end="2608" title="Governor of Arkansas" label="Governor of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="3122" end="3133" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican War"/>
<link wikidata="Q364779" start="3255" end="3272" title="John Selden Roane" label="John Selden Roane"/>
<link wikidata="Q366639" start="3306" end="3317" title="Albert Pike" label="Albert Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027380" start="3319" end="3332" title="Solon Borland" label="Solon Borland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680390" start="3338" end="3357" title="James Fleming Fagan" label="James Fleming Fagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181406" start="3417" end="3429" title="John E. Wool" label="John E. Wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="3710" end="3719" title="brevet (military)" label="brevetted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="3722" end="3739" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q115194" start="3743" end="3767" title="United States Volunteers" label="United States Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417182" start="4012" end="4030" title="Evergreen Cemetery (Fayetteville, Arkansas)" label="Evergreen Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q988923" start="4528" end="4546" title="Danville, Kentucky" label="Danville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="4759" end="4772" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q61317" start="4840" end="4851" title="Yell County, Arkansas" label="Yell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q79465" start="4856" end="4875" title="Yellville, Arkansas" label="Yellville, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="4937" end="4947" title="Antebellum United States" label="antebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q679084" start="4969" end="4975" title="Helena, Arkansas" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430456" start="5003" end="5025" title="U.S. Route 71 Business (Northwest Arkansas)" label="US Highway 71 Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="5182" end="5194" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990550" start="5212" end="5226" title="Nelson Hackett" label="Nelson Hackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="5254" end="5261" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="5286" end="5292" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5422" end="5456" title="Arkansas National Guard#List of adjutants general" label="List of Arkansas adjutants general"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154359" start="5459" end="5477" title="List of Freemasons (E–Z)" label="List of Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="5480" end="5509" title="List of governors of Arkansas" label="List of governors of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757656" start="5589" end="5612" title="The Political Graveyard" label="The Political Graveyard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306281" wikidata="Q2403455" url="?curid=306281" title="John Murrell (bandit)">
<text>John Andrews Murrell (c. 1806 – November 21, 1844), known as &quot;John A. Murrell&quot;, with his surname sometimes spelled as &quot;Murel&quot; or &quot;Murrel&quot;, and called the &quot;Great Western Land Pirate&quot;, was a 19th-century bandit and criminal operating along the Natchez Trace and Mississippi River, in the southern United States. His exploits were widely known at the time, and he became a noted figure in 20th century fiction.

He was first convicted as a youth for the crime of horse theft. He was branded with an &quot;HT&quot;, flogged, and sentenced to six years in prison. He was released in 1829. Murrell was convicted the second and last time for the crime of slave stealing, in the Circuit Court of Madison County, Tennessee. He was incarcerated in the Tennessee State Penitentiary in Nashville from 1834 to 1844.

==Early life==
According to Tennessee prison records, John Andrews Murrell was born in Lunenburg County, Virginia, and raised in Williamson County, Tennessee. Murrell was the son of Jeffrey Murrell and Zilpha Andrews, and was the third born of eight children. While he was incarcerated in Nashville for slave stealing, his mother, wife, and two children lived in the vicinity of Denmark, Tennessee.

==Punishment and imprisonment==
John A. Murrell had his first criminal conviction, for horse theft, as a teenager and was branded on the base of his thumb with an &quot;HT&quot; for horse thief, flogged, and sentenced to six years in prison. He was released in 1829. Murrell was convicted a second and final time, for the crime of slave stealing, in the Circuit Court of Madison County, Tennessee, and incarcerated in the Tennessee State Penitentiary in Nashville from 1834 to 1844.
While in the Tennessee State Penitentiary, Murrell, as part of his reform, was required to work as a blacksmith. A decade in prison under the Auburn penitentiary system, of mandatory convict regimentation, through prison uniforms, lockstep, silence, and occasional solitary confinement, were said to break Murrell mentally and supposedly left him an imbecile. He spent the last months of his life as a blacksmith in Pikeville, Tennessee.

The &quot;Nashville Daily American&quot; newspaper reported a different account of his last year of life. It said that when Murrell was released from prison, at 38 years old, he became a reformed man, and a Methodist in good standing. He worked as a carpenter by trade, and lived at a boarding house in Pikeville.
==Death==
In a deathbed confession, Murrell admitted to being guilty of most of the crimes charged against him except murder, to which he claimed to be &quot;guiltless&quot;. John A. Murrell died on November 21, 1844, nine months after leaving prison. He was reported to have contracted &quot;pulmonary consumption&quot; (tuberculosis). Murrell was interred at Smyrna Cemetery, in Pikeville,Tennessee. After Murrell died, parts of him were dug up and stolen by grave robbers. Although the corpse had been half-eaten by scavenging hogs, the head was separated from the torso, pickled, and displayed at county fairs. His skull is missing, but the Tennessee State Museum holds one of his thumbs.

== Accepted claims ==
Accepted facts about his life include stealing horses, for which he was branded. He was also caught with a freed slave living on his property. Murrell was known to kidnap slaves and sell them to other slave owners. His 10-year prison sentence was for slave-stealing. Murrell would be considered a conductor on the Reverse Underground Railroad. He is also suspected to have been involved in counterfeiting in Arkansas His claims of being part of a &quot;Mystic Clan&quot; resulted in over 50 white men and a number of African Americans to be either hanged or whipped and banished in Western Mississippi.
===&quot;The Murrell Excitement&quot;===
In 1835, Virgil Stewart wrote that a slave rebellion was being organized by highwaymen and Northern abolitionists. On Christmas Day, 1835, Murrell and his &quot;Mystic Clan&quot; planned to incite an uprising in every slaveholding state by invoking the Haitian Revolution, the most successful slave rebellion in history. Murrell believed that a slave rebellion would enable him to take over the South, and make New Orleans the center of operations of his criminal empire.
Stewart&#x27;s account of his interactions with Murrell was published as a pamphlet, written under the pseudonym &quot;Augustus Q. Walton, Esq.,&quot; for whom Stewart invented a fictitious background and profession. The validity of the pamphlet has been debated since its publication. Some historians say that Stewart&#x27;s pamphlet was largely fictional and that Murrell (and his brothers) were at best inept thieves, who had caused their father to go bankrupt as he raised bail money for them.

Given Nat Turner&#x27;s slave rebellion in 1831 in Virginia, slaveholders were always ready to believe conspiracies of new violence, especially in the Deep South where whites were far outnumbered by blacks. Those aroused by the pamphlet became part of increasing tensions and outbreaks known as the &quot;Murrell Excitement&quot;. During this time, tension between the races and between locals and outsiders increased. On July 4, 1835, disturbances occurred in the red-light districts of Nashville and Memphis, Tennessee, and Natchez, Mississippi. 20 slaves and 10 white men were hanged after confessing (under torture and coercion) to complicity in Murrell&#x27;s plot.

On July 6 in Vicksburg, Mississippi, an angry mob decided to expel all professional gamblers from the town, based on a rumor that gamblers were part of the plot. When the gamblers resisted, the mob lynched five of them by hanging. Similar panic surrounding Murrell and his conspiracy spread throughout the South long after his death, with cities from Huntsville, Alabama, to New Orleans, Louisiana, creating committees dedicated to identifying Murrell&#x27;s conspirators and potential signs of slave rebellion.

== Disputed claims ==

Murrell was known as a &quot;land-pirate&quot;, using the Mississippi River as a base for his operations. He used a network of 300 to 1,000, and even as many as 2,500 (as some newspaper reports claimed) fellow bandits collectively known as the Mystic Clan to pull off his escapades. Many of his followers were believed to be members of mixed-race groups known as the Melungeons and Redbones. He was also known as a bushwhacker along the Natchez Trace.

Murrell posed as a traveling preacher. Twain and others wrote that he would preach to a congregation while his gang stole the horses outside, but they also said that Murrell&#x27;s horse was always left behind. The location of his hideout and operations base has been debated. Possibilities were Jackson County, Tennessee; Natchez, Mississippi, at Devil&#x27;s Punch Bowl; Tunica County, Mississippi; the Neutral Ground in Louisiana; and Island 37 on the Mississippi River. One record, a genealogical note, places him as far east as Georgia. Atlanta historian Franklin Garrett wrote that a lawless district in that town was named for him in the 1840s, as &quot;Murrell&#x27;s Row&quot;. Because Murrell came to symbolize lawlessness along the Natchez Trace in the antebellum era, his &quot;hideouts&quot; (whether any hideouts existed or not) were said to be located at most of the well-known areas of such lawlessness along the Trace.

Stewart published his account of Murrell&#x27;s plot in 1835. Just before Murrell was apprehended, he was rumored to be leading a slave revolt in New Orleans in an attempt to take over the city and become a sort of criminal potentate of Louisiana. Some say he began to plot his takeover of New Orleans in 1841, although he was then in the sixth year of a 10-year sentence in the prison at Nashville. Others say he operated as a criminal from 1835 to 1857. He was in prison for 10 of those years and died of tuberculosis in 1844 shortly after being released.

A stream in Chicot County, Arkansas, called Whiskey Chute, was named in 1855 for Murrell&#x27;s raid on a whiskey-carrying steamboat that was sunk after it was pillaged. From Record Group 25, &quot;Prison Records for the Main Prison at Nashville, Tennessee, 1831-1922,&quot; Murrell was born in 1806, most likely in Williamson County, Tennessee.

==In popular culture==
*In &quot;Life on the Mississippi&quot; (Chapter 29), Mark Twain gives an inflated and gory account of the various crimes of Murrell (his spelling &quot;Murel&quot;) and attributes his capture and conviction to a Mr. Stewart.
*In &quot;The Adventures of Tom Sawyer&quot;, Injun Joe and his accomplice find a treasure which they believe to be spoils from Murrell&#x27;s robberies. Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn claim it in the end.
*Jorge Luis Borges referred to him in his fictional story, &quot;The Cruel Redeemer Lazarus Morell&quot;, written between 1933 and 1934 and published in &quot;A Universal History of Iniquity&quot; in 1935. 
*Murrell was a fictional character in the movie &quot;Virginia City&quot; (1940), in which he was played by Humphrey Bogart as the leader of a gang of &quot;banditos&quot; during the American Civil War of the early 1860s. (This was after his historic time.)
*Eudora Welty featured a highwayman named James Murrell in her short story &quot;A Still Moment&quot;, collected in &quot;The Wide Net and Other Stories&quot; (1943).
*Robert Lewis Taylor referred to him as a fictional character in his novel &quot;The Travels of Jamie McPheeters&quot;. Murrell also appeared in the 1963 television show based on the book, and was portrayed by James Westerfield.
*Gary Jennings used him as a fictional character in his novel &quot;Sow the Seeds of Hemp&quot; (1976).
*Murrell&#x27;s purported treasure figures in the Aaron and Adam Nee film &quot;Band of Robbers&quot; (2015), loosely based on Mark Twain&#x27;s &quot;The Adventures of Tom Sawyer&quot; and &quot;Adventures of Huckleberry Finn&quot;.
*William Faulkner mentions Murrell in his story &quot;The Courthouse&quot;. 
*Harry Harrison Kroll referred to Murrell as a figure in his novel &quot;Rogue&#x27;s Company&quot; (1943).

==See also==
*John Crenshaw
*James Ford (pirate)

==References==
Notes
Bibliography
*Block, Lawrence. &quot;Gangsters, swindlers, killers, and thieves: the lives and crimes of fifty American villains&quot;. Oxford University Press US, 2004, , 9780195169522. 
*Burroughs, Stephen. &quot;Memoirs of the notorious Stephen Burroughs&quot;. C. Gaylord, 1835.
*Botkin, B.A. &quot;A Treasury of Mississippi River folklore: stories, ballads &amp; traditions of the mid-American river country&quot;. Crown Publishers, 1955.
*Hall, Elihu Nicholas. &quot;Anna&#x27;s War Against River Pirates and Cave Bandits of John A. Murrell&#x27;s Northern Dive&quot;. Unpublished manuscripts in S.I.U. Rare Book Collections. Revised and published as &quot;Ballads From the Bluffs&quot;. 1948.
*Henry, Hollow Meadoes. &quot;The police control of the slave in South Carolina&quot;. Vanderbilt University, 1914.
*National Police Gazette, eds. &quot;The Life and Adventures of John A. Murrell, the Great Western Land Pirate,&quot; &quot;National Police Gazette&quot;. H. Long and Brother, 1847. 
*Penick, James L. &quot;The great western land pirate: John A. Murrell in legend and history&quot;. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 1981.
*Phares, Ross. &quot;Reverend Devil: Master Criminal of the Old South&quot;. Gretna, LA: Publisher Pelican Publishing, 1941.
*&quot;The Pictorial Life and Adventures of John A. Murrell, the Great Western Land Pirate: With Twenty-one Large Spirited Engravings &quot;Murrell!&quot; &quot;Hare!&quot; and &quot;Turpin&quot; series!&quot;. Philadelphia, PA: T. B. Peterson and brothers, 1849.
*Rothman, Joshua D. &quot;Flush Times and Fever Dreams: A Story of Capitalism and Slavery in the Age of Jackson&quot;. University of Georgia Press, 2012.
*Sandlin, Lee. &quot;Wicked River: The Mississippi When It Last Ran Wild&quot;. Pantheon, 2010.
*Smith, Thomas Ruys. &quot;Independence Day, 1835: The John A. Murrell Conspiracy and the Lynching of the Vicksburg Gamblers in Literature,&quot; &quot;The Mississippi Quarterly&quot;*. Volume: 59. Issue: 1–2. Publication Date: Winter, 2005.
*Stewart, Virgil A. &quot;The history of Virgil A. Stewart: and his adventure in capturing and exposing the great &quot;western land pirate&quot; and his gang, in connexion with the evidence; also of the trials, confessions, and execution of a number of Murrell&#x27;s associates in the state of Mississippi during the summer of 1835, and the execution of five professional gamblers by the citizens of Vicksburg, on the 6th July, 1835&quot; New York, NY: Harper and Brothers, 1836.
*Twain, Mark. Chapter XXIX, &quot;Life on the Mississippi&quot;. Harper, 1883.
*Walton, Augustus Q. &quot;A history of the detection, conviction, life and designs of John A. Murel, the great western land pirate.&quot;. Athens, TN: G. White, 1835.
*Wellman, Paul L. &quot;Spawn of Evil&quot;. Doubleday and Company, 1964.
*Wyatt-Brown, Bertram. &quot;Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old South&quot;. Oxford University Press, New York, 1982, , 978-0-19-503119-5.

==External links==
*Report of Murrell&#x27;s treasure at Honey Island
*&quot;The Great Western Land Pirate, Again&quot; by William Edward Henry
*The Robber John Murrell and his Famous Hideouts
*The Strange Story Behind the State&#x27;s Thumb 
*The Life and Adventures of John A. Murrell, the Great Western Land Pirate
*History of the Detection, Conviction, Life and Designs of John A. Murrell, the Great Western Land Pirate
* &quot;How Missing Court Records Created a Folk Legend from Nashville’s Wild Past&quot;How missing court records created a folk-legend from Nashville’s wild past | TheNews | Nashville Community Newspapers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2403455" start="0" end="20" title="John Murrell (bandit)" label="John Andrews Murrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968653" start="242" end="248" title="bandit" label="bandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q876870" start="282" end="295" title="Natchez Trace" label="Natchez Trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="300" end="317" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11877090" start="500" end="511" title="horse theft" label="horse theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="711" end="724" title="Circuit Court" label="Circuit Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q494755" start="728" end="753" title="Madison County, Tennessee" label="Madison County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="762" end="774" title="incarceration" label="incarcerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700172" start="782" end="823" title="Tennessee State Prison" label="Tennessee State Penitentiary in Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q508192" start="931" end="957" title="Lunenburg County, Virginia" label="Lunenburg County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501948" start="973" end="1001" title="Williamson County, Tennessee" label="Williamson County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1223" end="1241" title="Denmark, Tennessee#Cities and towns" label="Denmark, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11877090" start="1331" end="1342" title="horse theft" label="horse theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="1598" end="1611" title="Circuit Court" label="Circuit Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q494755" start="1615" end="1640" title="Madison County, Tennessee" label="Madison County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="1646" end="1658" title="incarceration" label="incarcerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700172" start="1666" end="1707" title="Tennessee State Prison" label="Tennessee State Penitentiary in Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="1828" end="1838" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819349" start="1869" end="1895" title="Auburn penitentiary system" label="Auburn penitentiary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q989174" start="1910" end="1917" title="convict" label="convict"/>
<link wikidata="Q659964" start="1941" end="1956" title="prison uniforms" label="prison uniforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665849" start="1958" end="1966" title="lockstep" label="lockstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="1992" end="2012" title="solitary confinement" label="solitary confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221574" start="2143" end="2163" title="Pikeville, Tennessee" label="Pikeville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="2373" end="2382" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="2416" end="2425" title="carpentry" label="carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558858" start="2451" end="2465" title="boarding house" label="boarding house"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2802" end="2814" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221574" start="2861" end="2880" title="Pikeville, Tennessee" label="Pikeville,Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="3099" end="3104" title="human skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700171" start="3125" end="3147" title="Tennessee State Museum" label="Tennessee State Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q868393" start="3493" end="3502" title="Conductor (underground railroad)" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968540" start="3510" end="3538" title="Reverse Underground Railroad" label="Reverse Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="3916" end="3926" title="Highwayman" label="highwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="4093" end="4111" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="4251" end="4262" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q493787" start="5496" end="5518" title="Vicksburg, Mississippi" label="Vicksburg, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="6048" end="6059" title="highwayman" label="land-pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="6077" end="6094" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403455" start="6263" end="6274" title="Mystic Clan" label="Mystic Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668201" start="6386" end="6395" title="Melungeon" label="Melungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305479" start="6401" end="6408" title="Redbone (ethnicity)" label="Redbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q887183" start="6434" end="6445" title="bushwhacker" label="bushwhacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q876870" start="6456" end="6469" title="Natchez Trace" label="Natchez Trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q944044" start="6795" end="6815" title="Natchez, Mississippi" label="Natchez, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q110643836" start="6820" end="6843" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Punchbowl (Natchez, Mississippi)" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Punch Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q484668" start="6845" end="6871" title="Tunica County, Mississippi" label="Tunica County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q841667" start="6877" end="6904" title="Neutral Ground (Louisiana)" label="Neutral Ground in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6910" end="6919" title="Island 37" label="Island 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="7005" end="7012" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="7014" end="7021" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505741" start="7032" end="7048" title="Franklin Garrett" label="Franklin Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q17043730" start="7133" end="7151" title="Murrell&amp;#x27;s Row" label="Murrell&amp;#x27;s Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="7236" end="7250" title="antebellum era" label="antebellum era"/>
<link wikidata="Q61458" start="7980" end="8003" title="Chicot County, Arkansas" label="Chicot County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131648" start="8348" end="8371" title="Life on the Mississippi" label="Life on the Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="8392" end="8402" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q326914" start="8574" end="8602" title="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" label="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600332" start="8610" end="8619" title="Injun Joe" label="Injun Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q944203" start="8718" end="8728" title="Tom Sawyer" label="Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48479" start="8733" end="8749" title="Huckleberry Finn" label="Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="8772" end="8789" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196790" start="8930" end="8961" title="A Universal History of Iniquity" label="A Universal History of Iniquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q643220" start="9032" end="9045" title="Virginia City (film)" label="Virginia City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="9086" end="9101" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9161" end="9179" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q259364" start="9237" end="9249" title="Eudora Welty" label="Eudora Welty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161480" start="9613" end="9630" title="James Westerfield" label="James Westerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q301372" start="9633" end="9646" title="Gary Jennings (author)" label="Gary Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406126" start="9700" end="9721" title="Sow the Seeds of Hemp" label="Sow the Seeds of Hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733237" start="9786" end="9804" title="Nee Brothers" label="Aaron and Adam Nee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23763028" start="9816" end="9831" title="Band of Robbers" label="Band of Robbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q326914" start="9887" end="9915" title="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" label="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215410" start="9932" end="9962" title="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" label="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q38392" start="9971" end="9987" title="William Faulkner" label="William Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811260" start="10048" end="10068" title="Harry Harrison Kroll" label="Harry Harrison Kroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227600" start="10170" end="10183" title="John Crenshaw" label="John Crenshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134054" start="10185" end="10204" title="James Ford (pirate)" label="James Ford (pirate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888158" start="10511" end="10523" title="B.A. Botkin" label="Botkin, B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="11014" end="11035" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413033" start="11044" end="11067" title="National Police Gazette" label="National Police Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895837" start="11340" end="11368" title="University of Missouri Press" label="University of Missouri Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="12740" end="12751" title="Mark Twain" label="Twain, Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154292" start="12987" end="13003" title="Paul Wellman" label="Wellman, Paul L."/>
<link wikidata="Q4895834" start="13061" end="13081" title="Bertram Wyatt-Brown" label="Wyatt-Brown, Bertram"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306282" wikidata="Q246539" url="?curid=306282" title="Wade Boggs">
<text>Wade Anthony Boggs (born June 15, 1958), nicknamed &quot;Chicken Man&quot;, is an American former professional baseball third baseman. He spent 18 seasons in Major League Baseball, primarily with the Boston Red Sox. He also played for the New York Yankees (1993–1997), winning the 1996 World Series with them, and finished his career with the Tampa Bay Devil Rays (1998–1999).

Boggs became the 23rd player to reach 3,000 career hits. His hitting in the 1980s and 1990s made him a perennial contender for American League batting titles, winning 5 in 6 years from 1983 to 1988. His .328 career batting average is the highest of any living former player. Boggs is part of the Red Sox Hall of Fame and the Rays Hall of Fame, and he was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2005 in his first year of eligibility.

With 12 straight All-Star appearances, Boggs is third only to Brooks Robinson and George Brett in number of consecutive appearances as a third baseman. In 1997, he ranked number 95 on the &quot;Sporting News&quot; list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players. Boggs, a 1976 graduate of Plant High School in Tampa, Florida, resides in the Tampa Palms neighborhood of Tampa.

==Early life==
Born in Omaha, Nebraska, the youngest of three sons of Winfield Kennedy Boggs Jr. and Sue Nell Graham, Wade had a regimented military upbringing. Winfield and Sue met in 1946 at a military base in Georgia. Winfield served with the Marines in World War II and flew for the Air Force in the Korean War, while Sue piloted mail planes in World War II. The Boggs family lived in several different places (including Puerto Rico and Savannah, Georgia) before settling in Tampa, Florida when Wade was 11 years old. He attended Plant High School in Tampa, where he played baseball and was an All-State football player as a senior. Boggs played quarterback until his senior year when he switched positions to avoid injury and thereby protect his baseball career. His success as a left-footed placekicker and punter earned him a scholarship offer from the University of South Carolina. He graduated from Plant High School in 1976 and was selected by the Boston Red Sox in the seventh round of the 1976 MLB draft on the advice of veteran scout George Digby. He signed with the club for $7,500.

==Professional career==
===Minor leagues===
Boggs played in the longest game in professional baseball history as a member of the Pawtucket Red Sox in 1981 against Cal Ripken Jr. and the Rochester Red Wings. It lasted for 33 innings over eight hours and 25 minutes. The game took place from April 18–19, 1981, concluding on June 23, 1981, at McCoy Stadium in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. During his last year in the minor leagues with Pawtucket, he led the league with a .335 batting-average, 167 hits, and 41 doubles.

===Boston Red Sox===
A left-handed hitter, Boggs won five batting titles starting in 1983. He also batted .349 in his rookie year, which would have won the batting title, but he was 121 plate appearances short of the required minimum of 502. From 1982 to 1988, Boggs hit below .349 only once, hitting .325 in 1984. From 1983 to 1989, Boggs rattled off seven consecutive seasons in which he collected 200 or more hits, an American League record for consecutive 200-hit seasons that was surpassed by Seattle&#x27;s Ichiro Suzuki. Boggs also had six seasons with 200 or more hits, 100+ runs, and 40+ doubles. Although he would not win another batting title after 1988 (his batting title that year broke Bill Madlock&#x27;s Major League record of four by a third baseman), he regularly appeared among the league leaders in hitting.
In 1985, Boggs recorded hits in 135 games, tying a major league record. He also had 240 hits and 72 multi-hit games, setting club records for both.

In 1986, Boggs made it to the World Series with the Red Sox, but they lost to the New York Mets in seven games. He holds the record for batting average at Fenway Park, at .369.

Boggs had a power surge in 1987, setting career highs with 24 home runs, 89 RBIs, and a .588 slugging percentage. He never hit half as many home runs in any other season.

In 1992, Boggs slumped to .259—one of only three times in his career that he failed to reach .300.

===New York Yankees===
After the 1992 season, Boggs became a free agent. He was heavily pursued by two teams: the Los Angeles Dodgers and the arch-rival of the Red Sox, the New York Yankees. He signed a three-year contract with the Yankees worth $11 million, after they added the third year to the contract that the Dodgers would not offer. Boggs went on to be awarded three straight All-Star appearances, had four straight .300-plus seasons, and even collected two Gold Glove Awards for his defense.

In 1996, Boggs helped the Yankees win their first World Series title in 18 years against the Atlanta Braves, which became his only World Series title. In the series&#x27; fourth game which saw the Yankees rally from six runs down to tie it, Boggs was called on to pinch hit in the tenth inning. Using the batting eye he was known for throughout his career, he drew a bases-loaded walk out of Steve Avery, forcing in the go-ahead run and ultimately win 8–6, evening the series. After the Yankees won the series in game 6, Boggs memorably celebrated by jumping on the back of an NYPD horse, touring the field with his index finger in the air, despite his self-professed fear of horses.

===Tampa Bay Devil Rays===
Boggs signed with the Tampa Bay Devil Rays for the final two seasons of his career. He hit the first home run in Devil Rays history in the sixth inning of the inaugural game on March 31, 1998. On August 7, 1999, he collected his 3,000th hit with a home run. Despite his reputation for lacking home run power, he was the first player in history to make such a hit a home run. Boggs retired in 1999 after sustaining a knee injury, leaving with a career batting average of .328 and 3,010 hits. His last game was on August 27, 1999; he went 0-for-3 with a walk against the Cleveland Indians. Two yellow seats among the rest of the Tropicana&#x27;s blue seats mark where both historic balls landed in right field, each with a small metal plate noting it as the area that the ball landed. Since he signed with the first-year expansion team Devil Rays so late in his career, he is the oldest former Devil Ray. (This only includes when they were called the Devil Rays.)

==Legacy==

Boggs&#x27; career paralleled that of Tony Gwynn, who also debuted (in the National League) in 1982. Boggs and Gwynn were the premier contact hitters of their era. They both won multiple batting titles—Boggs, five and Gwynn, eight—and each won four straight batting titles to join Ty Cobb, Rogers Hornsby, and Rod Carew as the only players to do so. Gwynn and Boggs each hit over .350 in four straight seasons, the only players to do so since 1931. They joined Lou Brock and Rod Carew as the only players whose careers ended after World War II who finished with 3,000 hits and fewer than 160 home runs.

Boggs was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 2005 and is depicted with a Red Sox cap.

Tommy John noted that Boggs always seemed to know what the next pitch was going to be. &quot;...for pure hitting, Boggs is the best I&#x27;ve ever seen,&quot; John wrote in 1991. &quot;He&#x27;s a phenomenon, a pure hitting machine. I&#x27;ve never seen anything like him. He lit me up.&quot;

Boggs recorded 2.1 innings of pitching at the Major League level. His main pitch was a knuckleball, which he used 16 times (along with one fastball) in one shutout inning for the Yankees against the Anaheim Angels in a 1997 game. Boggs recorded a strike-out pitching during that game. Boggs also pitched 1.1 innings for Tampa Bay against the Orioles in a 1999 game, allowing one run.

On December 21, 2015, the Red Sox announced that they would retire Boggs&#x27; number (26). The ceremony was held on May 26, 2016. Boggs occasionally appears in the Yankees&#x27; annual Old-Timers&#x27; Day, a celebration of past Yankees in which the players play a multi-inning game of baseball at Yankee Stadium.

His own style included mental preparedness techniques, which consisted of visualizing four at-bats each evening before a game and imagining himself successfully getting four hits.

As of June 8, 1986—over the course of the previous 162 games (equivalent to a full season, though across two seasons)—Boggs was hitting .400, with 254 hits in 635 at-bats.

In his 18-year major league career, Boggs recorded 3 five-hit games and 59 four-hit games. On June 29, 1987, he had a career-high seven RBI against the Orioles in a 14–3 victory at Fenway.

The Tampa Bay Devil Rays retired his #12 on April 7, 2000. It is the only number to have been issued only once by the Rays.

The Boston Red Sox inducted Boggs into the team&#x27;s Hall of Fame in 2004 and his number 26 was retired during a pre-game ceremony on May 26, 2016.

Boggs was known for his superstitions. He ate chicken before every game (Jim Rice once called Boggs &quot;chicken man&quot;), woke up at the same time every day, and ran sprints at 7:17 pm. His route to and from his position in the field beat a path to the home dugout. He drew the Hebrew word &quot;Chai&quot; (meaning &quot;life&quot;) in the batter&#x27;s box before each at-bat, though he is not Jewish. He asked Fenway Park public address announcer Sherm Feller not to say his uniform number when he introduced him because Boggs once broke out of a slump on a day when Feller forgot to announce his number.

==Life outside baseball==
===The Margo Adams affair and palimony lawsuit===

Boggs garnered non-baseball-related media attention in 1989 for his four-year extramarital affair with Margo Adams, a California mortgage broker. After Boggs ended the relationship in 1988, Adams filed a $12 million lawsuit for emotional distress and breach of oral contract. She argued that Boggs had verbally agreed to compensate her for lost income and services performed while accompanying Boggs on road trips. Boggs&#x27; reputation was further sullied when Adams agreed to an interview with &quot;Penthouse&quot; magazine in which she discussed intimate details of her time with Boggs. While acknowledging the affair, Boggs went on the offensive in order to combat the wave of negative press, denying many of the claims made by Adams. Boggs&#x27; rebuttal included an appearance on the ABC program &quot;20/20&quot; in which he presented his side of the story to Barbara Walters. In February 1989, an appeals court threw out $11.5 million of the initial lawsuit, ruling that Adams could not seek compensation for emotional distress. The remaining demand for $500,000 was settled out of court later that year for an undisclosed amount.

===Hall of Fame plaque cap logo controversy===
Before his retirement, Boggs was plagued by newspaper reports that the expansion Devil Rays gave him financial compensation in return for selecting a Devil Rays cap for his plaque at the Baseball Hall of Fame, though he has denied that any such condition was part of his contract. In light of those reports (and other rumors that teams were offering number retirement, money, or organizational jobs in exchange for the cap designation) the Hall decided in 2001 to change its practice of deferring to players&#x27; wishes regarding cap logo selection and reinforced the Hall&#x27;s authority to determine with which cap the player would be depicted. Boggs is wearing a Boston cap on his plaque.

===Family===
Boggs&#x27; mother died in June 1986 in a car accident in Tampa while he was with the Red Sox. Shortly after her death, Boggs and his father bought a fish camp on U.S. 301 just south of Hawthorne, Florida, that they named Yankee Landing-Finway Fish Camp; his father operated it until shortly before he died. Wade and his wife Debbie have two children, Brett and Meagann.

Wade Boggs was named one of the &quot;Top 10 Most Superstitious Athletes&quot; by &quot;Men&#x27;s Fitness&quot; for his well known superstitions about baseball, including his habit of eating chicken before every game and practicing at only specific times of day. His chicken eating habits earned him the nickname &quot;Chicken Man&quot;.

===Wrestling===
As a baseball player, Boggs made an appearance for the professional wrestling promotion World Wrestling Federation (WWF) in 1992. He appeared in a vignette with wrestler Mr. Perfect (Curt Hennig) in which Perfect played baseball. The two remained good friends afterward; 15 years later, in 2007, Boggs inducted the late Perfect into the WWE Hall of Fame. In the DVD &quot;The Life and Times of Mr. Perfect&quot;, Boggs related how Hennig saved his life, carrying Boggs to help after he had severely cut his leg climbing over a broken barbed wire fence during a hunting trip. He also made a guest appearance on the December 13, 1999 episode of WWF Raw Is War where he was involved in a brief segment with Dwayne &quot;The Rock&quot; Johnson.

===Television===
Boggs was one of the baseball players featured in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;Homer at the Bat,&quot; in which he was recruited as a ringer by Mr. Burns for the Power Plant&#x27;s softball team, only to later be knocked out in a bar fight by Barney Gumble. Boggs appeared as himself in the &quot;Cheers&quot; episode &quot;Bar Wars&quot; in which he was sent to the bar as an apology by a rival bar. He was accosted by the regulars who thought he was a fake. (&quot;Cheers&quot; writer Ken Levine revealed in 2009 that Boggs had promised to bring Kirstie Alley&#x27;s panties back to spring training with him but, in fact, brought back his mistress Margo Adams&#x27; panties instead.) In &quot;Seinfeld&quot;″s &quot;The Chaperone,&quot; George convinces the Yankees to switch to cotton uniforms, assuring manager Buck Showalter that the Bombers would be &quot;five degrees cooler than the other team.&quot; Wade Boggs was quoted as saying, &quot;What a fabric! Finally we can breathe.&quot;

Boggs is the subject of an apocryphal story in which, on a cross-country flight during his career, he drank a very large number of beers, sometimes given as exactly 64 (a number Boggs has denied). In 2011, he appeared in the &quot;Psych&quot; episode &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Curveball&quot;, in which he tells Danny Glover&#x27;s character that the real number was 73. In 2015, he guest starred in the &quot;It&#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia&quot; season 10 premiere &quot;The Gang Beats Boggs&quot;, in which the characters try to drink more than 70 beers while flying across country. Dee confuses Boggs with Boss Hogg while Charlie believes that Boggs is dead. Boggs reportedly told actor Charlie Day that, counting post-flight excursions, the total for the day was 107.

In August 2017, Boggs served as a fill-in color commentator for some Red Sox games played in Tampa Bay and broadcast on New England Sports Network (NESN), working with play-by-play announcer Dave O&#x27;Brien.

In 2018, Wade Boggs was mentioned in a &quot;Good Mythical Morning&quot; episode by hosts Rhett and Link, involving his Wade Boggs .352 Bar that was made in 1990. He later made a cameo appearance on the show in 2021.

=== Cancer diagnosis ===
On September 7, 2024, Boggs revealed that he is battling prostate cancer. In February 2025, he revealed he is cancer free. 

==Bibliography==
* &quot;Fowl Tips: My Favorite Chicken Recipes&quot; (1984). Wakefield, Rhode Island: Narragansett Graphics. .
* &quot;Boggs!&quot; (1986). Contemporary Books, .
* &quot;The Techniques of Modern Hitting&quot; (1990). Perigee Books. (with David Brisson).

==See also==
* DHL Hometown Heroes
* List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career assists as a third baseman leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career batting average leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career on-base percentage leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a third baseman leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career times on base leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders
* List of Major League Baseball doubles records
* List of Major League Baseball hit records
* List of people from Omaha, Nebraska
* Major League Baseball titles leaders
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246539" start="0" end="18" title="Wade Boggs" label="Wade Anthony Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q246539" start="57" end="68" title="Wade Boggs" label="Chicken Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="111" end="119" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368170" start="120" end="133" title="third baseman" label="third baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="158" end="179" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="200" end="214" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="239" end="255" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316802" start="281" end="298" title="1996 World Series" label="1996 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="343" end="363" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="429" end="433" title="hit (baseball)" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="505" end="520" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948047" start="674" end="694" title="Red Sox Hall of Fame" label="Red Sox Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="703" end="720" title="Tampa Bay Rays Hall of Fame" label="Rays Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="748" end="778" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866524" start="782" end="786" title="2005 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="839" end="847" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q521270" start="884" end="899" title="Brooks Robinson" label="Brooks Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152442" start="904" end="916" title="George Brett" label="George Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="1016" end="1029" title="Sporting News" label="Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685888" start="1105" end="1122" title="Plant High School" label="Plant High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="1126" end="1140" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681721" start="1157" end="1168" title="Tampa Palms" label="Tampa Palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1439" end="1446" title="USMC" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1480" end="1489" title="USAF" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="1497" end="1507" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570679" start="1527" end="1537" title="mail plane" label="mail plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="1618" end="1629" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="1634" end="1651" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="1672" end="1686" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685888" start="1727" end="1744" title="Plant High School" label="Plant High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="1771" end="1779" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="1801" end="1809" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="1843" end="1854" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638113" start="1990" end="2001" title="placekicker" label="placekicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q525495" start="2006" end="2012" title="punter (football)" label="punter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566583" start="2053" end="2081" title="South Carolina Gamecocks football" label="University of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="2151" end="2165" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881603" start="2194" end="2208" title="1976 MLB draft" label="1976 MLB draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540992" start="2240" end="2252" title="George Digby (baseball scout)" label="George Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673745" start="2355" end="2400" title="longest professional baseball game" label="longest game in professional baseball history"/>
<link wikidata="Q603099" start="2420" end="2437" title="Pawtucket Red Sox" label="Pawtucket Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q731168" start="2454" end="2468" title="Cal Ripken Jr." label="Cal Ripken Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1966948" start="2477" end="2496" title="Rochester Red Wings" label="Rochester Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q600" start="3319" end="3332" title="Ichiro Suzuki" label="Ichiro Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903287" start="3506" end="3518" title="Bill Madlock" label="Bill Madlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568875" start="3813" end="3825" title="1986 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="3865" end="3878" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="3938" end="3949" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815849" start="4054" end="4073" title="slugging percentage" label="slugging percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="4294" end="4304" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="4347" end="4366" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048808" start="4375" end="4385" title="Yankees – Red Sox rivalry" label="arch-rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="4406" end="4422" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q120649" start="4699" end="4716" title="Rawlings Gold Glove Award" label="Gold Glove Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072121" start="4828" end="4842" title="1996 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961787" start="5127" end="5138" title="Steve Avery (baseball)" label="Steve Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="5312" end="5316" title="NYPD" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="5469" end="5489" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="5695" end="5703" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="6016" end="6033" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145222" start="6460" end="6470" title="Tony Gwynn" label="Tony Gwynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="6497" end="6512" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164832" start="6556" end="6570" title="contact hitter" label="contact hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q552828" start="6703" end="6710" title="Ty Cobb" label="Ty Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q262945" start="6712" end="6726" title="Rogers Hornsby" label="Rogers Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316950" start="6732" end="6741" title="Rod Carew" label="Rod Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260115" start="6883" end="6892" title="Lou Brock" label="Lou Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316950" start="6897" end="6906" title="Rod Carew" label="Rod Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531327" start="7121" end="7131" title="Tommy John" label="Tommy John"/>
<link wikidata="Q44459" start="7502" end="7513" title="knuckleball" label="knuckleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="7554" end="7562" title="fastball" label="fastball"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="7614" end="7628" title="Anaheim Angels" label="Anaheim Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083341" start="7986" end="8006" title="Old-Timers&amp;#x27; Day" label="Old-Timers&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q753529" start="8099" end="8113" title="Yankee Stadium" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="8664" end="8684" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="8789" end="8803" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q104214305" start="8900" end="8917" title="pre-game ceremony" label="pre-game ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="8960" end="8972" title="superstition" label="superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q864693" start="8982" end="8989" title="Chicken (food)" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056244" start="9009" end="9017" title="Jim Rice" label="Jim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q972316" start="9198" end="9204" title="Dugout (baseball)" label="dugout"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="9218" end="9224" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304537" start="9236" end="9240" title="Chai (symbol)" label="Chai"/>
<link wikidata="Q809889" start="9281" end="9298" title="batter&amp;#x27;s box" label="batter&amp;#x27;s box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="9311" end="9317" title="at-bat" label="at-bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495099" start="9390" end="9402" title="Sherm Feller" label="Sherm Feller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885113" start="9418" end="9432" title="Uniform number (Major League Baseball)" label="uniform number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278442" start="9755" end="9770" title="mortgage broker" label="mortgage broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="9842" end="9849" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044480" start="9854" end="9872" title="Intentional infliction of emotional distress" label="emotional distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="9877" end="9900" title="Breach of contract" label="breach of oral contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q108515" start="10123" end="10144" title="Penthouse (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Penthouse&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="10418" end="10421" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q197867" start="10436" end="10441" title="20/20 (US television show)" label="20/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q231417" start="10495" end="10510" title="Barbara Walters" label="Barbara Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="10533" end="10546" title="appellate court" label="appeals court"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="11002" end="11023" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427857" start="11686" end="11694" title="U.S. 301" label="U.S. 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003873" start="11709" end="11727" title="Hawthorne, Florida" label="Hawthorne, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779863" start="11983" end="12001" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Fitness" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866623" start="12027" end="12055" title="Baseball superstition" label="superstitions about baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336206" start="12306" end="12338" title="professional wrestling promotion" label="professional wrestling promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="12339" end="12365" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12398" end="12406" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Vignette" label="vignette"/>
<link wikidata="Q282078" start="12421" end="12432" title="Curt Hennig" label="Mr. Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="12588" end="12604" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="12894" end="12908" title="WWE Raw" label="WWF Raw Is War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="12955" end="12990" title="Dwayne &amp;quot;The Rock&amp;quot; Johnson" label="Dwayne &amp;quot;The Rock&amp;quot; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="13066" end="13078" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662792" start="13099" end="13115" title="Homer at the Bat" label="Homer at the Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q716636" start="13164" end="13173" title="Mr. Burns" label="Mr. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470014" start="13263" end="13276" title="Barney Gumble" label="Barney Gumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q732063" start="13317" end="13323" title="Cheers" label="Cheers"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="13568" end="13581" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49223" start="13589" end="13596" title="panties" label="panties"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="13715" end="13723" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722142" start="13738" end="13751" title="The Chaperone (Seinfeld)" label="The Chaperone"/>
<link wikidata="Q921030" start="13835" end="13849" title="Buck Showalter" label="Buck Showalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48758" start="14245" end="14250" title="Psych" label="Psych"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14271" end="14296" title="Psych season 6#ep84" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Curveball"/>
<link wikidata="Q192165" start="14322" end="14334" title="Danny Glover" label="Danny Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23670" start="14420" end="14458" title="It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia" label="It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14490" end="14510" title="It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia season 10#ep105" label="The Gang Beats Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911540" start="14627" end="14636" title="Boss Hogg" label="Boss Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q365915" start="14708" end="14719" title="Charlie Day" label="Charlie Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="14833" end="14850" title="color commentator" label="color commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338942" start="14911" end="14937" title="New England Sports Network" label="New England Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="14959" end="14981" title="Sports commentator" label="play-by-play announcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229485" start="14982" end="14999" title="Dave O&amp;#x27;Brien (sportscaster)" label="Dave O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331467" start="15047" end="15068" title="Good Mythical Morning" label="Good Mythical Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="15181" end="15197" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="15302" end="15317" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205029" start="15657" end="15676" title="DHL Hometown Heroes" label="DHL Hometown Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577595" start="15679" end="15731" title="List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589039" start="15734" end="15790" title="List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883071" start="15793" end="15864" title="List of Major League Baseball career assists as a third baseman leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career assists as a third baseman leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589025" start="15867" end="15927" title="List of Major League Baseball career batting average leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career batting average leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244083" start="15930" end="15982" title="List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589026" start="15985" end="16048" title="List of Major League Baseball career on-base percentage leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career on-base percentage leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037317" start="16051" end="16122" title="List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a third baseman leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career putouts as a third baseman leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589011" start="16125" end="16181" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244079" start="16184" end="16243" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q27660996" start="16246" end="16304" title="List of Major League Baseball career times on base leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career times on base leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186880" start="16307" end="16363" title="List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577598" start="16366" end="16411" title="List of Major League Baseball doubles records" label="List of Major League Baseball doubles records"/>
<link wikidata="Q648100" start="16414" end="16455" title="List of Major League Baseball hit records" label="List of Major League Baseball hit records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632664" start="16458" end="16493" title="List of people from Omaha, Nebraska" label="List of people from Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738199" start="16496" end="16532" title="Major League Baseball titles leaders" label="Major League Baseball titles leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306283" wikidata="Q226091" url="?curid=306283" title="Catholic League">
<text>Catholic League may refer to:

*Catholic League (French) (1576–1577, 1584–1595), created by Henry of Guise, in 1576 during the French Wars of Religion
*Catholic League (German) (1609–1635), a confederation of Catholic German states formed to counteract the Protestant Union
*Catholic League (U.S.) (1973–present), a Roman Catholic advocacy organization in the United States
*Catholic League (English) (1913–present), an organization to promote reunion of the Church of England and the Holy See

==Sports==

*Baltimore Catholic League, a competitive basketball association composed of private Catholic high schools in the Baltimore, Maryland area
*Catholic High School League, a high school athletic conference of the Detroit metropolitan area
*Chicago Catholic League, a high school athletic conference of the Chicago metropolitan area
*New Orleans Catholic League, a high school athletic league in the New Orleans, Louisiana area
*Philadelphia Catholic League, a high school sports league composed of 20 Catholic High Schools in and around Philadelphia

==See also==
*Catholic Conference (disambiguation)
*Holy League (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226091" start="0" end="15" title="Catholic League" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="32" end="56" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Catholic League (French)"/>
<link wikidata="Q731814" start="152" end="176" title="Catholic League (German)" label="Catholic League (German)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997406" start="275" end="297" title="Catholic League (U.S.)" label="Catholic League (U.S.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053188" start="375" end="400" title="Catholic League (English)" label="Catholic League (English)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852800" start="508" end="533" title="Baltimore Catholic League" label="Baltimore Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053177" start="647" end="674" title="Catholic High School League" label="Catholic High School League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095527" start="744" end="767" title="Chicago Catholic League" label="Chicago Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010702" start="837" end="864" title="New Orleans Catholic League" label="New Orleans Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182640" start="932" end="960" title="Philadelphia Catholic League" label="Philadelphia Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q124605474" start="1069" end="1105" title="Catholic Conference (disambiguation)" label="Catholic Conference (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q293074" start="1107" end="1135" title="Holy League (disambiguation)" label="Holy League (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306288" wikidata="Q696189" url="?curid=306288" title="Catholic League (French)">
<text>The Catholic League of France (), sometimes referred to by contemporary (and modern) Catholics as the Holy League (), was a major participant in the French Wars of Religion. The League, founded and led by Henry I, Duke of Guise, intended the eradication of Protestantism from Catholic France, as well as the replacement of the French King Henry III, who had acquiesced to Protestant worship in the Edict of Beaulieu (1576). The League also fought against Henry of Navarre, the Protestant prince who became presumptive heir to the French throne in 1584.

Pope Sixtus V, Philip II of Spain, and the Jesuits were all supporters of this Catholic party.

== Origins ==

Local confraternities were initially established by French Catholics to counter the Edict of Beaulieu in 1576. King Henry III placed himself at the head of these associations as a counter-balance to the ultra-Catholic League of Peronne. Following the repudiation of that edict by the Estates General, most of the local leagues were disbanded.

In June 1584, the illness and death of Henry III&#x27;s heir François, Duke of Anjou made the Protestant Henry of Navarre the new heir presumptive under Salic law. Faced with the prospect of a Protestant king, Catholic nobles gathered at Nancy in December 1584, and the League drew up a treaty with Philip II&#x27;s ambassadors at Joinville. Following this agreement, the Catholic confraternities and leagues were united as the Catholic League under the leadership of Henry I, Duke of Guise.

The Catholic League aimed to preempt any seizure of power by the Huguenots, who made up nearly half of the French nobility, and to protect French Catholics&#x27; right to worship. The Catholic League&#x27;s cause was fueled by the doctrine &quot;Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus&quot;. It feared that the House of Valois would weaken the Catholic position by attempting to appease the Huguenots.

The League was also inspired by the writings of the English Catholic refugee Richard Verstegan, who published accounts of the suffering of English, Welsh, and Irish Catholic Martyrs under the Protestant monarchy of England. In 1588, Verstegan was briefly imprisoned by Henri III at the insistence of the English ambassador Sir Francis Walsingham, but soon released at the insistence of the Catholic League and the Papal Nuncio.

By this time &quot;the League in Paris had fallen from its first ideals into mere partisanship&quot;, and the Duke of Guise increasingly used it not only to defend the Catholic cause, but as a political tool in an attempt to usurp the French throne.

Catholic Leaguers saw their fight against Calvinism (the primary branch of Protestantism in France) as a Crusade against heresy and to defend French Catholics from Elizabethan-style persecution. The League&#x27;s pamphleteers blamed any natural disaster as God&#x27;s way of punishing France for tolerating heretics.
Both the League and the hardline Calvinists scorned Henry III&#x27;s attempts to mediate peaceful coexistence between Catholics and Protestants. The League also opposed the pragmatic French jurists and intellectuals known as Politiques, who recoiled from the murderous sectarian loathing and sought a strong monarchy to rise above religious differences.

==History==

The League immediately began to exert pressure on King Henry III and his heir Henry of Navarre. Faced with this mounting opposition, the King canceled the Peace of La Rochelle, re-criminalizing Protestantism and beginning a new chapter in the French Wars of Religion. However, Henry III also feared the growing power of the Duke of Guise, the head of the Catholic League. On the Day of the Barricades, Henry III was forced to flee Paris, leaving Guise as de facto ruler of France. To recover the King&#x27;s position, on 23 December 1588 royal guardsmen assassinated the Duke and his brother Louis II, while the Duke&#x27;s son Charles of Lorraine was imprisoned in the Bastille.

This move did little to consolidate the King&#x27;s power and enraged both the surviving Guises and their followers. The King again fled Paris to join Henry of Navarre, and began building an army to besiege the capital. 

On 1 August 1589, as the two Henrys sat before the city preparing for their final assault, Jacques Clément, a Dominican lay brother with ties to the League and enraged by the killing of the Duke, infiltrated the King&#x27;s entourage dressed as a priest, and assassinated him. As he lay dying, the King begged Henry of Navarre to convert to Catholicism, calling it the only way to prevent further bloodshed. The King&#x27;s death threw the army into disarray and Henry of Navarre was forced to lift the siege.

Although Henry of Navarre was now the legitimate King of France, the League&#x27;s armies forced him to retreat south. Using arms and military advisors provided by Queen Elizabeth I of England, he achieved several military victories. However, he was unable to overcome the superior forces of the League, which commanded the loyalty of most Frenchmen and had the support of Philip II of Spain. On 21 November 1589 the League attempted to declare the Cardinal of Bourbon, Henry&#x27;s uncle, as king Charles X of France. However, the Cardinal was under guard by Henry&#x27;s men, and he refused to usurp the throne from his nephew; he died in May 1590. 

The Catholic jurist and poet Jean de La Ceppède, a Politique supporter of Henry of Navarre, was arrested in 1589 when Aix-en-Provence fell to the League&#x27;s armies. After a failed attempt to escape disguised as a shoemaker, he was released on the orders of an admirer who was a senior member of the League.

In the estates general of 1593, the League was unable even to unite behind a single candidate for the French throne, splitting between several candidates including the Spanish princess Isabella. The League&#x27;s position was further weakened, but they still securely held Paris. The stalemate was finally ended when Henry of Navarre was received into the Catholic Church on 25 July 1593, and was welcomed into Paris as King Henry IV on 27 February 1594.

The Catholic League, now lacking the threat of a Calvinist king, continued to disintegrate. The last remaining senior leader of the League was Philippe Emmanuel, Duke of Mercœur, who, with Spanish backing, was also fighting to restore the political independence of the Duchy of Brittany under his own rule.

With reinforcements sent from England, King Henry at last marched against the Duke of Mercœur in person, but instead received his submission, as the last remaining military leader of the Catholic League, at Angers on 20 March 1598. King Henry IV then assured his dynasty&#x27;s future inheritance of Brittany by arranging the marriage of his illegitimate son, César Duc de Vendôme, to Mercœur&#x27;s daughter Francoise. In April 1598, the King issued the Edict of Nantes, granting religious toleration and limited autonomy to the Huguenots, while retaining the Catholic Church in France as the Established Church of the realm, and finally ended the civil war.

==Assessment==
Historian Mack Holt argues that historians have sometimes overemphasised the political role of the League at the expense of its religious and devotional character:

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="4" end="29" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Catholic League of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="85" end="94" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="102" end="113" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Holy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="149" end="172" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q313700" start="205" end="227" title="Henry I, Duke of Guise" label="Henry I, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="334" end="348" title="Henry III of France" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616897" start="398" end="415" title="Edict of Beaulieu" label="Edict of Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="455" end="471" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="554" end="567" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="569" end="587" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="597" end="604" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616897" start="749" end="766" title="Edict of Beaulieu" label="Edict of Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="776" end="790" title="Henry III of France" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q207304" start="949" end="964" title="Estates General (France)" label="Estates General"/>
<link wikidata="Q318380" start="1070" end="1093" title="Francis, Duke of Anjou" label="François, Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="1114" end="1130" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="1162" end="1171" title="Salic law" label="Salic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q817418" start="1340" end="1349" title="Joinville, Haute-Marne" label="Joinville"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="1567" end="1576" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450700" start="1609" end="1624" title="French nobility" label="French nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q971965" start="1748" end="1775" title="Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus" label="Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182135" start="1802" end="1817" title="House of Valois" label="House of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="1870" end="1877" title="appeasement" label="appease"/>
<link wikidata="Q656317" start="1971" end="1988" title="Richard Verstegan" label="Richard Verstegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566414" start="2033" end="2040" title="List of Catholic martyrs of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070583" start="2053" end="2075" title="Irish Catholic Martyrs" label="Irish Catholic Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="2163" end="2172" title="Henri III of France" label="Henri III"/>
<link wikidata="Q138409" start="2221" end="2239" title="Francis Walsingham" label="Francis Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="2308" end="2320" title="Papal Nuncio" label="Papal Nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136723" start="2548" end="2553" title="usurper" label="usurp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="2679" end="2686" title="Crusade" label="Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="2695" end="2701" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="2787" end="2795" title="pamphlet" label="pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="3081" end="3087" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="3093" end="3105" title="intellectual" label="intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366363" start="3116" end="3126" title="Politiques" label="Politiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338007" start="3414" end="3434" title="Peace of La Rochelle" label="Peace of La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="3502" end="3525" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q313700" start="3583" end="3596" title="Henry I, Duke of Guise" label="Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187015" start="3638" end="3659" title="Day of the Barricades" label="Day of the Barricades"/>
<link wikidata="Q510693" start="3851" end="3859" title="Louis II, Cardinal of Guise" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965530" start="3887" end="3906" title="Charles, Duke of Guise" label="Charles of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865480" start="3929" end="3937" title="Bastille" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q453413" start="4253" end="4268" title="Jacques Clément" label="Jacques Clément"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="4272" end="4281" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q135450" start="4282" end="4293" title="lay brother" label="lay brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4837" end="4854" title="Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q544166" start="5122" end="5141" title="Charles, Cardinal de Bourbon (born 1523)" label="Cardinal of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175475" start="5355" end="5373" title="Jean de La Ceppède" label="Jean de La Ceppède"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366363" start="5377" end="5386" title="Politiques" label="Politique"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="5444" end="5459" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix-en-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591916" start="5644" end="5667" title="Estates General of 1593" label="estates general of 1593"/>
<link wikidata="Q158256" start="5822" end="5830" title="Isabella Clara Eugenia" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="5993" end="6008" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q592965" start="6236" end="6270" title="Philippe Emmanuel, Duke of Mercœur" label="Philippe Emmanuel, Duke of Mercœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q115828870" start="6308" end="6327" title="Brittany Campaign" label="fighting to restore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742087" start="6332" end="6354" title="Breton nationalism" label="political independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q71747" start="6362" end="6379" title="Duchy of Brittany" label="Duchy of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="6608" end="6614" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q303843" start="6761" end="6781" title="César, Duke of Vendôme" label="César Duc de Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="6856" end="6871" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="6882" end="6902" title="religious toleration" label="religious toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="6962" end="6987" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Catholic Church in France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306289" wikidata="Q7305479" url="?curid=306289" title="Redbone (ethnicity)">
<text>Redbone is a term historically used in much of the southern United States to denote a multiracial individual or culture. Among African Americans the term has been slang for fairer-skinned Black people, often for women specifically or for Black people with red undertones. In Louisiana, it also refers to a specific, geographically and ethnically distinct group.

==Definition==
In Louisiana, the Redbone cultural group consists mainly of the families of migrants to the state following the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. The term &quot;Redbone&quot; became disfavored as it was a pejorative nickname applied by others; however, in the past 30 years, the term has begun to be used as the preferred description for some creole groups, including the Louisiana Redbones.

==Louisiana Redbone cultural group==

The Louisiana Redbones historically lived in geographically and socially isolated communities in the southwestern Louisiana parishes, ranging from Sabine Parish in the northwest and Rapides Parish near the center of the state down to Calcasieu Parish in the southwest, including parts of Orange County, Texas and Newton County, Texas. This area is roughly coextensive with what was once known as the Neutral Ground or Sabine Free State, an area of disputed sovereignty from 1806 to 1821 that was primarily bound on the east by the Calcasieu River and the Sabine River on the west. Most families ancestral to the Louisiana Redbones came from South Carolina (where they were at times classified in some census records as &quot;other free persons&quot;), although some families came from other Southeastern states. A review of newspaper articles, land grants, census records and other documents referring to the Redbones indicates that the main settlements of Redbones to southwestern and south central Louisiana and southeastern Texas took place over the course of many years, although some members of Redbone families are noted as settling in the Neutral Ground before 1818 when the land was finally and officially considered part of the United States.

The ambiguity of the origins of the members of the Redbone community and the cultural attitudes held by those living in the same region as the Redbone community but who were not part of it is shown in a letter written in 1893 by Albert Rigmaiden, Calcasieu parish treasurer, to McDonald Furman, a South Carolinian who conducted private ethnological research. Rigmaiden wrote that he was unable to explain how the name Redbone originated and stated that: &quot;they are neither white nor black &amp; as well as I can find out, the oldest ones came from S.C many years ago ... they are not looked on as being—Negros—Indian nor White people.&quot;

Historically, members of the Redbone ethnic group lived in three areas. One community lived along Ten Mile Creek in Rapides Parish and Allen Parish. Members of this community were referred to as &quot;Ten Milers&quot; or as &quot;Red Bones.&quot; in the 19th century. A second community was along Bearhead creek in what is now Beauregard Parish. A third community was established in Newton County, Texas and Orange County, Texas. 19th century newspapers tended to refer to members of this community simply as &quot;mulattos,&quot; and members of the Texas community were not able to vote.

In the frontier of Southwestern Louisiana, the settlers successfully resisted classification as non-white. In 1837 and 1849, several of the members of the Redbone community were indicted for illegal voting on the charge that they were of color rather than white. The state court found them all not guilty, thus establishing that the Redbone community would be legally considered white in the state of Louisiana.

However, references to the Redbone community and its members in 19th century newspapers tend to be wildly divergent, ranging from making no mention of racial makeup, to stating that the members were white, to stating that the members were African American to stating that the members were of Indian extraction to the assertion that the members were of unspecified mixed race. These newspaper references do have the commonality of all pertaining to violent actions either in the community or perpetrated by members of the community.

Two incidents of violence in Louisiana are particularly notable, one due to the statement of Webster Talma Crawford and one due to the amount of newspaper coverage the incident received. The Westport Fight occurred December 24, 1881 in southern Rapides Parish. According to the Crawford account, friction between the more recent settlers and the Redbones had been simmering for much of the month before exploding into a fight that involved several families in the community and ended in the burning down of a store owned by some of the recent non-Redbone settlers. The Bearhead Creek incident took place in what is now southern Beauregard Parish on August 2, 1891. This battle also occurred due to similar tensions between Redbone and more recent, non-Redbone settlers. It left six men dead and several others wounded.

In Texas, one incident of violence is notable. In May 1856 in the town of Madison (now Orange, Texas), Orange County, Clark Ashworth was arrested for the theft of a hog. Ashworth was bound over for trial and his bond was paid by his cousin Sam Ashworth. Sam and a friend met the deputy sheriff Samuel L Deputy who had arrested Clark on these charges and Sam challenged him to a gun fight. The deputy sheriff arrested Sam Ashworth on the charges of abusive language from Negroes. Justice of the Peace A. N. Reading ruled that Sam Ashworth was a mulatto and not exclusively black, but neither was he white. Reading then sentenced Ashworth to 30 lashes on the bare back. The sheriff, Edward C. Glover, who was friendly to members of the Redbone community, allowed Sam to escape before sentence could be carried out. Sam Ashworth and his cousin, Jack Bunch, then murdered deputy sheriff Samuel Deputy as he crossed Sabine river with his friend A. C. Merriman. Sheriff Glover organized a posse to hunt for Ashworth but only included Glover&#x27;s and Ashworth&#x27;s friends. The posse did not find the wanted men. Thereafter, other attempts were made to find Ashworth and Bunch that were not successful. In the aftermath of this incident, members of the Redbone community in Orange County were harassed; their homes and businesses were burned and plundered. Many living in Orange County moved to Louisiana. Over the coming weeks, a war raged between two groups, The Orange County War of 1856. Those in support of Glover and the Redbones became known as &quot;regulators&quot; while those who supported Merriman became known as &quot;moderators.&quot;

These incidents illustrate the friction between some (mainly new) non-Redbone settlers to the region and the existing Redbone population. It is incidents such as these that may have cemented the non-Redbone view of this population as being both clannish and violent. The census records from the early to late 19th century list many non-Redbone families settling in the same regions as the Redbones, and these settlers, from the evidence of the records, lived peacefully with members of the Redbone families, even, in many cases, marrying into Redbone families.

During the era of mandated racial segregation under Jim Crow laws ( to 1965) schools accepted Redbone students as white and a review of United States Census records in the late 19th and early 20th century shows that families traditionally considered as members of the Redbone community were mainly (although not always) recorded as white. Additionally, according to the marriage and census records, individuals who were from these families married either other members of the Redbone community or individuals who were listed in the census records as white and not members of the Redbone community.

Academically, the group has been termed &quot;under-researched.&quot;

==In literature==
* Campbell, Will D. &quot;The Glad River&quot;, 1982
* Greg Iles. &quot;Natchez Burning&quot;, 2014,
*James Lee Burke. &quot;Morning for Flamingos&quot;, 1990

==In film==
*In the film &quot;The 6th Man&quot; (1997), R.C. St John (played by Michael Michele), in reference to her light colored skin.
*In the Netflix series &quot;Master of None&quot; (2015), Denise (played by Lena Waithe) uses the term to refer to a light skinned black person.
*In the television series &quot;P-Valley&quot; (2020), Autumn Knight (played by Elarica Johnson), in reference to her heritage/ethnicity.
*In the television series “Insecure”, Issa Dee (played by Issa Rae) uses the term to refer to Nathan, a fair skinned black love interest.

== In music ==
*The American funk rock band Redbone, formed in 1969, is named after the term as the founding members were all of mixed ancestry.
*The song &quot;Redbone&quot; by Cassandra Wilson from her 1993 album &quot;Blue Light &#x27;til Dawn&quot; describes a troubled woman of Redbone heritage. 
*The 2016 song &quot;Redbone&quot; by Childish Gambino is named after the term.

==See also==
* Melungeon
* Sabine Free State
* Adams–Onís Treaty
* Regulator–Moderator War
* Brass Ankles
* Cajuns
* Acadians
* Mulatto
* Louisiana Creole people
* High yellow

==References==
==External links==
* Gilmer, Jason A., Selected Works &quot;Free People in a Slave Country,&quot;, March, 2010.
* Melungeon Heritage Association
* DeMarce, Virginia. &quot;National Genealogical Society Quarterly&quot;, March 1992.
* Marler, D. C. &quot;Louisiana Redbones&quot;, presented at the First Union, a meeting of Melungeons, at Clinch Valley College in Wise, Virginia, July 1997. (anecdotal history)
* Marler, D. C. &quot;Redbones of Louisiana&quot;, Dogwood Press.
* Crawford, Webster Talma. &quot;Redbones in the Neutral Strip or No Man&#x27;s Land Between Calcasieu and Sabine Rivers, and the Westport Fight Between Whites and Redbones for Possession of this Strip on Christmas Eve, 1882&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7305479" start="0" end="7" title="Redbone (ethnicity)" label="Redbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="51" end="73" title="southern United States" label="southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="127" end="143" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="275" end="284" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="917" end="926" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q507000" start="950" end="963" title="Sabine Parish, Louisiana" label="Sabine Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q503870" start="985" end="999" title="Rapides Parish, Louisiana" label="Rapides Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q504345" start="1037" end="1053" title="Calcasieu Parish, Louisiana" label="Calcasieu Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q109215" start="1091" end="1111" title="Orange County, Texas" label="Orange County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q112565" start="1116" end="1136" title="Newton County, Texas" label="Newton County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q841667" start="1203" end="1217" title="Neutral Ground (Louisiana)" label="Neutral Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q841667" start="1221" end="1238" title="Sabine Free State" label="Sabine Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433661" start="1334" end="1349" title="Calcasieu River" label="Calcasieu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q596106" start="1358" end="1370" title="Sabine River (Texas–Louisiana)" label="Sabine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="1444" end="1458" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="1528" end="1546" title="free people of color" label="other free persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="1594" end="1613" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeastern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1830" end="1835" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q841667" start="1949" end="1963" title="Neutral Ground (Louisiana)" label="Neutral Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q503870" start="2818" end="2832" title="Rapides Parish, Louisiana" label="Rapides Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q65433" start="2837" end="2849" title="Allen Parish, Louisiana" label="Allen Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q504284" start="3029" end="3046" title="Beauregard Parish, Louisiana" label="Beauregard Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q112565" start="3085" end="3105" title="Newton County, Texas" label="Newton County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109215" start="3110" end="3130" title="Orange County, Texas" label="Orange County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q504284" start="4866" end="4883" title="Beauregard Parish" label="Beauregard Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="7320" end="7333" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="7404" end="7424" title="United States Census" label="United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002772" start="7958" end="7974" title="Will Campbell (Baptist minister)" label="Campbell, Will D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349027" start="8011" end="8020" title="Greg Iles" label="Greg Iles"/>
<link wikidata="Q982095" start="8058" end="8073" title="James Lee Burke" label="James Lee Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003717" start="8147" end="8158" title="The 6th Man" label="The 6th Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q263935" start="8197" end="8212" title="Michael Michele" label="Michael Michele"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="8263" end="8270" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856971" start="8284" end="8298" title="Master of None" label="Master of None"/>
<link wikidata="Q21872808" start="8331" end="8342" title="Lena Waithe" label="Lena Waithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769439" start="8432" end="8440" title="P-Valley" label="P-Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q378950" start="8480" end="8495" title="Elarica Johnson" label="Elarica Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26689564" start="8565" end="8573" title="Insecure (TV series)" label="Insecure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560267" start="8596" end="8604" title="Issa Rae" label="Issa Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q835891" start="8706" end="8715" title="funk rock" label="funk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751280" start="8721" end="8728" title="Redbone (band)" label="Redbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q239860" start="8855" end="8871" title="Cassandra Wilson" label="Cassandra Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641163" start="8898" end="8923" title="Blue Light &amp;#x27;til Dawn" label="Blue Light &amp;#x27;til Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452669" start="9000" end="9007" title="Redbone (song)" label="Redbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239933" start="9017" end="9033" title="Childish Gambino" label="Childish Gambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668201" start="9075" end="9084" title="Melungeon" label="Melungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q841667" start="9087" end="9104" title="Sabine Free State" label="Sabine Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="9107" end="9124" title="Adams–Onís Treaty" label="Adams–Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309711" start="9127" end="9150" title="Regulator–Moderator War" label="Regulator–Moderator War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957854" start="9153" end="9165" title="Brass Ankles" label="Brass Ankles"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="9168" end="9174" title="Cajuns" label="Cajuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="9177" end="9185" title="Acadians" label="Acadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="9188" end="9195" title="Mulatto" label="Mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="9198" end="9221" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Louisiana Creole people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917000" start="9224" end="9235" title="High yellow" label="High yellow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306291" wikidata="Q34302" url="?curid=306291" title="Doubt">
<text>Doubt is a mental state in which the mind remains suspended between two or more contradictory propositions, and is uncertain about them. Doubt on an emotional level is indecision between belief and . It may involve uncertainty, distrust or lack of conviction on certain facts, actions, motives, or decisions. Doubt can result in delaying or rejecting relevant action out of concern for mistakes or missed opportunities.

==Psychology==
Partial or intermittent negative reinforcement can create an effective climate of fear and doubt.

==Philosophy==
Descartes employed Cartesian doubt as a pre-eminent methodological tool in his fundamental philosophical investigations. Branches of philosophy like logic devote much effort to distinguish the dubious, the probable and the certain. Much of illogic rests on dubious assumptions, dubious data or dubious conclusions, with rhetoric, whitewashing, and deception playing their accustomed roles.

In his posthumous work &quot;On Certainty&quot; (OC), Ludwig Wittgenstein describes how our everyday use of the words ‘doubt’ and ‘certainty’ function. The two concepts are interwoven into our daily lives such that if we cannot be certain of any fact, then we cannot be certain of the meaning of our words either. (OC §114). 

==Theology==

Doubt as a path towards (deeper) belief lies at the heart of the story of Saint Thomas the Apostle. Note in this respect the theological views of Georg Hermes:
... the starting-point and chief principle of every science, and hence of theology also, is not only methodical doubt, but positive doubt. One can believe only what one has perceived to be true from reasonable grounds, and consequently one must have the courage to continue doubting until one has found reliable grounds to satisfy the reason.
Doubt that god(s) exist may form the basis of agnosticism — the belief that one cannot determine the existence or non-existence of god(s). It may also form other brands of skepticism, such as Pyrrhonism, which do not take a positive stance in regard to the existence of god(s), but remain negative. Alternatively, doubt over the existence of god(s) may lead to acceptance of a particular religion: compare Pascal&#x27;s Wager. Doubt of a specific theology, scriptural or deistic, may bring into question the truth of that theology&#x27;s set of beliefs. On the other hand, doubt as to some doctrines but acceptance of others may lead to the growth of heresy and/or the splitting off of sects or groups of thought. Thus proto-Protestants doubted papal authority, and substituted alternative methods of governance in their new (but still recognizably similar) churches.

Christian existentialists such as Søren Kierkegaard suggest that for one to truly have belief in God, one would also have to doubt one&#x27;s beliefs about God; the doubt is the rational part of a person&#x27;s thought involved in weighing evidence, without which the belief would have no real substance. Belief is not a decision based on evidence that, say, certain beliefs about God are true or a certain person is worthy of love. No such evidence could ever be enough to pragmatically justify the kind of total commitment involved in true theological belief or romantic love. Belief involves making that commitment anyway. Kierkegaard thought that to have belief is at the same time to have doubt.

==Law==
Most criminal cases within an adversarial system require that the prosecution proves its contentions beyond a reasonable doubt — a doctrine also called the &quot;burden of proof&quot;. This means that the State must present propositions which preclude &quot;reasonable doubt&quot; in the mind of a reasonable person as to the guilt of defendant. Some doubt may persist, but only to the extent that it would &quot;not&quot; affect a &quot;reasonable person&#x27;s&quot; belief in the defendant&#x27;s guilt. If the doubt raised &quot;does&quot; affect a &quot;reasonable person&#x27;s&quot; belief, the jury is not satisfied beyond a &quot;reasonable doubt&quot;. The jurisprudence of the applicable jurisdiction usually defines the precise meaning of words such as &quot;reasonable&quot; and &quot;doubt&quot; for such purposes.

==Science==

To doubt everything or to believe everything are two equally convenient solutions; both dispense with the necessity of reflection.
—Henri Poincaré, Science and Hypothesis (1905) (from Dover abridged edition of 1952)

The scientific method regularly quantifies doubt, and uses it to determine whether further research is needed. Isaac Asimov, in his 1962 essay collection &quot;Fact and Fancy&quot;, described science as a system for causing and resolving intelligent doubt.

Charles Peirce saw doubt as the starting point of any scientific investigation.
Karl Popper deployed scientific doubt as an essential tool: scientists working in the Popperian paradigm doubt any theory so thoroughly that they strive to falsify that theory.

==See also==
* Doubting Thomas
* Fear, uncertainty and doubt
* Further research is needed
* List of ethics topics
* Methodic doubt
* Philosophical skepticism
* Question
* Reasonable doubt
* Skepticism
*Self-doubt

==Notes and references==


==Further reading==
* Berger, Peter L. and Zijderveld, Anton (2009). &quot;In Praise of Doubt: How to Have Convictions Without Becoming a Fanatic&quot;. New York: HarperOne. . A book by two eminent sociologists, one American and the other Dutch.
* This book traces the role of doubt through human history, all over the world, particularly regarding religion.
* Hein, David (Winter 2006). &quot;Faith and Doubt in Rose Macaulay&#x27;s &quot;The Towers of Trebizond&quot;&quot;. &quot;Anglican Theological Review&quot; 88 (1): 47–68. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34302" start="0" end="5" title="Doubt" label="Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968640" start="11" end="23" title="mental state" label="mental state"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="37" end="41" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520777" start="115" end="124" title="certainty" label="uncertain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="149" end="156" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="187" end="193" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649246" start="215" end="226" title="uncertainty" label="uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q621922" start="228" end="236" title="distrust" label="distrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q188572" start="270" end="274" title="fact" label="fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="298" end="307" title="Decision making" label="decisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321905" start="469" end="482" title="reinforcement" label="reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394672" start="507" end="522" title="climate of fear" label="climate of fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="550" end="559" title="René Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q976088" start="569" end="584" title="Cartesian doubt" label="Cartesian doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="699" end="704" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="756" end="764" title="probability" label="probable"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="870" end="878" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504639" start="880" end="892" title="whitewash (censorship)" label="whitewashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="898" end="907" title="deception" label="deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q330929" start="970" end="982" title="On Certainty" label="On Certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="995" end="1014" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="1315" end="1321" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="1362" end="1380" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Thomas the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074" start="1428" end="1440" title="Georg Hermes" label="Georg Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="1831" end="1842" title="agnosticism" label="agnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="1957" end="1967" title="skepticism" label="skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126340" start="1977" end="1987" title="Pyrrhonism" label="Pyrrhonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q830200" start="2191" end="2210" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s Wager" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s Wager"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="2436" end="2442" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="2471" end="2475" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292614" start="2504" end="2521" title="proto-Protestantism" label="proto-Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="2530" end="2545" title="papal authority" label="papal authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745479" start="2654" end="2679" title="Christian existentialism" label="Christian existentialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="2688" end="2705" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="3369" end="3377" title="criminal law" label="criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="3394" end="3412" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905670" start="3465" end="3490" title="beyond a reasonable doubt" label="beyond a reasonable doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="3526" end="3541" title="Legal burden of proof" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900682" start="3662" end="3679" title="reasonable person" label="reasonable person"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="4031" end="4044" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="4339" end="4353" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="4428" end="4445" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377987" start="4507" end="4533" title="further research is needed" label="further research is needed"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="4535" end="4547" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428677" start="4584" end="4598" title="Fact and Fancy" label="Fact and Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="4682" end="4696" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="4762" end="4773" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="4918" end="4925" title="falsifiability" label="falsify"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924861" start="4955" end="4970" title="Doubting Thomas" label="Doubting Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q831648" start="4973" end="5000" title="Fear, uncertainty and doubt" label="Fear, uncertainty and doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377987" start="5003" end="5029" title="Further research is needed" label="Further research is needed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112626" start="5032" end="5053" title="List of ethics topics" label="List of ethics topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q976088" start="5056" end="5070" title="Methodic doubt" label="Methodic doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="5073" end="5097" title="Philosophical skepticism" label="Philosophical skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189756" start="5100" end="5108" title="Question" label="Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905670" start="5111" end="5127" title="Reasonable doubt" label="Reasonable doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="5130" end="5140" title="Skepticism" label="Skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34302" start="5142" end="5152" title="Self-doubt" label="Self-doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q84486" start="5203" end="5219" title="Peter L. Berger" label="Berger, Peter L."/>
<link wikidata="Q7769767" start="5621" end="5644" title="The Towers of Trebizond" label="The Towers of Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q15753995" start="5664" end="5691" title="Anglican Theological Review" label="Anglican Theological Review"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306296" wikidata="Q4009190" url="?curid=306296" title="Vecna">
<text>Vecna ( ) is a fictional character appearing in the &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; fantasy role-playing game. Vecna has been named one of the greatest villains in the &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; franchise.

Originally appearing in the &quot;Greyhawk&quot; campaign setting, Vecna was described as a powerful wizard who became a lich. He was eventually destroyed, and his left hand and left eye were the only parts of his body to survive. Even after the character achieved godhood—being a member of the third edition&#x27;s default pantheon of &quot;D&amp;D&quot; gods (the pantheon of Oerth)—he is still described as missing both his left eye and left hand. Vecna&#x27;s holy symbol is an eye in the palm of a left hand.

Vecna&#x27;s &quot;right-hand man&quot;, who ultimately became his betrayer, is Kas the Bloody-Handed, a vampire whose sword, the &quot;Sword of Kas&quot;, is also an artifact.

== Publication history ==
===Original &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;===
In &quot;Eldritch Wizardry&quot; (1976), the third supplement to the original &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; rules, Brian Blume invented two artifacts he called the Hand and Eye of Vecna. These were supposedly the only remnants of an evil lich, Vecna, who had been destroyed long ago. &quot;The book contains no more detail on Vecna other than the fact that Kas was his bodyguard&quot;. The name Vecna was an anagram of Vance, the surname of Jack Vance, the fantasy author whose works inspired the magic system used in &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. The Hand and Eye of Vecna on the other hand were inspired by similar items that appear in the &quot;Eternal Champion&quot; series by Michael Moorcock (the Hand of Kwll and the Eye of Rhynn).

On the artifacts, Gary Gygax later said, &quot;nary a detail of those items did [Blume] ever reveal to me&quot;.

===1st edition===
The Hand and Eye of Vecna were then mentioned in the first edition &quot;Dungeon Master&#x27;s Guide&quot; (1979) on page 124. During the &quot;Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; years, Vecna was regarded only as a legend or myth, a long-destroyed legendary lich of great power, only able to threaten player characters who dared to use his Hand and Eye.

=== 2nd edition ===
Ten years later, in Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons 2nd edition&#x27;s &quot;Dungeon Master&#x27;s Guide&quot; (1989), Vecna&#x27;s history was expanded under the description of his Hand. With the release of the adventure &quot;Vecna Lives!&quot; in 1990, written in support of &quot;The City of Greyhawk&quot; boxed set, Vecna finally appeared in person, reimagined as a demigod, and the chief antagonist of the adventure. At the end of the adventure—presuming the players defeat Vecna—he is transported to the &quot;Ravenloft&quot; campaign setting. Vecna&#x27;s history, via his artifacts, was also further developed in the supplemental sourcebook &quot;Book of Artifacts&quot; (1993). After the publication of &quot;Vecna Lives!&quot; (1990), &quot;Vecna disappeared throughout the rest of the &#x27;90s, until &quot;Domains of Dread&quot; (1997)&quot; which confirmed his new location in the realm of Ravenloft. However, it wasn&#x27;t until 1998 that there was a Ravenloft-centered follow-through, &quot;Vecna Reborn&quot;.

In 2000, Wizards of the Coast released the last adventure to be written for the 2nd edition ruleset, &quot;Die Vecna Die!&quot;, a three-part adventure tying Greyhawk to the Ravenloft and Planescape campaign settings. In this adventure, Vecna was given the rank of a lesser god. &quot;Die Vecna Die!&quot; set up the transition between the second and third editions of D&amp;D. According to Shannon Appelcline, the adventure &quot;touched upon the oldest locales and the most ancient myths of the &quot;D&amp;D&quot; game&quot; by involving the Eye and Hand of Vecna and using them to oppose Iuz the cambion demigod.

=== 3rd and 3.5 edition ===
Wizards of the Coast continued the character&#x27;s theme of ascending godhood in Dungeons &amp; Dragons Third Edition (2000–2002) with the &quot;Player&#x27;s Handbook&quot; (2000) listing him as a Lesser deity. Third Edition further raised Vecna&#x27;s profile in the game, making him a member of the game&#x27;s &quot;core pantheon&quot;. Vecna&#x27;s alignment was changed from Lawful Evil to Neutral Evil in Third Edition, and no in-game explanation has surfaced. Vecna&#x27;s role in the 3rd edition Greyhawk setting was defined in the &quot;Living Greyhawk Gazetteer&quot; (2000). Vecna is detailed in &quot;Deities and Demigods&quot; (2002). On the deities of the Greyhawk setting, Matthew Attanasio, for &quot;CBR&quot;, wrote, &quot;Vecna, a lich who hordes [sic] dark secrets, covets incredible power and holds dominion over the undead, is perhaps the most infamous of these deities&quot;.

Vecna appears in the revised &quot;Player&#x27;s Handbook&quot; (2003) for Dungeons &amp; Dragons 3.5 edition (2003–2007). His priesthood is detailed for this edition in &quot;Complete Divine&quot; (2004). Vecna was one of the deities featured in &quot;Libris Mortis&quot; (2004). Vecna and his priesthood were expanded upon in &quot;Dragon&quot; #348, in the &quot;Core Beliefs&quot; column.

=== 4th edition ===
Vecna appears as one of the deities described in the 2008 &quot;Dungeon Master&#x27;s Guide&quot; for Dungeons &amp; Dragons 4th edition. He is primarily the god of secrets. The Hand of Vecna has also made its return for this edition of the game. Vecna was given a set of statistics in &quot;Open Grave&quot; (2008). Vecna was the name of the Wizards of the Coast&#x27;s server that hosted and handled the new online character builder tool.

=== 5th edition ===
In the 5th Edition &quot;Dungeon Master&#x27;s Guide (&quot;2014), Vecna appears as a member of the &quot;Dawn War Pantheon&quot; which is mostly derived from the 4th Edition pantheon. He is also included in the &quot;Player&#x27;s Handbook&quot; (2014) as one of the deities of Greyhawk. In both, he is listed as the god of evil secrets. Additionally, both his hand and eye are listed as artifacts. In the &quot;Sword Coast Adventurer&#x27;s Guide&quot; (2015), Vecna is mentioned as a possible God for the Arcana Cleric Domain, as well as a Warlock patron of the Undying.

In the Exandria setting, Vecna is a Betrayer God also known as the Whispered One. He was introduced to this setting in the &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; web series &quot;Critical Role&quot; as the main villain in the last arc of the first campaign. However, the events of &quot;Critical Role&quot; were not added to the official &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; canon until Joe Manganiello&#x27;s character Arkhan was added to the adventure module &quot;Baldur&#x27;s Gate: Descent Into Avernus&quot; (2019). Further details on Vox Machina&#x27;s fight with Vecna were then included in the official campaign sourcebook &quot;Explorer&#x27;s Guide to Wildemount&quot; (2020) along with details on Vecna&#x27;s enemies and his commandments.

In June 2022, Wizards of the Coast released the &quot;Vecna Dossier&quot; as a digital exclusive on D&amp;D Beyond. This included background information and a 5th Edition statblock for Vecna in the updated style of the edition. This iteration is of Vecna as an archlich before his ascension to godhood.

Vecna is the main villain of the adventure module &quot;Vecna: Eve of Ruin&quot;, released in May 2024. This module also launches a new storyline that will &quot;play out over a five year period, with other adventures bringing back more classic D&amp;D villains&quot;.

== Related artifacts ==
===&quot;Hand&quot; and &quot;Eye of Vecna&quot;===
The left hand and eye of Vecna&#x27;s original &quot;mortal&quot; lich form, which have never been replaced in his later more powerful incarnations, are now high-valued and very dangerous magical artifacts. To use the powers of the Hand of Vecna or the Eye of Vecna one is required to cut off one&#x27;s own corresponding body part and affix Vecna&#x27;s in its place. &quot;The new bearer of the Eye or Hand (or both) will gain access to powerful spell-like abilities, but the items will slowly corrupt them, turning them evil over time&quot;. These artifacts were introduced in the third supplement to the original D&amp;D rules, &quot;Eldritch Wizardry&quot;. They went on to appear in all subsequent D&amp;D editions. They are considered classic items in D&amp;D, with Mordicai Knode of Tor.com commenting &quot;We all agree that the &quot;Hand and Eye of Vecna&quot; are the best artifacts, right?&quot; Scott Baird, for &quot;Screen Rant&quot;, highlighted the risk of the items and stated that &quot;a &quot;D&amp;D&quot; party that finds one can find itself torn apart. The reputation of these items precedes them and many good adventurers would want to destroy the Eye or Hand of Vecna, but there is always the temptation of power. More importantly, the player will be tempted, simply so they can brag that they used these famous items in a campaign&quot;.

Joe Manganiello&#x27;s character Arkhan fought against Vecna with the adventuring party Vox Machina in the web series &quot;Critical Role&quot;. He then stole the Hand of Vecna and replaced his own hand with the artifact. In &quot;Baldur&#x27;s Gate: Descent Into Avernus&quot; (2019), Arkhan is attempting to master the Hand of Vecna in hopes of freeing Tiamat, however, the artifact is slowly corrupting and decomposing his left side.

===&quot;Sword of Kas&quot;===
Vecna created the &quot;Sword of Kas&quot; for his greatest servant, which contains a &quot;portion of his consciousness.&quot;

This interpretation is relatively recent. As per the 1st edition &quot;Dungeon Master&#x27;s Guide&quot;, Vecna only procured this most powerful sword for his chief lieutenant. Similarly, depending on edition and source, its appearance has varied, from a short sword to a wavy bladed two hander. However, it is consistently depicted that the &quot;Sword&quot; is inextricably tied to Vecna&#x27;s relics. &quot;The reason why Vecna only has a single eye and hand is due to a betrayal by Kas&quot;, who used the sword against his former master.

&quot;In the third edition of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons,&quot; the Sword of Kas is a &quot;+6 unholy keen vorpal longsword&quot; that grants a +10 modifier to the Strength score of its wielder&quot;.

===Other artifacts===
A number of Vecna&#x27;s other body parts are presented as minor artifacts in &quot;Die Vecna Die!&quot;, including the &quot;First Digit&quot; (right thumb), &quot;Second Digit&quot; (right index finger), &quot;Third Digit&quot; (right middle finger), &quot;Last Digit&quot; (right pinky finger), &quot;Incisors&quot; (a pair of inappropriately named fang-like canines), &quot;Molar&quot;, &quot;Scalp&quot;, &quot;Skin&quot;, &quot;Heart&quot;, &quot;Foot&quot; (left), and &quot;Right Eye&quot;. These artifacts are collectively known in D&amp;D 3rd Edition as the &quot;Fragments of Vecna&quot;. The &quot;Compendium Maleficarum&quot; is a book of spells, doctrines, and secrets crafted entirely from bone (even the pages) and penned in blood, that is on par with the &quot;Fragments of Vecna&quot;. The &quot;Tome of Shared Secrets&quot; is an illustrated bestiary of relic status, with the ability to impart knowledge of dark and evil creatures at the cost of a portion the user&#x27;s life force. Those two books were superseded in 5th edition by a combined &quot;Book of Vile Darkness&quot;, a legacy of dark secrets started by Vecna. The &quot;Rod of the Whispered One&quot;, while not nearly so powerful as the &quot;Sword of Kas&quot;, is another item Vecna crafted to connect himself with his highest lieutenants. The final issue of Dragon Magazine, issue #359, featured rules for the &quot;Left Ear of Vecna&quot; as a minor artifact. It grants the owner magical bonuses to hearing and resisting sonic attacks, spell-like abilities to inflict deafness, grant clairaudience and create sonic blasts, and enables them to understand any spoken language. A lich known as Osterneth possesses the &quot;Heart of Vecna&quot; according to the &quot;Open Grave&quot; sourcebook.

===&quot;Head of Vecna&quot;===
The &quot;Head of Vecna&quot; was a hoax that one adventuring party played on another in a campaign run by game master Mark Steuer. One of the groups tricked the other into going on a quest for the &quot;Head of Vecna&quot;, a hoax artifact that was supposedly similar to his &quot;Hand&quot; and &quot;Eye&quot;, but was simply an ordinary severed head. The hoax takes advantage of the fact that the &quot;Eye&quot; and &quot;Hand&quot; require a person to remove their own eye or hand and replace it with the artifact to function. The characters involved in the story reasoned that they needed to decapitate themselves to gain the powers of the Head of Vecna, and several members of the group actually fought over which character would get to have his head cut off and replaced. After the third character died, the joke was revealed.

In the 1999 &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; CRPG &quot;&quot;, Fall-From-Grace (a celibate succubus) asks Morte (a disembodied floating skull) &quot;What are you?&quot;, to which Morte replies &quot;Me? I&#x27;m the head of Vecna.&quot; A similar conversation between the two involves Morte saying &quot;It&#x27;s a long story involving the head of Vecna. I don&#x27;t want to talk about it.&quot; Grace responds with an amused &quot;That was you?&quot; Also in the same game, the &quot;Eye of Vecna&quot; is a rare item dropped by greater glabrezu.

The &quot;Head of Vecna&quot; made a canonical appearance in the AD&amp;D 2nd edition module &quot;Die Vecna Die!&quot; (2000), and was the subject of a short adventure on the Wizards of the Coast website in 2007.

Familiarity with the &quot;Head of Vecna&quot; was cited as an example characteristic of an avid role-playing gamer by writer David M. Ewalt.

== Fictional history ==

===Description===
Vecna is usually depicted as a powerful magician resembling a desiccated corpse missing his left hand and eye. A constant theme in the adventures in which the character appears is Vecna&#x27;s never-ending quest for power, ending, should he succeed, with Vecna as the only deity in existence.

=== Character biography ===
Vecna was born as a human, centuries ago as a member of the untouchable caste in the Flan city of Fleeth on Oerth. He was initially trained by his mother, Mazzel, in the art of magic, before she was executed by the government of Fleeth for practicing witchcraft. Vowing revenge, Vecna eventually assumed a mastery of the dark arts achieved by no mortal before or since. Some say this achievement was due to direct tutelage by Mok&#x27;slyk the Serpent, believed to be the personification of arcane magic itself.

Nearly one thousand years after his birth, Vecna, now a lich and ruler of a great and terrible empire (in the Sheldomar Valley, centered near the modern-day Rushmoors), laid siege to the city of Fleeth with an army of arcane spellcasters and undead. Legend has it that Vecna was nearly slain in this battle by clerics channeling the power of Pholtus, the god of light. The clerics unleashed a great burst of light, which hit Vecna primarily on his left side. Vecna was rescued and brought to safety by one of his wizard generals, a cambion named Acererak (who would one day himself become a mighty demilich).

Vecna eventually recovered. On the verge of conquering Fleeth, the officials of the city came before him to beg for mercy. They offered up the entire city and her wealth if only Vecna would spare the lives of her citizens. When Vecna was not satisfied, the officials offered their own lives. Vecna gave one of their number, Artau, and his family, over to his lieutenant, Kas, who spent the entire day torturing and murdering them before the other officials. Still unsatisfied, Vecna slaughtered all within the city, and had their heads stacked before the officials, with those of their family members prominent. Vecna then granted his mercy, granting the officials leave to depart, and promising them his protection for the rest of their lives.

At his empire&#x27;s height, Vecna was betrayed and destroyed by his most trusted lieutenant, a vampire called Kas the Bloody-Handed, using a magical sword that Vecna himself had crafted for him, now known as the Sword of Kas. Only his left hand and his eye survived the battle, perhaps because of the previous events in Fleeth.

Vecna did not stay gone forever, and rose as a demigod of magic and secrets in the world of Greyhawk. In 581 CY, his cult helped set events in motion that would have granted him the power of a greater god, but the plan was ultimately foiled. After these events, Vecna ended up imprisoned in the demiplane of Ravenloft, but broke free again later, emerging with the power of a greater god, after absorbing the power of Iuz. He then broke free into the city of Sigil, where he came perilously close to rearranging all existence to his whims. (Vecna&#x27;s multiverse shattering campaign in Sigil is used as an in-universe way to explain the differences between the 2nd and 3rd editions of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons.&quot;) When Vecna was ejected from Sigil by a party of adventurers, Iuz was freed and Vecna returned to Oerth greatly reduced in power, though still a lesser god.

In the events of the Living Greyhawk campaign setting, Vecna&#x27;s machinations allowed him to reappear on the prime material plane and retake his place in the Oerth pantheon.

===Writings===
At some point in his history, Vecna penned a tome known as &quot;Ordinary Necromancy&quot;. He is also rumored to have made significant additions to the &quot;Book of Vile Darkness&quot;.

== Fictional relationships ==
Vecna has few allies, and countless enemies. In 2nd and 3rd Edition, his greatest, and perhaps only true ally is the mysterious entity known as the Serpent. In 4th edition, the Open Grave book introduces Osterneth, the Bronze Lich, as the mightiest servant of Vecna. The famed cambion lich, Acererak, once served Vecna, but the current status of their relationship is unknown. Among Vecna&#x27;s staunchest foes are Kas, Iuz, Saint Cuthbert, the Lady of Pain, Pholtus, and the Circle of Eight. He is also opposed by the Old Faith and the Silent Ones.

In 4th edition, Vecna&#x27;s main foes in the realm of death and undeath are Kas, Orcus and the Raven Queen (though he would rather she rule the dead than Orcus). Among the gods, Ioun is something of Vecna&#x27;s antithesis, for she would share with the world all the knowledge he would keep secret.

===Worshippers===
Vecna&#x27;s cult is very secretive, and cells have been uncovered, at various points in history, in Diamond Lake, Greyhawk, and Verbobonc. Temples to Vecna have also been reported in the Pomarj town of Highport and Erelhei-Cinlu, the debased city at the heart of the Vault of the Drow.

====Scriptures====
Being a secretive cult, there are no real collections of Vecnan teachings. However, copies of the &quot;Book of Vile Darkness&quot; are highly prized by the cult for Vecna&#x27;s role in that work&#x27;s development. The &quot;Open Grave&quot; book offers the &quot;Scroll of Mauthereign&quot;, which offers a twisted version of Vecna&#x27;s history and tells his followers that committing evil acts is holy and righteous.

Although not actually penned by Vecna, &quot;the Book of Keeping&quot; (a book of Yugoloth summoning) is heavily linked with the cult of Vecna, as the cultists have the only known copies that are free of the intentional errors introduced into the book by the fiends that wrote the volume as a trap for would-be summoners.

====Hierarchy====
Each position in Vecna&#x27;s cult is named for a certain body part. At the top is Vecna himself, followed by the Voice of Vecna, which can only be filled by Vecna&#x27;s manifestation.

Next is the Heart of Vecna, the high priest of the cult. The last known Heart of Vecna was Diraq Malcinex of Ket, who was slain by adventurers in 581 CY.

Immediately below the Heart of Vecna are two bizarre monsters known as the Hand and the Eye. The Eye of Vecna creature appears as a slender humanoid with an eyeball for a head, whereas the Hand of Vecna appears as a stocky humanoid with a huge left hand where its head should be.

Individual congregations are known as organs. Each organ is led by a Thought of Vecna. Lesser priests are known as Memories of Vecna.

Lay members of the cult consist of the Teeth, Fingers, Blood, and Spawn of Vecna. The Teeth of Vecna are made up of wizards, and specialize in arcane spellcasting and crafting magical items for the cult. The Fingers of Vecna consist mainly of thieves, who engage in various forms of subterfuge. The Blood of Vecna are mainly warriors charged with protection and enforcement of the cult and its goals. The Spawn of Vecna are the lowest in the cult hierarchy, and consist of the common people who honor the Lich Lord.

In 4th edition, the &quot;Open Grave&quot; book shows the leader of the cult of Vecna is a lich named Mauthereign. Even when Osterneth, the Bronze Lich, is Vecna&#x27;s mightiest servant, her position is not revealed among his files.

====Other Vecnan organizations====
Other Vecnan organizations are known to exist outside of the mainstream cult, and some may have similar or identical names. Relations between these groups and the mainstream cult may vary. Known examples are the Eyes of Vecna (a cult of undeath consisting mainly of rogues), the Fingers of Vecna (Vecna&#x27;s personal guard), and the Ebon Triad (a heretical cult seeking to merge Vecna, Hextor, and Erythnul into a single entity).

In 4th edition, a secret group known as the Keepers of the Forbidden Lore is devoted to Vecna. Unlike most Vecna worshippers, the Keepers reject most of the nasty and evil rituals and beliefs associated with the god; they worship him as the God of Secrets, and believe that there is some knowledge too evil for the world to know. They instead hunt down secrets and information they deem to be too dangerous for the world at large and keep it secret in the name of Vecna. This puts them in opposition to mainstream followers of Vecna who regard the Keepers as heretics, and makes them enemies of Ioun and her followers, who believe all knowledge should be available for everybody and the moral obligations on how to use it rest on the shoulders of the individuals involved.

==Reception==
In 2013, Alex Lucard, for &quot;Diehard GameFAN&quot;, highlighted the use of Vecna in two 2nd edition modules: &quot;Vecna Lives&quot; (1991) and &quot;Die Vecna, Die&quot; (2000). On the second module, Lucard wrote, &quot;I love Vecna and I love Greyhawk. [...] Players will encounter some of the most iconic and evil characters in all of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, and have to witness firsthand the end of the Second Edition Universe, and the beginning of Third Edition&quot;.

Vecna was #2 on &quot;Screen Rant&quot;&#x27;s 2018 &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons: The 15 Most Powerful Villains, Ranked&quot; list — the article highlights the &quot;Vecna Lives&quot; (1991) module and states &quot;the players are given the chance to control the members of the Circle of Eight as they investigate a strange burial mound in the Kron Hills. The players then have to watch in horror as the high-level wizards that they are controlling are brutally dealt with [...]. The players then wake up and realize that they have to succeed where some of the most powerful wizards in the world failed. &quot;Vecna Lives&quot; concludes with the players facing off against an avatar of Vecna&quot;.

In 2019, Jeremy Thomas, for &quot;411Mania&quot;, wrote &quot;Vecna is one of D&amp;D’s most well-known villainous characters. While his story has evolved slightly over the years, he has always been a powerful undead lich. The original appearance of the Eye and Hand of Vecna was in 1976’s &quot;Eldritch Wizardry&quot; and it was said that Vecna was long-since destroyed. He eventually became an antagonist in the world of Greyhawk, reimagined as a lich who attained demigod status. His hand and eye, which were separated from him, are able to be applied to characters to grant great powers at an equally great cost&quot;.

Vecna was #4 on &quot;CBR&quot;&#x27;s 2020 &quot;10 Unique (&amp; Powerful) Villains To Spice Up A High Level Dungeons &amp; Dragons Campaign&quot; list — the article states that &quot;Once a humble necromancer, he rose all the way to becoming a lich and finally a god through an act of ascension. Resplendent with evil this figure is a god whose domain encompasses the undead and secrets. This villain is the apex of the living dead. A campaign centered around fighting the undead in any established D&amp;D setting could use him as the big bad at the end. He currently doesn&#x27;t have a stat block in 5e but some homebrew stats exist for him&quot;.

Vecna was #4 on &quot;Game Rant&quot;&#x27;s 2020 &quot;10 Must-Have NPCs In Dungeons &amp; Dragons Lore To Make Your Campaigns Awesome&quot; list — the article states that &quot;Aside from being a deity himself, Vecna can take on the role of an Undying Patron for Warlocks. Campaigns with a focus on gods, the divine, and the infernal may benefit from having Vecna. Vecna&#x27;s cunning means he&#x27;ll likely have a scheme to achieve domination over whatever pantheon he becomes a part of.&quot;

==In other media==
* In &quot;Slash&#x27;EM&quot;, the &quot;Hand of Vecna&quot; is a very useful artifact, gained after killing Vecna himself in the Chaotic Quest. 
*WizKids, a Wizards of the Coast licensee, released a home display version of the Hand and Eye of Vecna in January 2021 as part of their &quot;D&amp;D Icons of the Realms&quot; series. In 2022, they released a collectable resin statue of Vecna which includes the &quot;Book of Vile Darkness&quot; under his ribcage.
*In the &quot;&quot; expansion set &quot;Adventures in the Forgotten Realms&quot; (2021), a player can sacrifice three cards (The Book of Vile Darkness, Eye of Vecna, and Hand of Vecna) to summon Vecna as an &quot;indestructible token&quot; with all of the features of those three cards. 
*In &quot;The Legend of Vox Machina&quot; (2022), an adaptation of &quot;Critical Role&quot;&#x27;s first campaign, multiple references are made to The Whispered One, whom the Briarwoods attempt to summon during the first season.
*In &quot;Stranger Things&quot;, a character named after Vecna is the main antagonist in the fourth season (2022) and the perpetrator of the series as a whole. Like the Demogorgon and Mind Flayer, Vecna is not based on the &quot;D&amp;D&quot; character, but the main characters in the series named him based on some similarities.
*In RuneScape, the &quot;Vecna skull&quot; is a very rare item, obtained from the Rare Drop Table. It can be activated to provide the player with a boost to their magic level.
*In the video game &quot;Dead by Daylight&quot;, Vecna – known as &quot;The Lich&quot; who wields the Book of Vile Darkness – appears as the &quot;playable killer&quot; in the licensed &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; DLC (2024). He is voiced by Matthew Mercer. Players have a chance to equip either the Hand or Eye of Vecna as they face off against him.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Brown, Anne. &quot;Player&#x27;s Guide&quot; (TSR, 1998).
* Conforti, Steven, ed. &quot;Living Greyhawk Official Listing of Deities for Use in the Campaign&quot;, version 2.0 (Wizards of the Coast, 2005).
* Cook, Monte. &quot;Book of Vile Darkness&quot; (Wizards of the Coast, 2002).
* Cook, Monte. &quot;Vecna Reborn&quot; (TSR, 1998).
* Heard, Bruce. &quot;Spells Between the Covers.&quot; &quot;Dragon&quot; #82 (TSR, 1984).
* Mona, Erik. &quot;Ancient History: Vecna&#x27;s Realm.&quot;
* Moore, Roger E. &quot;&quot; (TSR, 1998).
* Mullin, Robert S. &quot;Arcane Lore: Greyhawk Grimoires II.&quot; &quot;Dragon&quot; #241 (TSR, 1997).
* Mullin, Robert S. &quot;Campaign Classics: Three Greyhawk Grimoires.&quot; &quot;Dragon&quot; #225 (TSR, 1996).
* Niles, Douglas, and Carl Sargent. &quot;The City of Greyhawk&quot; (TSR, 1989).
* Reynolds, Sean K, and Chris Pramas. &quot;Slavers&quot; (TSR, 2000).
* Sargent, Carl. &quot;Ivid the Undying&quot; (TSR, unpublished).
* Thorsson, Modi, and Kevin McCann. &quot;Vecna: Hand of the Revenant&quot;, (Iron Hammer Graphics, 2002).

==External links==
;&quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; official content
* Who Is Vecna? (via YouTube) by Chris Perkins and Todd Kenreck
* The Head of Vecna (via YouTube) by Chris Perkins and Todd Kenreck
;Living Greyhawk campaign
* Weiss, Samuel. &quot;Grand Sheldomar Timeline, Part I.&quot;
* Weiss, Samuel. &quot;The Yaheetes and Tyrus: The Wars Against the Hand and the Eye in the Sheldomar.&quot;
* Weiss, Samuel, and Gary Holian. &quot;The Hand and Eye of Vecna.&quot;
* Living Greyhawk Journal no. 3 – &quot;Gods of Oerth&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4009190" start="0" end="5" title="Vecna" label="Vecna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="58" end="80" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="87" end="94" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="95" end="112" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="155" end="163" title="villains" label="villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="252" end="260" title="Greyhawk" label="Greyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418079" start="267" end="283" title="campaign setting" label="campaign setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843388" start="319" end="325" title="Wizard (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543175" start="339" end="343" title="lich (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="lich"/>
<link wikidata="Q113404536" start="534" end="550" title="List of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons deities" label="default pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="596" end="601" title="Oerth" label="Oerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572512" start="813" end="834" title="Kas the Bloody-Handed" label="Kas the Bloody-Handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912955" start="838" end="845" title="vampire (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572512" start="869" end="881" title="Sword of Kas" label="Sword of Kas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354191" start="996" end="1013" title="Eldritch Wizardry" label="Eldritch Wizardry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356338" start="1056" end="1099" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons (1974)" label="original &amp;quot;Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644435" start="1107" end="1118" title="Brian Blume" label="Brian Blume"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009190" start="1165" end="1177" title="Eye of Vecna" label="Eye of Vecna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543175" start="1230" end="1234" title="lich (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="lich"/>
<link wikidata="Q312632" start="1433" end="1443" title="Jack Vance" label="Jack Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077092" start="1489" end="1501" title="Magic in Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="magic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469334" start="1646" end="1662" title="Eternal Champion" label="Eternal Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="1679" end="1695" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379" start="1756" end="1766" title="Gary Gygax" label="Gary Gygax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315139" start="1943" end="1970" title="Dungeon Master&amp;#x27;s Guide" label="Dungeon Master&amp;#x27;s Guide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2268" end="2311" title="Editions of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons#Advanced Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 2nd edition" label="Advanced Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 2nd edition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2325" end="2352" title="Dungeon Master&amp;#x27;s Guide#Advanced Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 2nd edition" label="Dungeon Master&amp;#x27;s Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917764" start="2476" end="2488" title="Vecna Lives!" label="Vecna Lives!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723213" start="2532" end="2552" title="The City of Greyhawk" label="The City of Greyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q777042" start="2766" end="2775" title="Ravenloft" label="Ravenloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942995" start="2905" end="2922" title="Book of Artifacts" label="Book of Artifacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135204" start="3288" end="3308" title="Wizards of the Coast" label="Wizards of the Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274453" start="3386" end="3400" title="Die Vecna Die!" label="Die Vecna Die!"/>
<link wikidata="Q777042" start="3453" end="3462" title="Ravenloft" label="Ravenloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345291" start="3467" end="3477" title="Planescape" label="Planescape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338719" start="3619" end="3625" title="AD&amp;amp;D 2nd Edition" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338719" start="3630" end="3635" title="D&amp;amp;D 3rd Edition" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572514" start="3871" end="3874" title="Iuz" label="Iuz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4007" end="4043" title="Editions of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons#Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 3rd edition" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons Third Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659127" start="4473" end="4498" title="Living Greyhawk Gazetteer" label="Living Greyhawk Gazetteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252594" start="4540" end="4560" title="Deities and Demigods" label="Deities and Demigods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="4644" end="4647" title="Comic Book Resources" label="CBR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4902" end="4936" title="Editions of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons#Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons v3.5" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 3.5 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156455" start="5003" end="5018" title="Complete Divine" label="Complete Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542766" start="5080" end="5093" title="Libris Mortis" label="Libris Mortis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405201" start="5161" end="5167" title="Dragon (magazine)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5343" end="5377" title="Editions of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons#Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 4th edition" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 4th edition"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5533" end="5543" title="Open Grave: Secrets of the Undead" label="Open Grave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5710" end="5721" title="Editions of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons#Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 5th edition" label="5th Edition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5728" end="5755" title="Dungeon Master&amp;#x27;s Guide#Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 5th edition" label="Dungeon Master&amp;#x27;s Guide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5921" end="5943" title="Player&amp;#x27;s Handbook#Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 5th edition" label="Player&amp;#x27;s Handbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q97160639" start="6116" end="6151" title="Sword Coast Adventurer&amp;#x27;s Guide" label="Sword Coast Adventurer&amp;#x27;s Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613776" start="6285" end="6293" title="Exandria" label="Exandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079668" start="6453" end="6466" title="Critical Role" label="Critical Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q104771348" start="6516" end="6530" title="Critical Role (campaign one)" label="first campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q53815" start="6647" end="6652" title="Canon (fiction)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q470005" start="6659" end="6674" title="Joe Manganiello" label="Joe Manganiello"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6739" end="6779" title="Baldur&amp;#x27;s Gate: Descent into Avernus" label="Baldur&amp;#x27;s Gate: Descent Into Avernus"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845893" start="6910" end="6945" title="Explorer&amp;#x27;s Guide to Wildemount" label="Explorer&amp;#x27;s Guide to Wildemount"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764340" start="7125" end="7139" title="D&amp;amp;D Beyond" label="D&amp;amp;D Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7871" end="7880" title="Magic item (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)#Artifacts" label="artifacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354191" start="8313" end="8330" title="Eldritch Wizardry" label="Eldritch Wizardry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353448" start="8466" end="8473" title="Tor.com" label="Tor.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="8607" end="8618" title="Screen Rant" label="Screen Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991098" start="9397" end="9403" title="Tiamat (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="Tiamat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572512" start="9535" end="9547" title="Sword of Kas" label="Sword of Kas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274453" start="10495" end="10509" title="Die Vecna Die!" label="Die Vecna Die!"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="12333" end="12344" title="game master" label="game master"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12458" end="12466" title="Magic item (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)#Artifacts" label="artifact"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="13110" end="13114" title="CRPG" label="CRPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q847638" start="13172" end="13177" title="Morte (Planescape)" label="Morte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274453" start="13716" end="13730" title="Die Vecna Die!" label="Die Vecna Die!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236912" start="13958" end="13972" title="David M. Ewalt" label="David M. Ewalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009190" start="14115" end="14119" title="Hand of Vecna" label="hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009190" start="14124" end="14127" title="Eye of Vecna" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="14425" end="14429" title="Flan (Greyhawk)" label="Flan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="14448" end="14453" title="Oerth" label="Oerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="14517" end="14522" title="magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572514" start="14766" end="14779" title="Mok&amp;#x27;slyk" label="Mok&amp;#x27;slyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543175" start="14909" end="14913" title="Lich (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="lich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="14963" end="14979" title="Sheldomar Valley" label="Sheldomar Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15010" end="15019" title="Rushmoors" label="Rushmoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572514" start="15195" end="15202" title="Pholtus" label="Pholtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572512" start="15399" end="15407" title="Acererak" label="Acererak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543175" start="15451" end="15459" title="Demilich (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="demilich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572512" start="15834" end="15837" title="Kas the Bloody-Handed" label="Kas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572512" start="16320" end="16341" title="Kas the Bloody-Handed" label="Kas the Bloody-Handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572512" start="16422" end="16434" title="Sword of Kas" label="Sword of Kas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466470" start="16586" end="16593" title="demigod" label="demigod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="16631" end="16639" title="Greyhawk" label="Greyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="16648" end="16650" title="Common Year (Greyhawk)" label="CY"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16732" end="16743" title="greater god" label="greater god"/>
<link wikidata="Q777042" start="16847" end="16856" title="Ravenloft" label="Ravenloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572514" start="16957" end="16960" title="Iuz" label="Iuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345291" start="16998" end="17003" title="Planescape" label="Sigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="17093" end="17103" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684013" start="17441" end="17456" title="Living Greyhawk" label="Living Greyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700276" start="17772" end="17793" title="Book of Vile Darkness" label="Book of Vile Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17980" end="17987" title="List of Greyhawk deities#Mok&amp;#x27;slyk" label="Serpent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18109" end="18116" title="Monsters in Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons#Half-fiends and fiendish creatures" label="cambion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18123" end="18131" title="List of Greyhawk characters#Acererak" label="Acererak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18248" end="18251" title="List of Greyhawk characters#Kas the Bloody-Handed" label="Kas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18253" end="18256" title="List of Greyhawk deities#Iuz" label="Iuz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18258" end="18272" title="List of Greyhawk deities#Saint Cuthbert" label="Saint Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18292" end="18299" title="List of Greyhawk deities#Pholtus" label="Pholtus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18309" end="18324" title="Greyhawk#Significant player characters of the home campaign" label="Circle of Eight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18352" end="18361" title="List of Greyhawk deities#Old Faith" label="Old Faith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18461" end="18464" title="List of Greyhawk characters#Kas the Bloody-Handed" label="Kas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18466" end="18471" title="Monsters in Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons#Demons" label="Orcus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18480" end="18491" title="List of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons deities#Unaligned deities" label="Raven Queen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18563" end="18567" title="List of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons deities#Unaligned deities" label="Ioun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18804" end="18816" title="Age of Worms#Summary" label="Diamond Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q282479" start="18818" end="18826" title="Free City of Greyhawk" label="Greyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18832" end="18841" title="Greyhawk#Setting" label="Verbobonc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18891" end="18897" title="Greyhawk#Setting" label="Pomarj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18919" end="18932" title="Drow#In Greyhawk" label="Erelhei-Cinlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263740" start="18971" end="18988" title="Descent into the Depths of the Earth" label="Vault of the Drow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="20071" end="20074" title="Ket (Greyhawk)" label="Ket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843388" start="20649" end="20656" title="Wizard (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909125" start="20776" end="20783" title="Rogue (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778796" start="20858" end="20866" title="Fighter (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691912" start="21655" end="21665" title="Ebon Triad" label="Ebon Triad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21708" end="21714" title="List of Greyhawk deities#Hextor" label="Hextor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21720" end="21728" title="List of Greyhawk deities#Erythnul" label="Erythnul"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="23053" end="23064" title="Screen Rant" label="Screen Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="24379" end="24382" title="Comic Book Resources" label="CBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056431" start="25542" end="25555" title="Slash&amp;#x27;EM" label="Slash&amp;#x27;EM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426375" start="25679" end="25686" title="WizKids" label="WizKids"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26035" end="26069" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons: Adventures in the Forgotten Realms" label="Adventures in the Forgotten Realms"/>
<link wikidata="Q108881587" start="26293" end="26318" title="The Legend of Vox Machina" label="The Legend of Vox Machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798734" start="26523" end="26538" title="Stranger Things" label="Stranger Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q114667519" start="26548" end="26575" title="Vecna (Stranger Things)" label="character named after Vecna"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847363" start="26606" end="26619" title="Stranger Things (season 4)" label="fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261974" start="26682" end="26692" title="Demogorgon (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="Demogorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q986360" start="26697" end="26708" title="Mind Flayer" label="Mind Flayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187732" start="26847" end="26856" title="RuneScape" label="RuneScape"/>
<link wikidata="Q24514682" start="27044" end="27060" title="Dead by Daylight" label="Dead by Daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="27239" end="27242" title="Downloadable content" label="DLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790967" start="27267" end="27281" title="Matthew Mercer" label="Matthew Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945820" start="27621" end="27632" title="Monte Cook" label="Cook, Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700276" start="27640" end="27661" title="Book of Vile Darkness" label="Book of Vile Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135204" start="27669" end="27689" title="Wizards of the Coast" label="Wizards of the Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945820" start="27700" end="27711" title="Monte Cook" label="Cook, Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405201" start="27812" end="27818" title="Dragon (magazine)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358135" start="27907" end="27921" title="Roger E. Moore" label="Moore, Roger E"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038032" start="28170" end="28184" title="Niles, Douglas" label="Niles, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040764" start="28190" end="28202" title="Carl Sargent" label="Carl Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723213" start="28210" end="28230" title="The City of Greyhawk" label="The City of Greyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107794" start="28274" end="28286" title="Chris Pramas" label="Chris Pramas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539239" start="28294" end="28301" title="Slavers (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="Slavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="28588" end="28595" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734400" start="28600" end="28613" title="Chris Perkins (game designer)" label="Chris Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684013" start="28700" end="28715" title="Living Greyhawk" label="Living Greyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659129" start="28972" end="28995" title="Living Greyhawk Journal" label="Living Greyhawk Journal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306304" wikidata="Q229459" url="?curid=306304" title="3D Realms">
<text>3D Realms Entertainment ApS is a video game publisher based in Aalborg, Denmark. Scott Miller founded the company in his parents&#x27; home in Garland, Texas, in 1987 as Apogee Software Productions to release his game &quot;Kingdom of Kroz&quot;. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the company popularized a distribution model where each game consists of three episodes, with the first given away free as shareware and the other two available for purchase. &quot;Duke Nukem&quot; was a major franchise created by Apogee to use this model, and Apogee published Commander Keen and Wolfenstein 3D the same way.

Apogee began using the brand name 3D Realms for its 3D games in 1994, and in 1996 rebranded the company itself to 3D Realms to focus on traditionally-published 3D titles. &quot;Duke Nukem 3D&quot; (1996) was released under this name to great success. 3D Realms largely ceased its publishing and development operations afterwards to focus on two extensively delayed games: &quot;Prey&quot; (2006), which was under development until being taken over by another studio in 2001, and &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot; (2011), which remained under development until 2009. The &quot;Apogee Software&quot; name, library, and logo were licensed to Terry Nagy in 2008, who established Apogee Software LLC to develop and publish ports and spinoffs of Apogee titles.

In 2009, 3D Realms, citing financial issues, laid off its development team and the majority of its staff, effectively ceasing operations. In March 2014, the company was acquired by SDN Invest, a Danish holding company and part-owner of Interceptor Entertainment, and relaunched later that year as 3D Realms Entertainment ApS, headquartered in Denmark. 3D Realms Entertainment has since served as a games publisher. Miller remained an advisor for the company until 2021, when he and Nagy acquired the Apogee brand and relaunched Apogee Software LLC as Apogee Entertainment, an independent games publisher. In August 2021, 3D Realms Entertainment was acquired by Embracer Group subsidiary Saber Interactive, which was spun off from Embracer in March 2024.

== History ==
===Apogee Software===
==== Background ====
In the early 1980s, Scott Miller often spent time in the computer lab of the high school he was attending, programming text adventures on the facility&#x27;s Apple II and getting to know fellow student George Broussard. Following graduation, both of them took jobs at local amusement arcade The Twilight Zone, allowing Miller to attend college and increase his interest in video games at the same time. Following his sophomore year, Miller dropped out of the University of Dallas to focus entirely on video games, including participating in tournaments as well as programming his own games. At that time, he found a special interest in the Turbo Pascal programming language and its easy integration on IBM Personal Computers. Miller subsequently figured that his knowledge on video games should earn him more money than he made at The Twilight Zone, wherefore he, with assistance by Broussard, wrote a manual-style book on &quot;how to beat video games&quot;. The book fell into obscurity due to an oversaturated market but landed Miller a job as a video game critic for &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot; and minor game-centric papers. After four years of writing for the newspaper, he decided that he was capable of creating games that were better than those that he had to review and quit his job. Miller acquired a 16.5k modem, which he installed in his parents&#x27; house in Garland, Texas, and started operating as a full-time independent game developer.

==== The Apogee Model (1987–1996) ====

Most games developed by Miller at the time used extended ASCII characters as graphics. The format appeared popular to him but ultimately proved unsuccessful when pitching them to publishers, adding to him not having a college degree or any professional experience in game development. As such, he considered self-printing copies of his games, or distributing them freely through bulletin board systems (BBS), where the boards&#x27; users make voluntary donations, a model known as shareware distribution. As the prior option seemed too expensive to Miller, he had to choose the latter, despite being urged not to by friends and colleagues. Miller released &quot;Beyond the Titanic&quot; and &quot;Supernova&quot; as shareware games in 1986 and 1987, respectively, but income was low, at roughly donated in a year for both games combined. Miller&#x27;s next game, &quot;Kingdom of Kroz&quot;, was developed to include 60 levels, more than what he wanted to release to the public for no cost. As such, he developed a new distribution model, dubbed the &quot;Apogee model&quot;, in which only a fraction of the game would be made available to play for free on BBS, which, upon completion, would display Miller&#x27;s mailing address to the player and ask them to contact him to buy the rest of the game. He applied this model to &quot;Kingdom of Kroz&quot; by breaking it up into three parts, named episodes, and sharing the first one over BBS while retaining the other two for sale. Released on November 26, 1987, &quot;Kingdom of Kroz&quot; was the first game to bear the name of Miller&#x27;s one-man company, Apogee Software Productions. The game proved successful, with checks sent to Miller amounting to roughly – and him receiving between and every single day. Broussard later joined Apogee, merging his own, lesser-known game company Micro-FX into it.

==== 3D Realms (1996–2009) ====
In 1994, Apogee decided to launch different brand names for each genre of games they published; it created 3D Realms for 3D games, publishing &quot;Terminal Velocity&quot; in 1995 and developing the 1996 &quot;Duke Nukem 3D&quot; under the name, with the other titles released in those years still under Apogee. In late 1996, however, Apogee renamed the company itself to 3D Realms to associate their brand with newer, 3D titles, and stopped using the Apogee brand name. The last game to be published under the Apogee name was &quot;Stargunner&quot; in 1996. Most of the proposed brands were never used, as 3D games like &quot;Duke Nukem&quot; became the company&#x27;s focus. 3D Realms launched a brand for pinball games, Pinball Wizards, in February 1997, but only published &quot;Balls of Steel&quot; (1997) under the name. Beginning in 1997 3D Realms shifted from episodic MS-DOS titles to non-episodic console and personal computer games. In the process it abandoned the shareware model in favor of a traditional publishing model; it also largely ceased its activities as a developer that same year, releasing only &quot;Shadow Warrior&quot; (1997). The sole exceptions were &quot;Prey&quot; (2006), which stayed in development until 2001 when it was transferred to Human Head Studios, and &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot; (2011), which famously stayed in development at 3D Realms as vaporware until 2009.

The &quot;Apogee Software&quot; name, library, and logo were licensed to Terry Nagy in 2008, who formed Apogee Software, LLC as a separate company that would handle distribution, remakes, and other developments related to older Apogee games. 3D Realms retained the corporate name of Apogee Software, Ltd. Apogee Software, LLC was renamed Apogee Entertainment in 2021.

==== Corporate restructuring, legal disputes (2009–2014) ====
After &quot;Prey&quot; was transferred away from 3D Realms in 2001, the only project under development at the company was &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot;, originally announced in 1997. The release date of the game was &quot;when it&#x27;s done.&quot; 3D Realms continued some operations as a publisher as part of the Gathering of Developers publishing group, but otherwise served only as the publisher and licensee of &quot;Duke Nukem&quot;-related spinoffs and mobile games for the next few years. On May 6, 2009, the development of &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot; was halted, and major staff cuts were initiated with the entire development team and most other employees laid off. According to Miller, the development was using up much of the company&#x27;s funds as they struggled to bring in new 3D rendering technology for the game, leading to the decision to cut their staff and sell the company.

On May 14, 2009, Take-Two, holders of the publishing rights of &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot;, filed a breach of contract suit against 3D Realms over failing to deliver the game. Take-Two Interactive asked for a restraining order and a preliminary injunction, to make 3D Realms keep the &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot; assets intact during proceedings. On May 18, 2009, 3D Realms key executives announced that &quot;3D Realms has not closed and is not closing&quot;, but that due to lack of funds development operations were ceasing and the company would continue to &quot;license and co-create games based upon the &quot;Duke Nukem&quot; franchise.&quot; They accused Take-Two of trying to acquire the &quot;Duke Nukem&quot; franchise in a &quot;fire sale&quot;.

On September 3, 2010, Take-Two Interactive announced that development of &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot; had been shifted over to Gearbox Software, effectively ending 3D Realms&#x27; association with the game after 12 years of development. 3D Realms remained credited as a co-developer on &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot;, due to their involvement in developing most of the game. The rights and intellectual property were sold to Gearbox, however, who became the owners of the &quot;Duke Nukem&quot; franchise.

An external developer, Interceptor Entertainment, started work on a fan-project remake of &quot;Duke Nukem 3D&quot; in 2010. They received a limited authorization from Gearbox to proceed with the game, which was named &quot;Duke Nukem 3D: Reloaded&quot;. However, after &quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot;″s release and negative reception in 2011, &quot;Duke Nukem 3D: Reloaded&quot; was put on hold indefinitely.

In an interview conducted with Scott Miller in April 2011, Miller specified that 3D Realms was involved with several projects: &quot;we have several projects underway, all fairly small—not any big console games. Once [&quot;Duke Nukem Forever&quot;] comes out we&#x27;ll be definitely looking to invest into other projects, and maybe other teams who are blazing new trails on smaller platforms, like smart phones and XBLA.&quot; 3D Realms did not publish any released titles over the next few years, however.

In June 2013, 3D Realms sued Gearbox for unpaid royalties as well as unpaid money for selling the &quot;Duke Nukem&quot; intellectual property. The lawsuit was dropped in September 2013 with 3D Realms apologizing with an announcement that they had resolved any differences they had with Gearbox. In February 2014, Gearbox sued 3D Realms, Interceptor Entertainment and Apogee Software, LLC for developing a new game called &quot;Duke Nukem: Mass Destruction&quot;. Gearbox stated that it was still the rights holder of the &quot;Duke Nukem&quot; franchise, and permission had not been granted by them to develop the game. 3D Realms soon after released a statement admitting its wrongdoing. The lawsuit was settled in August 2015, with Gearbox stressing that it was still the lawful owner of the &quot;Duke Nukem&quot; intellectual property.

===3D Realms Entertainment===
==== Acquisition by SDN Invest and relaunch (2014–2021) ====

In March 2014, SDN Invest, the part-owner of Interceptor Entertainment, acquired 3D Realms for an undisclosed sum. Mike Nielsen, the founder and chairman of SDN Invest, became the new chief executive officer of 3D Realms, headquartered in Aalborg, Denmark and incorporated in 2015 as 3D Realms Entertainment ApS. Miller remained with the company as a creative consultant, while Apogee Software LLC retained the license to the Apogee brand and library.

In May 2014, 3D Realms announced they were to publish &quot;Bombshell&quot; by Interceptor Entertainment, and in October 2014 the company returned to distributing its own titles with a digital anthology collection. &quot;Bombshell&quot; was released on January 29, 2016, as 3D Realms&#x27; first published title since 2005.

On February 28, 2018, 3D Realms announced the game &quot;Ion Maiden&quot;, a prequel to &quot;Bombshell&quot;, developed by Voidpoint and using Ken Silverman&#x27;s Build Engine. In May 2019, the company was hit with a $2 million trademark infringement lawsuit by heavy metal group Iron Maiden who claimed &quot;Ion Maiden&quot; was &quot;nearly identical to the Iron Maiden trademark in appearance, sound and overall commercial impression&quot; and was &quot;attempting to trade off on Iron Maiden&#x27;s notoriety.&quot; In July 2019, 3D Realms and Voidpoint changed the name of &quot;Ion Maiden&quot; to &quot;Ion Fury&quot; to end to the lawsuit. &quot;Ion Fury&quot; was released on August 15, 2019. Since then, 3D Realms published &quot;Ghostrunner&quot; (2020) and announced several projects which have been under development for multiple years without further notice.

In April 2021, Miller and Nagy acquired the Apogee name from 3D Realms and relaunched Apogee Software LLC as Apogee Entertainment. In 2022, Miller stated in a blog post that he was now uninvolved with 3D Realms and that &quot;[the company] no longer has any link to the past, other than in name only&quot; because he was no longer there to help design and fund games.

==== Acquisition by Embracer Group (2021–2023) ====

In August 2021, Embracer Group announced that they acquired the company through Saber Interactive, which will be the parent company. 3D Realms published &quot;Cultic&quot; on October 13 (2022).

In March 2023, 3D Realms announced that they hired Justin Burnham (formerly of Devolver Digital, Good Shepherd) to the position of CCO.

==== Reboot (2023–present) ====
On September 30, 2023, 3D Realms held its 4th annual Realms Deep event modernizing the company&#x27;s branding and announcing release dates for several previously-unreleased titles. Two days later on October 2, they published &quot;Ion Fury: Aftershock&quot; in collaboration with developer Voidpoint. 

On October 24, 2023, 3D Realms published &quot;Ripout&quot; into early access in collaboration with developer Pet Project Games. On November 16, 3D Realms published The Kindeman Remedy in collaboration with developer Troglobyte Games. 

On December 5, 2023, 3D Realms co-published (with Interplay) the Slipgate Ironworks-developed &quot;Kingpin Reloaded&quot;. In mid-December, &quot;at least half&quot; of 3D Realms and Slipgate Ironworks was laid off as part of Embracer&#x27;s restructuring. Layoffs continued into January 2024.

On January 24, 2024, 3D Realms co-published (with Fulqrum Publishing) the Slipgate Ironworks-developed &quot;Graven&quot; out of early access&quot;.&quot; On February 27, 3D Realms co-published (with Fulqrum Publishing) the Slipgate Ironworks and Killpixel Games-developed &quot;&quot; out of early access.

In March 2024, Saber Interactive was sold to Beacon Interactive, a new company from Saber co-founder Matthew Karch. Many of Saber&#x27;s studios, including 3D Realms, were included in the sale.

== Games ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229459" start="0" end="27" title="3D Realms" label="3D Realms Entertainment ApS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137109" start="33" end="53" title="video game publisher" label="video game publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="63" end="70" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091242" start="81" end="93" title="Scott Miller (entrepreneur)" label="Scott Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q49274" start="143" end="157" title="Garland, Texas" label="Garland, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q229459" start="170" end="197" title="3D Realms" label="Apogee Software Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817153" start="224" end="239" title="Kroz" label="Kingdom of Kroz"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="405" end="414" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q820568" start="463" end="473" title="Duke Nukem" label="Duke Nukem"/>
<link wikidata="Q868531" start="560" end="574" title="Commander Keen" label="Commander Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18940" start="579" end="593" title="Wolfenstein 3D" label="Wolfenstein 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q728061" start="786" end="799" title="Duke Nukem 3D" label="Duke Nukem 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535818" start="987" end="991" title="Prey (2006 video game)" label="Prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q962129" start="1094" end="1112" title="Duke Nukem Forever" label="Duke Nukem Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388714" start="1142" end="1159" title="development of Duke Nukem Forever" label="under development"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="1564" end="1579" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986584" start="1598" end="1623" title="Interceptor Entertainment" label="Interceptor Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q98785161" start="1913" end="1933" title="Apogee Entertainment" label="Apogee Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083539" start="2023" end="2037" title="Embracer Group" label="Embracer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469781" start="2049" end="2066" title="Saber Interactive" label="Saber Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091242" start="2194" end="2206" title="Scott Miller (entrepreneur)" label="Scott Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130071" start="2231" end="2243" title="computer lab" label="computer lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="2293" end="2308" title="Interactive fiction" label="text adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="2332" end="2340" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259482" start="2376" end="2392" title="George Broussard" label="George Broussard"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="2448" end="2464" title="amusement arcade" label="amusement arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q97360440" start="2591" end="2605" title="sophomore year" label="sophomore year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551578" start="2633" end="2653" title="University of Dallas" label="University of Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q473201" start="2814" end="2826" title="Turbo Pascal" label="Turbo Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="2827" end="2847" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="2876" end="2897" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM Personal Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q889935" start="3251" end="3274" title="The Dallas Morning News" label="The Dallas Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="3500" end="3505" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q49274" start="3556" end="3570" title="Garland, Texas" label="Garland, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610482" start="3726" end="3740" title="extended ASCII" label="extended ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="4057" end="4078" title="bulletin board system" label="bulletin board system"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="4159" end="4168" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968321" start="4340" end="4358" title="List of minor Apogee Software video games" label="Beyond the Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968321" start="4375" end="4384" title="Supernova (video game)" label="Supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817153" start="4547" end="4562" title="Kroz" label="Kingdom of Kroz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5689" end="5697" title="Video game graphics#3D" label="3D games"/>
<link wikidata="Q955289" start="5716" end="5733" title="Terminal Velocity (video game)" label="Terminal Velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q728061" start="5778" end="5791" title="Duke Nukem 3D" label="Duke Nukem 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968366" start="6101" end="6111" title="Stargunner" label="Stargunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q734911" start="6351" end="6365" title="Balls of Steel (video game)" label="Balls of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930787" start="6694" end="6708" title="Shadow Warrior (1997 video game)" label="Shadow Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535818" start="6754" end="6758" title="Prey (2006 video game)" label="Prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389983" start="6839" end="6857" title="Human Head Studios" label="Human Head Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q962129" start="6869" end="6887" title="Duke Nukem Forever" label="Duke Nukem Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q281066" start="6955" end="6964" title="vaporware" label="vaporware"/>
<link wikidata="Q98785161" start="7316" end="7336" title="Apogee Entertainment" label="Apogee Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495819" start="7725" end="7748" title="Gathering of Developers" label="Gathering of Developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388714" start="7927" end="7972" title="Development of Duke Nukem Forever" label="development of &amp;quot;Duke Nukem Forever&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q94933" start="8327" end="8335" title="Take-Two" label="Take-Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555572" start="9056" end="9065" title="fire sale" label="fire sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046593" start="9203" end="9219" title="Gearbox Software" label="Gearbox Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986584" start="9606" end="9631" title="Interceptor Entertainment" label="Interceptor Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9807" end="9830" title="Duke Nukem 3D: Reloaded" label="Duke Nukem 3D: Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="11581" end="11589" title="chairman" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="11620" end="11643" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="11675" end="11682" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19501393" start="11949" end="11958" title="Bombshell (video game)" label="Bombshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q50296442" start="12271" end="12281" title="Ion Maiden" label="Ion Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19501393" start="12308" end="12317" title="Bombshell (video game)" label="Bombshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278380" start="12358" end="12371" title="Ken Silverman" label="Ken Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003003" start="12379" end="12391" title="Build (game engine)" label="Build Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="12496" end="12507" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q96035161" start="12957" end="12968" title="Ghostrunner" label="Ghostrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q98785161" start="13200" end="13220" title="Apogee Entertainment" label="Apogee Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083539" start="13529" end="13543" title="Embracer Group" label="Embracer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469781" start="13593" end="13610" title="Saber Interactive" label="Saber Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q50296442" start="14109" end="14117" title="Ion Fury" label="Ion Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042291" start="14246" end="14258" title="early access" label="early access"/>
<link wikidata="Q628249" start="14468" end="14477" title="Interplay Entertainment" label="Interplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986584" start="14483" end="14501" title="Slipgate Ironworks" label="Slipgate Ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q594850" start="14518" end="14534" title="Kingpin Reloaded" label="Kingpin Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q77202" start="14764" end="14782" title="1C Company" label="Fulqrum Publishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306308" wikidata="Q337349" url="?curid=306308" title="Honesty">
<text>Honesty or truthfulness is a facet of moral character that connotes positive and virtuous attributes such as integrity, truthfulness, straightforwardness (including straightforwardness of conduct: earnestness), along with the absence of lying, cheating, theft, etc. Honesty also involves being trustworthy, loyal, , and sincere.

A reputation for honesty is denoted by terms like reputability and trustworthiness. Honesty about one&#x27;s future conduct, loyalties, or commitments is called accountability, reliability, dependability, or conscientiousness.

Someone who goes out of their way to tell possibly unwelcome truths extends honesty into the region of candor or frankness. The Cynics engaged in a challenging sort of frankness like this called &quot;parrhêsia&quot;.
==Opinions==
Honesty is valued in many ethnic and religious cultures. &quot;Honesty is the best policy&quot; is a proverb of Edwin Sandys, while the quote &quot;Honesty is the first chapter in the book of wisdom&quot; is attributed to Thomas Jefferson, as used in a letter to Nathaniel Macon. April 30 is national Honesty Day in the United States.

William Shakespeare described honesty as an attribute people leave behind when he wrote that &quot;no legacy is so rich as honesty&quot; in act 3, scene 5 of &quot;All&#x27;s Well that Ends Well.&quot;

Tolstoy thought that honesty was revolutionary: “No feats of heroism are needed to achieve the greatest and most important changes in the existence of humanity... it is only needful that each individual should say what he really feels or thinks, or at least that he should not say what he does not think.”
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (&quot;Live Not By Lies,&quot; 1974) and Václav Havel (&quot;The Power of the Powerless&quot;, 1978) agreed. Havel wrote:

: [L]iving within the truth has more than a mere existential dimension (returning humanity to its inherent nature), or a noetic dimension (revealing reality as it is), or a moral dimension (setting an example for others). It also has an unambiguous political dimension. If the main pillar of the system is living a lie, then it is not surprising that the fundamental threat to it is living the truth.

The 18th century enlightenment philosopher William Wollaston argued that all religion ultimately reduces to ethics and all ethics reduces to honesty (&quot;The Religion of Nature Delineated&quot;, 1722). “[E]very intelligent, active, and free being should so behave himself, as by no act to contradict truth; ...treat every thing as being what it is.” All else would follow from that.

Immanuel Kant made the duty of honesty a core example of his ethical theories.

Others noted, however, that &quot;too much honesty might be seen as undisciplined openness&quot;. For example, individuals may be perceived as being &quot;too honest&quot; if they honestly express the negative opinions of others, either without having been asked their opinion, or having been asked in a circumstance where the response would be trivial. This concern manifests in political correctness, with individuals refraining from expressing their true opinions due to a general societal condemnation of such views. Research also found that honesty can lead to interpersonal harm because people avoid information about how their honest behavior affects others.

==Definitions==
Merriam-Webster defines honesty as &quot;fairness and straightforwardness of conduct&quot; or &quot;adherence to the facts&quot;.

The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; defines honesty as &quot;the quality of being honest.&quot; Honest is, in turn, defined as &quot;Free of deceit; truthful and sincere...Morally correct or virtuous...(attributive) Fairly earned, especially through hard work...(of an action) done with good intentions even if unsuccessful or misguided...(attributive) Simple, unpretentious, and unsophisticated.

==See also==
*
*
*
*
*

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337349" start="0" end="7" title="Honesty" label="Honesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q337349" start="11" end="23" title="Honesty" label="truthfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12504525" start="38" end="53" title="moral character" label="moral character"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="81" end="89" title="virtue" label="virtuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329012" start="109" end="118" title="integrity" label="integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="120" end="125" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="197" end="208" title="Good faith" label="earnestness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132131" start="307" end="312" title="Loyalty" label="loyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q666985" start="320" end="327" title="Sincerity" label="sincere"/>
<link wikidata="Q877546" start="380" end="392" title="Reputation" label="reputability"/>
<link wikidata="Q659974" start="397" end="412" title="trustworthiness" label="trustworthiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="491" end="505" title="accountability" label="accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689057" start="520" end="533" title="dependability" label="dependability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307067" start="538" end="555" title="conscientiousness" label="conscientiousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q485459" start="686" end="692" title="Cynicism (philosophy)" label="Cynics"/>
<link wikidata="Q384975" start="753" end="774" title="Parrhesia" label="&amp;quot;parrhêsia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="890" end="897" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346806" start="901" end="913" title="Edwin Sandys (died 1629)" label="Edwin Sandys"/>
<link wikidata="Q799" start="981" end="987" title="wisdom" label="wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="1011" end="1027" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733790" start="1052" end="1067" title="Nathaniel Macon" label="Nathaniel Macon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893336" start="1090" end="1101" title="Honesty Day" label="Honesty Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1109" end="1122" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1125" end="1144" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q506865" start="1289" end="1319" title="All&amp;#x27;s Well that Ends Well" label="All&amp;#x27;s Well that Ends Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="1328" end="1335" title="Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34474" start="1634" end="1656" title="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn" label="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="1698" end="1710" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12038401" start="1718" end="1744" title="The Power of the Powerless" label="The Power of the Powerless"/>
<link wikidata="Q322001" start="2225" end="2242" title="William Wollaston" label="William Wollaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308014" start="2338" end="2371" title="The Religion of Nature Delineated" label="The Religion of Nature Delineated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="2568" end="2581" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689619" start="2625" end="2645" title="Kantian ethics" label="his ethical theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="2778" end="2787" title="Perception" label="perceived"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962655" start="2858" end="2865" title="opinion" label="opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="3028" end="3049" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="3331" end="3346" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="3472" end="3497" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306311" wikidata="Q881532" url="?curid=306311" title="James Sevier Conway">
<text>James Sevier Conway (December 9, 1796 – March 3, 1855) was an American politician who served as the first governor of Arkansas from 1836 to 1840.

== Early life ==
James Sevier Conway was born on December 4, 1796, in Greene County, Tennessee, to Thomas and Ann ( Rector) Conway. Conway&#x27;s father was born in Pittsylvania County, Virginia, in 1771. His paternal ancestors originated in Conwy, Wales. Among Conway’s siblings were politicians Elias N Conway, William B Conway and Henry W Conway. One of his cousins was Henry M Rector, the sixth governor of Arkansas. Thomas employed private tutors to teach his seven sons and three daughters. In 1818, the family moved to St. Louis, where Conway learned the art of land surveying from his uncle William Rector, surveyor-general in Illinois, Missouri, and Arkansas. In 1820, Conway resigned a Cole County, Missouri, circuit clerk&#x27;s position to serve as deputy-surveyor in the newly established Arkansas Territory, where he purchased a tract of land in Hempstead (present-day Lafayette) County. While living there, Conway met Mary Jane Bradley, who had migrated with her family from Wilson County, Tennessee. They were married December 21, 1825, and had ten children, five of whom died in infancy or early childhood.

== Political career ==
In 1832, Conway became the surveyor-general in Arkansas Territory and served in that position until 1836. He was the elected to the new office of governor when Arkansas became a state in 1836. His administration focused on developing schools and roads. He ordered the militia to patrol the western frontier and worked to have the federal arsenal built at Little Rock. He worked to get funding for a state penitentiary. He pressed the General Assembly for establishment of a state library and university but was unsuccessful. Conway left office in 1840 and returned to Lafayette County where he served three nonconsecutive terms as postmaster.

== Death and legacy ==
Conway died from the complications of pneumonia on March 3, 1855. His remains were interred in the Conway Cemetery (present-day Conway Cemetery State Park), near Bradley, Arkansas. He helped establish Lafayette Academy in Greene County, Tennessee. Present-day Conway, Arkansas, is named after him.

== See also ==
* Conway-Johnson family
* List of Welsh Americans

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==

; Official
* Conway Cemetery State Park
; General information
* James Sevier Conway at National Governors Association
* James Sevier Conway at The Political Graveyard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q881532" start="0" end="19" title="James Sevier Conway" label="James Sevier Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="106" end="126" title="List of governors of Arkansas" label="governor of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502428" start="217" end="241" title="Greene County, Tennessee" label="Greene County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q513744" start="312" end="341" title="Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Pittsylvania County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q634054" start="389" end="394" title="Conwy" label="Conwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="396" end="401" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q364798" start="444" end="458" title="Elias Nelson Conway" label="Elias N Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842262" start="460" end="476" title="William Conway (Arkansas judge)" label="William B Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607403" start="481" end="495" title="Henry W. Conway" label="Henry W Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q364720" start="520" end="534" title="Henry Rector" label="Henry M Rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="673" end="682" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="782" end="790" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="792" end="800" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q61414" start="806" end="814" title="Arkansas County, Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q484493" start="843" end="864" title="Cole County, Missouri" label="Cole County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="949" end="967" title="Arkansas Territory" label="Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q61355" start="1007" end="1016" title="Hempstead County, Arkansas" label="Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q61167" start="1030" end="1039" title="Lafayette County, Arkansas" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q501606" start="1137" end="1161" title="Wilson County, Tennessee" label="Wilson County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="1455" end="1463" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829641" start="1625" end="1640" title="Tower Building of the Little Rock Arsenal" label="federal arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747168" start="1729" end="1745" title="Arkansas General Assembly" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="2000" end="2009" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166698" start="2090" end="2116" title="Conway Cemetery State Park" label="Conway Cemetery State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q79581" start="2124" end="2141" title="Bradley, Arkansas" label="Bradley, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79853" start="2222" end="2238" title="Conway, Arkansas" label="Conway, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733282" start="2278" end="2299" title="Conway-Johnson family" label="Conway-Johnson family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603911" start="2302" end="2325" title="List of Welsh Americans" label="List of Welsh Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="2476" end="2506" title="National Governors Association" label="National Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757656" start="2532" end="2555" title="The Political Graveyard" label="The Political Graveyard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306316" wikidata="Q58375" url="?curid=306316" title="Thioridazine">
<text>Thioridazine (Mellaril or Melleril) is a first generation antipsychotic drug belonging to the phenothiazine drug group and was previously widely used in the treatment of schizophrenia and psychosis. The branded product was withdrawn worldwide in 2005 because it caused severe cardiac arrhythmias. However, generic versions are still available in the US.

==Indications==
Thioridazine was voluntarily discontinued by its manufacturer, Novartis, worldwide because it caused severe cardiac arrhythmias. However, generics remain on the market in some countries.

Its primary use in medicine is for the treatment of schizophrenia. It was also tried with some success as a treatment for various psychiatric symptoms seen in people with dementia, but chronic use of thioridazine and other anti-psychotics in people with dementia is not recommended.
Generic forms of thioridazine remain on the market in a few countries, usually with restrictions due to the risk of arrhythmias. For example, in the US, it is restricted to patients who have taken at least 2 other antipsychotics that either failed or caused serious side effects.

==Side effects==
Thioridazine prolongs the QTc interval in a dose-dependent manner. It produces significantly less extrapyramidal side effects than most first-generation antipsychotics, likely due to its potent anticholinergic effect. Its use, along with the use of other typical antipsychotics, has been associated with degenerative retinopathies (specifically retinitis pigmentosa). It has a higher propensity for causing anticholinergic side effects coupled with a lower propensity for causing extrapyramidal side effects and sedation than chlorpromazine, but also has a higher incidence of hypotension and cardiotoxicity. It is also known to possess a relatively high liability for causing orthostatic hypotension compared to other antipsychotics. Similarly to other first-generation antipsychotics it has a relatively high liability for causing prolactin elevation. It is moderate risk for causing weight gain. As with all antipsychotics thioridazine has been linked to cases of tardive dyskinesia (an often permanent neurological disorder characterised by slow, repetitive, purposeless and involuntary movements, most often of the facial muscles, that is usually brought on by years of continued treatment with antipsychotics, especially the first-generation (or &quot;typical&quot;) antipsychotics such as thioridazine) and neuroleptic malignant syndrome (a potentially fatal complication of antipsychotic treatment). Blood dyscrasias such as agranulocytosis, leukopenia and neutropenia are possible with thioridazine treatment. Thioridazine is also associated with abnormal retinal pigmentation after many years of use.
Thioridazine has been correlated to rare instances of clinically apparent acute cholestatic liver injury.

==Pharmacology==

Thioridazine has the following binding profile:
&quot;Note: The Binding affinities given are towards cloned human receptors unless otherwise specified&quot;

Acronyms used&lt;br&gt;
HB – Human brain receptor&lt;br&gt;
RC – Cloned rat receptor&lt;br&gt;
ND – No data

==Metabolism==
Thioridazine is a racemic compound with two enantiomers, both of which are metabolized, according to Eap et al., by CYP2D6 into (&quot;S&quot;)- and (&quot;R&quot;)-thioridazine-2-sulfoxide, better known as mesoridazine, and into (&quot;S&quot;)- and (&quot;R&quot;)-thioridazine-5-sulfoxide. Mesoridazine is in turn metabolized into sulforidazine. Thioridazine is an inhibitor of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4.

==History==
The manufacturer Novartis/Sandoz/Wander of the brands of thioridazine, Mellaril in the US and Canada and Melleril in Europe, discontinued the drug worldwide in June 2005.

Generic forms of thioridazine however remain on the market in a few countries usually with restrictions for example in the US its restricted to patients who have taken at least 2 other antipsychotics that either failed or caused serious side effects 

==Antibiotic activity==

Thioridazine is known to kill extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis and to make methicillin-resistant &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot; sensitive to β-lactam antibiotics. A possible mechanism of action for the drug&#x27;s antibiotic activity is via the inhibition of bacterial secretion pumps. The β-lactam antibiotic resistance is due to the secretion β-lactamase a protein that destroys antibiotics. If the bacteria cannot secrete the β-lactamase, then the antibiotic will be effective. The drug has been successfully used in the treatment of granulomatous amoebic encephalitis in conjunction with more conventional amoebicidal medications.

==Synthesis==
Note: Same sidechain used for mesoridazine and sulforidazine.

The alkylation of 2-Picoline [109-06-8] (1) with formaldehyde gives 2-Pyridineethanol [103-74-2] (2). Forming the quat salt with methyl iodide [74-88-4] leads to 2-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-methyl-pyridinium iodide [56622-15-2] (3). Catalytic hydrogenation in the presence of hydrochloric acid leads to 2-(2-Chloroethyl)-1-Methylpiperidine [50846-01-0] (4). Alkylation of 2-Methylthiophenothiazine [7643-08-5] (5) in the presence of sodium hydride base completed the synthesis of &quot;Thioridazine&quot; (6).

== References ==
== Further reading ==


== External links ==
* Antipsychotic Mellaril Removed from Market &quot;Schizophrenia Daily News Blog.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58375" start="0" end="12" title="Thioridazine" label="Thioridazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q58375" start="14" end="22" title="Thioridazine" label="Mellaril"/>
<link wikidata="Q58375" start="26" end="34" title="Thioridazine" label="Melleril"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="58" end="71" title="antipsychotic" label="antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="72" end="76" title="psychoactive drug" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q410846" start="94" end="107" title="phenothiazine" label="phenothiazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="170" end="183" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="188" end="197" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="434" end="442" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12074763" start="1166" end="1178" title="QT interval" label="QTc interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385411" start="1238" end="1265" title="extrapyramidal side effects" label="extrapyramidal side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q113259" start="1547" end="1562" title="anticholinergic" label="anticholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385411" start="1620" end="1647" title="extrapyramidal side effects" label="extrapyramidal side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="1666" end="1680" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104966" start="1817" end="1840" title="orthostatic hypotension" label="orthostatic hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546328" start="2107" end="2125" title="tardive dyskinesia" label="tardive dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="2454" end="2484" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q396013" start="2573" end="2588" title="agranulocytosis" label="agranulocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q496812" start="2590" end="2600" title="leukopenia" label="leukopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435822" start="2605" end="2616" title="neutropenia" label="neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467717" start="3176" end="3183" title="racemic" label="racemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q494483" start="3202" end="3212" title="enantiomer" label="enantiomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271142" start="3274" end="3280" title="CYP2D6" label="CYP2D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821618" start="3365" end="3377" title="mesoridazine" label="mesoridazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636215" start="3492" end="3505" title="sulforidazine" label="sulforidazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737406" start="3539" end="3545" title="CYP1A2" label="CYP1A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="3588" end="3596" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040214" start="4050" end="4089" title="extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis" label="extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q595158" start="4102" end="4123" title="methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus" label="methicillin-resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="4130" end="4151" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q306264" start="4171" end="4191" title="β-Lactam antibiotic" label="β-lactam antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22327148" start="4289" end="4314" title="Efflux (microbiology)" label="bacterial secretion pumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q311379" start="4375" end="4386" title="β-lactamase" label="β-lactamase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596834" start="4567" end="4601" title="granulomatous amoebic encephalitis" label="granulomatous amoebic encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742080" start="4640" end="4663" title="amoebicide" label="amoebicidal medications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821618" start="4710" end="4722" title="mesoridazine" label="mesoridazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636215" start="4727" end="4740" title="sulforidazine" label="sulforidazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306320" wikidata="Q840396" url="?curid=306320" title="Ideal (ethics)">
<text>An ideal is a principle or value that one actively pursues as a goal, usually in the context of ethics, and one&#x27;s prioritization of ideals can serve to indicate the extent of one&#x27;s dedication to each. The belief in ideals is called ethical idealism, and the history of ethical idealism includes a variety of philosophers. In some theories of applied ethics, such as that of Rushworth Kidder, there is importance given to such orders as a way to resolve disputes. In law, for instance, a judge is sometimes called on to resolve the balance between the ideal of truth, which would advise hearing out all evidence, and the ideal of fairness. Given the complexity of putting ideals into practice, and resolving conflicts between them, it is not uncommon to see them reduced to dogma. One way to avoid this, according to Bernard Crick, is to have ideals that themselves are descriptive of a process, rather than an outcome. His political virtues try to raise the practical habits useful in resolving disputes into ideals of their own. A virtue, in general, is an ideal that one can make a habit.

== See also ==
* Dominant culture
* Euthyphro dilemma
* History of ethical idealism
* Self-sufficiency
* Social justice

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q840396" start="3" end="8" title="Ideal (ethics)" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="14" end="23" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="27" end="32" title="Value (personal and cultural)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503831" start="64" end="68" title="goal" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="96" end="102" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q126113075" start="268" end="295" title="history of ethical idealism" label="history of ethical idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q538733" start="352" end="366" title="applied ethics" label="applied ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380889" start="384" end="400" title="Rushworth Kidder" label="Rushworth Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282696" start="455" end="471" title="dispute resolution" label="resolve disputes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="476" end="479" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="497" end="502" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="570" end="575" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="783" end="788" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897748" start="826" end="839" title="Bernard Crick" label="Bernard Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897748" start="933" end="950" title="political virtues" label="political virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="1042" end="1048" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136816" start="1094" end="1099" title="habituation" label="habit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081571" start="1119" end="1135" title="Dominant culture" label="Dominant culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378951" start="1138" end="1155" title="Euthyphro dilemma" label="Euthyphro dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q126113075" start="1158" end="1185" title="History of ethical idealism" label="History of ethical idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="1188" end="1204" title="Self-sufficiency" label="Self-sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="1207" end="1221" title="Social justice" label="Social justice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306325" wikidata="Q31317" url="?curid=306325" title="Shawn Michaels">
<text>Shawn Michaels (born Michael Shawn Hickenbottom on July 22, 1965) is an American retired professional wrestler. He is signed to WWE, where he is the Senior Vice President of Talent Development, Creative, and oversees the creative aspects of the NXT brand, the promotion&#x27;s developmental territory. Regarded as one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time, he is known by the nicknames &quot;The Heartbreak Kid&quot; (often abbreviated as HBK), &quot;The Showstopper&quot;, and &quot;Mr. WrestleMania&quot;.

Michaels wrestled consistently for WWE, formerly the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, renamed in 2002), from 1988 until his first retirement in 1998. He performed in non-wrestling roles for the next two years, resuming his wrestling career with WWE in 2002 until ceremoniously retiring in 2010. He returned for a one-off final match in 2018. In 2016, he began working as a coach at the WWE Performance Center, and was a producer on &quot;NXT&quot; in 2018, before becoming the Senior Vice President of Talent Development Creative for the NXT brand itself.

In WWF/WWE, Michaels headlined pay-per-view events between 1989 and 2018, main-eventing the company&#x27;s flagship annual event, WrestleMania, five times (12, 14, 20, 23 and 26). He was the co-founder and original leader of the successful stable, D-Generation X. Michaels also wrestled in the American Wrestling Association (AWA), where he founded The Midnight Rockers with Marty Jannetty in 1985. After winning the AWA World Tag Team Championship twice, the team continued to the WWF as The Rockers and had a high-profile breakup in January 1992. Within the year, Michaels twice challenged for the WWF Championship and won his first Intercontinental Championship, heralding his arrival as one of the industry&#x27;s premier singles stars.

Michaels is a four-time world champion, having held the WWF Championship three times and WWE&#x27;s World Heavyweight Championship once. He is also a two-time Royal Rumble winner (and the first man to win the match as the first entrant), the company&#x27;s first Grand Slam Champion and fourth Triple Crown Champion, as well as a two-time WWE Hall of Fame inductee (2011 as a singles wrestler and 2019 as part of D-Generation X). Michaels won the &quot;Pro Wrestling Illustrated&quot; &quot;Match of the Year&quot; reader vote a record eleven times, and his match against John Cena on April 23, 2007, was ranked by WWE as the best match ever aired on the company&#x27;s flagship television program, &quot;Raw&quot;. Michaels has been a participant in several first installments of a number of WWE&#x27;s signature gimmick matches—namely the first Hell in a Cell at the Badd Blood: In Your House, the first Ladder match during a taping of &quot;WWF Wrestling Challenge&quot; (and subsequent first pay-per-view installment at WrestleMania X), both the inaugural (as part of The Rockers tag team) and first televised (at WrestleMania XII) Iron Man matches, and Elimination Chamber at the 2002 Survivor Series.

== Early life ==
Michael Shawn Hickenbottom was born in Chandler, Arizona, on July 22, 1965. He has an older sister named Shari and two older brothers named Randy and Scott. He was raised in a military family and briefly spent some of his early years in the English town of Reading, Berkshire, but grew up primarily in San Antonio, Texas. As a child, he disliked the name &quot;Michael&quot; and convinced his family and friends to address him by his middle name. Ever since, he has been referred to as Shawn. Additionally, Hickenbottom moved around frequently since his father was in the military. He knew he wanted to become a professional wrestler at the age of 12 and performed a wrestling routine at his high school&#x27;s talent show, complete with fake blood. He was a keen athlete while growing up, and his sporting career began at the age of six when he played football. He was a stand-out linebacker at Randolph High School on Randolph Air Force Base and eventually became captain of the football team. He attended Southwest Texas State University in San Marcos, Texas, but dropped out to pursue a career in professional wrestling. His cousin Matt Bentley is also a wrestler.

== Professional wrestling career ==
=== National Wrestling Alliance (1984–1985) ===
Hickenbottom began to train under Mexican professional wrestler Jose Lothario. During his training, Hickenbottom adopted the ring name, &quot;Shawn Michaels&quot;. After his training with Lothario, he debuted as Shawn Michaels with the National Wrestling Alliance&#x27;s (NWA) Mid-South Wrestling territory on October 16, 1984, against Art Crews, losing to Crews via swinging neckbreaker. Michaels&#x27;s performance in his debut match impressed many veterans, including Terry Taylor. Michaels made his televised debut on October 20, 1984, teaming with Jim Hornet in a losing effort against the tag team of Hercules Hernandez and &quot;Dr. Death&quot; Steve Williams.

In January 1985, he debuted for World Class Championship Wrestling (WCCW), the NWA territory in Dallas, Texas. In April 1985, Michaels went to work for another NWA territory in Kansas City called Central States Wrestling. There, he and tag team partner Marty Jannetty defeated The Batten Twins for the NWA Central States Tag Team Championship, later losing it back to the Battens.

=== Texas All-Star Wrestling (1985–1986) ===
After leaving Kansas City, he returned to Texas to wrestle for Texas All-Star Wrestling (TASW). During his time with TASW, Michaels replaced Nick Kiniski in the American Breed tag team, teaming with Paul Diamond. Michaels and Diamond were awarded the TASW Tag Team Championship by Chavo Guerrero Sr. The team was later renamed American Force. While in TASW, Michaels and Diamond feuded with Japanese Force.

=== American Wrestling Association (1986–1987) ===

Michaels made his national-level debut, as Sean Michaels, at the age of 20 in the American Wrestling Association (AWA), in a victory over Buddhakhan on ESPN. He was once again teamed with Marty Jannetty, billed as The Midnight Rockers. The Midnight Rockers won the AWA World Tag Team Championship, defeating Doug Somers and Buddy Rose.

=== World Wrestling Federation and return to AWA (1987–1988) ===
In 1987, The Rockers were signed by a competing promotion: the World Wrestling Federation (WWF). They were fired from WWF two weeks later, for a bar incident (a misunderstanding, according to Michaels&#x27;s autobiography). They then returned to AWA, where they won the AWA tag team titles for a second time, but were re-signed by WWF a year later.

=== Return to the WWF/E ===
==== The Rockers (1988–1992) ====

The Rockers redebuted at a WWF live event on July 7, 1988. Due to WWF chairman Vince McMahon&#x27;s desire to have his performers carry WWF-exclusive ring names, Michaels and Jannetty were renamed, as simply The Rockers. The team proved popular with both children and women and was a mid-card stalwart of television and pay-per-view shows for the next two years. During this time, Michaels headlined his first pay-per-view for the WWF when The Rockers were involved in the 4-on-4 Survivor Series match main event of Survivor Series on November 23, 1989, which they won.

On October 30, 1990, The Rockers unofficially won the WWF Tag Team Championship from The Hart Foundation (Bret Hart and Jim Neidhart), as Neidhart, half of the championship team, was in the process of negotiating his release from the company. The match was taped with The Rockers winning the title, but soon after Neidhart came to an agreement with management and was rehired. The championship was returned to the Hart Foundation, while the title change was never broadcast or even acknowledged on television (though The Rockers did have a successful title defense on November 3, 1990, against Power and Glory (Hercules and Paul Roma) before the title was returned to the Hart Foundation). When news spread, WWF explained that the original result was void due to a collapsed turnbuckle in the ring during the bout. A buckle had indeed broken, but not to a noticeable or dangerous extent during the match. The Rockers continued their partnership, eventually splitting on December 2, 1991, aired January 11, 1992, on Wrestling Challenge, during an incident on Brutus Beefcake&#x27;s televised &quot;Barber Shop&quot; talk show promotional segment. Michaels superkicked Jannetty and threw him through a glass window on the set of Beefcake&#x27;s talk show. Jannetty returned to the WWF the following year and enjoyed moderate success before leaving the company in 1994, while Michaels became a prominent villain of the early to mid-1990s as &quot;The Boy Toy&quot;.

==== Heartbreak Kid (1992–1995) ====

At the suggestion of Curt Hennig, Michaels adopted the nickname &quot;The Heartbreak Kid&quot;. Along with his new name came a new gimmick as a vain, cocky villain. He was put together with mirror-carrying manager, Sensational Sherri, who according to the storyline had become infatuated with him. Sherri even sang the first version of his new theme music, &quot;Sexy Boy&quot;. During that period, after Michaels had wrestled his scheduled match at live events, his departure was announced with &quot;Shawn Michaels has left the building&quot;, alluding to the phrase &quot;Elvis has left the building&quot;.
At WrestleMania VIII on April 5, 1992, Michaels defeated Tito Santana in his first pay-per-view singles match after both men had simultaneously eliminated each other from that year&#x27;s Royal Rumble. Michaels subsequently became a contender to the promotion&#x27;s singles titles and failed to win the WWF Championship from champion Randy Savage in his first opportunity to compete for that title at British event UK Rampage, held on April 19 at the Sheffield Arena and broadcast on Sky Movies Plus (the match later aired in the US on the edition of June 15 of &quot;Prime Time Wrestling&quot;). Michaels was also unable to win the Intercontinental Championship from Bret Hart in the WWF&#x27;s first ladder match at a &quot;Wrestling Challenge&quot; taping on July 21, which was subsequently made available on multiple Coliseum/WWE Home Video releases. However, he won the title from The British Bulldog on &quot;Saturday Night&#x27;s Main Event XXXI&quot;, which aired on November 14. He faced Hart for the WWF Championship at Survivor Series on November 25, but lost the match. Originally the secondary main event, Michaels and Hart became the primary main event after The Ultimate Warrior was unable to compete and was replaced by Mr. Perfect (Curt Hennig) in the tag team match that involved Randy Savage against the team of Ric Flair and Razor Ramon. During this time, Michaels and Sherri split and he engaged himself in a feud with former tag team partner Marty Jannetty. Michaels lost the Intercontinental Championship to Jannetty on the May 17, 1993, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, but regained it on June 6 with the help of his debuting &quot;bodyguard&quot; (and off-air friend) Diesel.

In September 1993, Michaels was suspended for testing positive for steroid – a charge he never admitted. On WWF programs, his suspension was explained by his having neglected to defend the title often enough. After turning down World Championship Wrestling (WCW)&#x27;s advances, Michaels returned to the WWF and made several appearances in the United States Wrestling Association (USWA) during a WWF/USWA cross-promotion. He returned on November 24 at Survivor Series, substituting for Jerry Lawler, who was dealing with legal issues, in a match pitting himself and three of Lawler&#x27;s &quot;Knights&quot; against the Hart brothers, Bret, Bruce, Keith and Owen.

In 1994, Michaels entered a rivalry with Razor Ramon, who had won the vacant Intercontinental Championship during Michaels&#x27;s absence. Since Michaels had never been defeated in the ring for the title, he claimed to be the rightful champion and even carried around his old title belt. This feud culminated in a ladder match between the two on March 20 at WrestleMania X. Michaels lost the match, which featured both his and Ramon&#x27;s championship belts suspended above a ladder in the ring. This match was voted by fans as &quot;Match of the Year&quot; by &quot;Pro Wrestling Illustrated&quot;. It also received a five-star rating from &quot;Wrestling Observer Newsletter&quot; editor Dave Meltzer, the first of nine WWF/E matches to do so. Over the next few months, Michaels battled various injuries and launched the &quot;Heartbreak Hotel&quot; television talk show segment, mainly shown on &quot;Superstars&quot;.

On August 28, Michaels and Diesel won the WWF Tag Team Championship from The Headshrinkers (Samu and Fatu). The next day at SummerSlam, Diesel lost the Intercontinental Championship to Ramon when Michaels accidentally superkicked Diesel. This triggered a split between the two, a storyline that was drawn out until Survivor Series on November 24. Michaels won the Royal Rumble on January 2, 1995, which set up a championship grudge match on March 20 at WrestleMania XI against Diesel (who had gone on to win the WWF Championship from Bob Backlund). As part of the storyline, Michaels recruited Sid as his bodyguard for the build-up, lost the match and was attacked by Sid the following night. After this, Michaels took time off because Vince McMahon wanted Michaels to become a fan favorite.

==== Formation of the Kliq (1995–1996) ====

Michaels returned to the ring as a fan favorite in May 1995 and defeated Jeff Jarrett to win his third Intercontinental Championship on July 24 at In Your House 2: The Lumberjacks. This led to a title defense against Razor Ramon on August 27 at SummerSlam in a ladder match, which Michaels won. Around this time, Michaels became the leader of a backstage group known as The Kliq. Critics perceive the group to have sufficient clout with WWF owner Vince McMahon, becoming dominant wrestling figures in the WWF for several years in the mid-1990s, causing friction with other wrestlers. Michaels disputes the perception, saying that McMahon pushed only deserving wrestlers. Michaels&#x27;s fan base was later nicknamed &quot;The Kliq&quot; as an inside reference to the real &quot;Kliq&quot;. In October 1995, Michaels was the victim of a legit assault outside a bar in Syracuse, New York. Due to not being able to compete, Michaels was forced to forfeit the Intercontinental Championship to his original opponent Dean Douglas on October 22 at In Your House: Great White North, who in turn Douglas lost the championship to Razor Ramon, another member of the Kliq. During a match with Owen Hart on a November episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Hart performed an enzuigiri that struck the back of Michaels&#x27;s head. They continued the match, but Michaels collapsed in the ring, supposedly because he had suffered a concussion. The concussion was scripted, which was kept from most fans at the time. A retirement angle was written so that Michaels could take some time off after he came back from an injury too soon.

==== WWF Champion (1996–1998) ====
After teasing retirement, Michaels returned to the WWF at the Royal Rumble match on January 21, 1996, winning for the second year in a row to receive a WWF Championship match in the main event at WrestleMania XII. Around this time, Jose Lothario became Michaels&#x27;s on-screen manager. At WrestleMania XII on March 31, Michaels defeated WWF Champion Bret Hart in the overtime of their sixty-minute Iron Man match, which had ended in a scoreless tie. On May 19, Michaels and his fellow Kliq members were involved in the incident known as &quot;Curtain Call&quot;. Diesel and Razor Ramon were about to leave WWF to company rival WCW. After Michaels won a match against Diesel, Ramon and Hunter Hearst Helmsley came to the ring and joined Michaels and Diesel in a group-hug. As Diesel and Helmsley were seen as villains at the time, in contrast to Michaels and Ramon, this constituted a breach of &quot;kayfabe&quot;, as acting out of character, which was rare and controversial at the time. As WCW gained momentum due to the signings of Hall and Nash, Michaels held the championship for most of the year. At Survivor Series on November 17, Michaels lost the WWF Championship to Sycho Sid but recaptured the title on January 19, 1997, at Royal Rumble.

On a special episode of &quot;Raw&quot; dubbed &quot;Thursday Raw Thursday&quot;, Michaels vacated the WWF Championship. He explained to fans that he was informed by doctors that he had suffered a knee injury. Michaels contemplated thoughts of retirement and stated that he &quot;had to find his smile again&quot;, which he had &quot;lost&quot; somewhere down the line. After consulting with Dr. James Andrews, who concluded that he did not need surgery, Michaels underwent four weeks of physical therapy and returned to in-ring action a few months later, briefly teaming with Stone Cold Steve Austin to win the WWF Tag Team Championship. In his autobiography, Michaels discusses his real-life feud with Bret Hart, claiming that Hart did interviews on live television claiming that Michaels was faking his whole injury.
By the spring of 1997, the real-life backstage conflict between Michaels and Hart was reaching its height. Both men were going out on television and frequently making personal, true to heart remarks about one another. Michaels briefly left the WWF in June of that year after a real backstage fight with Hart, just hours before a &quot;Raw Is War&quot; show, which allegedly resulted from Michaels making an on-air remark, known as the &quot;Sunny Days&quot; comment, implying that Hart (who was married at the time) was having an affair with Tammy Sytch, a manager and valet who was signed to the WWF as Sunny. Michaels and Austin were still WWF Tag Team Champions at the time during an ongoing feud with the Hart Foundation and a tournament was made to decide new tag team champions. Michaels eventually returned that summer in July. At SummerSlam on August 3, Michaels officiated the WWF Championship match between WWF Champion The Undertaker and Bret Hart. The match ended controversially, with Michaels hitting The Undertaker with a chair (unintentionally, as he was aiming for Hart after he spat in his face). Michaels was then forced to award the championship to his nemesis, Bret Hart. The next night on &quot;Raw Is War&quot;, signs of a heel turn started to show as Michaels told the WWF fans what happened at SummerSlam was an accident and that he dealt with The Undertaker when the time came. At WWF One Night Only, held in Birmingham, England, on September 20, Michaels defeated The British Bulldog to capture the WWF European Championship. The fans at the event were so upset at the result of the match they booed Michaels out of the building to the extent that they littered the ring with garbage, cementing his second heel turn. With this win, Michaels became the first Grand Slam Champion. At In Your House: Badd Blood on October 5, Michaels defeated The Undertaker in the first Hell in a Cell match, during which Michaels fell off the side of the high structure through a table. The match received a 5-star rating from Dave Meltzer.

In the fall, Michaels joined forces with real-life friend Hunter Hearst Helmsley (later known as Triple H), Helmsley&#x27;s then real-life girlfriend Chyna, and Rick Rude to form the stable D-Generation X (DX). Michaels continued his rivalry with Bret Hart and his reformed Hart Foundation, which was now a pro-Canada stable. Michaels taunted the group and Canada by engaging in acts such as blowing his nose with and humping the Canadian Flag. Michaels later claimed the flag desecration was Hart&#x27;s idea. Michaels&#x27;s feud with the Hart Foundation culminated in a WWF Championship match at Survivor Series on November 9 against Hart. Michaels came out of this match, dubbed by fans the &quot;Montreal Screwjob&quot;, as the WWF Champion. Michaels now held both the WWF and European championships at the same time. Michaels dropped the European Championship to DX member Hunter Hearst Hemsley in a farcical match.

==== First retirement and hiatus (1998–2002) ====
On January 18, 1998, at the Royal Rumble, in a casket match against The Undertaker, Michaels took a back body drop to the outside of the ring and hit his lower back on the casket, causing him to herniate two discs and crush one completely. Michaels went on to win the match but the injury rendered him unable to compete on the following month&#x27;s No Way Out of Texas: In Your House as advertised, and forced him into retirement a night after losing the WWF Championship to Stone Cold Steve Austin on March 29 at WrestleMania XIV.

After being away for nearly four months, Michaels made a surprise return to the WWF as a guest commentator on the July 13 episode of &quot;Raw Is War&quot;. Michaels continued to make non-wrestling appearances on WWF programming and on November 23 he replaced Sgt. Slaughter as the WWF Commissioner, eventually joining Vince McMahon&#x27;s group of wrestlers called The Corporation. Throughout late 1998 and early 1999, Michaels made regular television appearances on &quot;Raw&quot;, in which he scheduled matches, throwing around his authority, and sometimes even deciding the outcome of matches. On the January 4, 1999, episode of &quot;Raw Is War&quot;, Michaels re-joined DX as a face, but disappeared from WWF television for a few weeks to have back surgery and by the time he returned DX was on the way of dissolving within the next couple of months.

On November 23, 1999, Michaels made a special appearance for Frontier Martial-Arts Wrestling at the 10th Anniversary Show at the Yokohama Arena, serving as the guest referee for the H vs fake Hayabusa (Mr. Gannosuke) main event. He got himself involved in the match when Gannosuke delivered a low blow on him and he responded later on with &quot;Sweet Chin Music&quot;.

Michaels made occasional appearances as the WWF Commissioner during the spring and summer of 1999, but remained absent from television after August until May 15, 2000, when he returned on &quot;Raw Is War&quot; to declare himself the special guest referee for The Rock and Triple H&#x27;s Iron Man match at Judgment Day. One month later, Michaels briefly reappeared on &quot;Raw Is War&quot; to hand over the role of Commissioner to Mick Foley, and after another appearance in October did not make any in-arena appearances until mid-2002. He appeared briefly on television to make a speech at WWF New York during Armageddon on December 10, 2000.

On April 4, 2000, Michaels returned to wrestling for a one-night appearance defeating Paul Diamond in a bunkhouse brawl at Texas Wrestling Entertainment.

Believing that his wrestling career was over, Michaels was interested in training individuals who wanted to become professional wrestlers. He saw potential in using his name and opened the Shawn Michaels Wrestling Academy (later the Texas Wrestling Academy) in 1999, after his lawyer Skip McCormick suggested the idea. Michaels left the academy in 2002, giving co-founder Rudy Boy Gonzalez sole responsibility due to Michaels&#x27;s new contract with WWE. Michaels was also a sportscaster for San Antonio&#x27;s local news for a short period during his retirement.

==== Feud with Triple H (2002–2004) ====
On the June 3, 2002 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels returned to WWE television after 18 months of absence when Kevin Nash announced him as a new member of the recently reformed New World Order (nWo). Michaels was the only nWo member to have never worked in WCW. After the nWo had disbanded, Triple H appeared to make amends with Michaels. This was solidified when Michaels pleaded Triple H to return to &quot;Raw&quot;. Later on, they came down to the ring sporting their DX music and attire. When the pair was about to perform their trademark &quot;Suck It&quot; taunt, Triple H turned on Michaels by performing a Pedigree on him. Continuing the angle, in his first WWE match since WrestleMania XIV, Michaels defeated Triple H at SummerSlam on August 25, but was attacked by Triple H with a sledgehammer after the match. At Survivor Series on November 17, Michaels won the World Heavyweight Championship from Triple H in the first Elimination Chamber match. On December 15 at Armageddon, he lost the championship to Triple H in a Three Stages of Hell match.
Michaels then began a rivalry with Chris Jericho, after Jericho claimed that he was the next Shawn Michaels. On the January 13, 2003 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, after Jericho won a battle royal to select his entry number for the Royal Rumble match, choosing number two in order to start the match with Michaels, who had already been named number one. At the Royal Rumble on January 19, Jericho, with the help of Christian, eliminated Michaels. Michaels later interfered in the match, causing Jericho to be eliminated. Michaels defeated Jericho on March 30 at WrestleMania XIX but was low-blowed after hugging Jericho.

At Backlash on April 27, Michaels lost to the team of Jericho, Triple H and Ric Flair in a 6-man tag team. This led to a match between Michaels and Flair at Bad Blood on June 15, which Flair won. Following this, Michaels continued feuding with the members of Triple H&#x27;s faction Evolution. He was unsuccessful in capturing the World Heavyweight Championship at SummerSlam on August 24 with Triple H retaining in the second Elimination Chamber match. He then lost to Randy Orton at Unforgiven on September 21. At Armageddon on December 14, Michaels defeated the group&#x27;s enforcer Batista.

On the December 29 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels seemingly defeated Triple H after a Sweet Chin Music for the World Heavyweight Championship in his hometown of San Antonio, Texas, with Eric Bischoff as the special guest referee (Earl Hebner originally refereed the match, only to be knocked out by Triple H in the middle of the match). However, Bischoff reversed the decision due to both men&#x27;s shoulders being on the mat. Angered by this, Michaels attacked Ric Flair and Bischoff. He was subsequently fired by Bischoff but rehired by Stone Cold Steve Austin.

As a part of an ongoing feud with Triple H, the two competed alongside Chris Benoit in the main event on March 14, 2004, at WrestleMania XX for the World Heavyweight Championship, which Benoit won. The night before this, Michaels inducted Tito Santana in the WWE Hall of Fame. A triple threat WrestleMania rematch for the title took place on April 18 at Backlash, where Benoit successfully retained it after forcing Michaels to submit to a Sharpshooter. Due to the &quot;Montreal Screwjob&quot; incident, the Edmonton crowd booed Michaels, with chants of &quot;You screwed Bret!&quot; being heard during his match at Backlash. At Bad Blood on June 13, Michaels lost to Triple H in the longest Hell in a Cell match in history. Four months later, he lost a World Heavyweight Championship match against Triple H, after Edge interfered on October 19 at Taboo Tuesday, when the fans voted for him ahead of Edge and Chris Benoit to face Triple H one more time. Following this, Michaels was out of action for a few months with a legit torn meniscus.

==== D-Generation X reunion (2005–2007) ====

At the Royal Rumble on January 30, 2005, after losing to Edge, Michaels competed in the Royal Rumble match and eliminated Kurt Angle. In seeking revenge, Angle re-entered the ring and eliminated Michaels, and thus placed him in an ankle lock submission hold, outside the ring. Michaels issued a challenge to Angle for a match at WrestleMania 21, which Angle accepted when he appeared on &quot;Raw&quot; to attack Michaels. The following week on &quot;Raw&quot;, Marty Jannetty and Michaels had a one time reunion as The Rockers and defeated La Résistance (Robért Conway and Sylvain Grenier). Three days later on &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, Angle defeated Jannetty, after Angle made Jannetty submit to the ankle lock. To send a &quot;message&quot; to Michaels, Angle also humiliated Michaels&#x27;s former manager, Sensational Sherri, when he applied the ankle lock hold on her. At WrestleMania on April 3, Angle defeated Michaels by submission, again with an ankle lock.

The next night on &quot;Raw&quot;, Muhammad Hassan and Daivari came out to confront and assault Michaels. On the April 11 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels approached General Manager Eric Bischoff, in which he demanded a handicap match with Hassan and Daivari. Bischoff refused to schedule such a match and instead told Michaels to find a partner. Michaels then made a plea for Hulk Hogan to come back and team with him. On the April 18 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Hassan again led an attack on Michaels until Hogan appeared to save Michaels and accept his offer. At Backlash on May 1, Hogan and Michaels defeated Hassan and Daivari. Later, in a WrestleMania rematch, Michaels defeated Kurt Angle (who was drafted to Raw in the draft lottery) on June 26 at Vengeance. On the July 4 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, after defeating Carlito and Kurt Angle, Michaels hit Hogan with his &quot;Sweet Chin Music&quot;, knocking Hogan to the ground and turning heel for the first time since 1998. The following week on &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels appeared on &quot;Piper&#x27;s Pit&quot; where he superkicked Roddy Piper and then challenged Hogan to a match at SummerSlam, which Hogan accepted the following week. Hogan defeated Michaels at SummerSlam on August 21, and after the match Michaels extended his hand to him, saying &quot;I needed to know, and I found out&quot; and he and Hogan shook hands. Michaels left the ring to allow Hogan to celebrate with the crowd, turning face once again. He became the first person to cleanly defeat Chris Masters on September 18 at Unforgiven with &quot;Sweet Chin Music&quot;. On the October 3 &quot;WWE Homecoming&quot; episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, he wrestled old rival Kurt Angle to a 2–2 draw in a 30-Minute Iron Man match. Afterwards, he challenged Angle to sudden-death overtime, but Angle refused and walked out. He was part of Team Raw at Survivor Series on November 27, but lost the match to Team SmackDown!.

On the December 26 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Vince McMahon lauded Michaels for his part in the &quot;Montreal Screwjob&quot;. Michaels said he was only being loyal to his company, he had moved on, and McMahon should move on as well. McMahon then began setting unusual stipulations for Michaels&#x27; matches and interfering on behalf of Michaels&#x27; opponents. On January 29, 2006, at the Royal Rumble, McMahon made his way to the ring, and as Michaels stared at McMahon, Shane McMahon made a surprise appearance to eliminate Michaels. On the February 13 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, McMahon unsuccessfully forced Michaels to sign retirement papers. The following week, Michaels won a handicap match against the Spirit Squad (Kenny, Johnny, Mitch, Nicky and Mikey), after which Michaels&#x27;s former partner, Marty Jannetty, saved him from the assault by the Spirit Squad. After the two reunited, McMahon offered Jannetty a contract if he &quot;kissed his ass.&quot; The following week, Jannetty refused McMahon&#x27;s offer and instead took Chris Masters&#x27;s &quot;Masterlock challenge.&quot; Michaels tried to help Jannetty, which ultimately resulted in Shane attacking Michaels and forcing him to kiss his father&#x27;s behind. On March 18 at &quot;Saturday Night&#x27;s Main Event XXXII&quot;, Shane defeated Michaels in a Street Fight after he applied a sharpshooter on Michaels, leading to McMahon ordering for the bell to be rung though Michaels did not submit, which was an allusion to the &quot;Montreal Screwjob&quot;. Despite interference from the Spirit Squad and Shane, Michaels defeated McMahon on April 2 at WrestleMania 22 in a No Holds Barred match. At Backlash on April 30, The McMahons (Vince and Shane) defeated Michaels and &quot;God&quot; with help from the Spirit Squad in a no disqualification tag team match. On the May 22 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, the Spirit Squad was scripted to injure Michaels&#x27;s knee. This angle was written so Michaels could have surgery on his knee, which had been legitimately injured for some time.

In 2006, a series of events took place which suggested a reunion of Michaels and Triple H as DX. They began at WrestleMania 22, where both Michaels and Triple H performed the crotch chop during their matches. On &quot;Raw&quot;, the two continued to deliver chops, as Michaels feuded with Vince McMahon and Triple H went to challenge John Cena for the WWE Championship, repeatedly butting heads with Vince McMahon in the process. On the June 12 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, DX officially reunited. During Triple H&#x27;s gauntlet match, which had him compete against the Spirit Squad. Michaels came in to help Triple H, and the two did the DX &quot;crotch chops.&quot; On June 25 at Vengeance, DX defeated the Spirit Squad in a 5–on–2 handicap match. They also defeated the Spirit Squad on July 15 at &quot;Saturday Night&#x27;s Main Event XXXIII&quot; in a 5-on-2 elimination match and defeated The McMahons on August 20 at SummerSlam. At Unforgiven on September 17, DX defeated the McMahons and ECW World Champion The Big Show in a Hell in a Cell match, ending the feud.

At Cyber Sunday on November 5, DX lost to Rated-RKO (Edge and Randy Orton) after fan-selected referee Eric Bischoff allowed the illegal use of a steel chair to give Rated-RKO the ill-gotten win and the plaudit of being the first tag team to defeat DX in a tag team match since their reformation in June 2006. On November 26 at Survivor Series, Team DX emerged victorious against Team Rated-RKO in a clean sweep victory. At New Year&#x27;s Revolution on January 7, 2007, Triple H suffered a legit torn right quadriceps during their match with Rated-RKO. Rated-RKO claimed victory over DX, citing Triple H&#x27;s injury, as the &quot;end&quot; of DX. On the January 15 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels lived up to his word of &quot;dealing&quot; with Rated-RKO, from his comments the previous week before, when he took out Randy Orton with a con-chair-to after a handicap match against Edge and Orton. At the Royal Rumble on January 28, Michaels was the last man eliminated in the Royal Rumble match by the winner of the match, The Undertaker.

==== Various feuds and championship pursuits (2007–2009) ====

On the January 29 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels captured the World Tag Team Championship with WWE Champion John Cena after defeating Rated-RKO. At WrestleMania 23 on April 1, Cena retained the WWE Championship against Michaels after making him submit to the STFU. The next night on &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels and Cena competed in two back-to-back ten team battle royals, winning the first and losing the World Tag Team Championship in the second to The Hardys (Matt and Jeff) when Michaels threw Cena over the top rope. Michaels faced off with Cena, Edge and Randy Orton in a fatal four-way match on April 29 at Backlash for the WWE Championship, where Cena retained the title after Michaels performed Sweet Chin Music on Cena, causing him to fall on Orton for the pinfall.

Michaels then entered a feud with Randy Orton when Orton claimed that he could beat Michaels. The week before their scheduled match on May 20 at Judgment Day, after Michaels won a match against then-World Heavyweight Champion Edge, Orton attacked him by punting Michaels in the head. Orton assaulted Michaels again prior to their match at Judgment Day, interrupting Michaels&#x27;s interview segment. Michaels collapsed during their match, causing Orton to win by referee stoppage. Orton continued the beating and performed an RKO to a fallen Michaels, who was removed out of the ring in a stretcher. During the feud, Michaels suffered a storyline concussion. This injury was used to keep Michaels out of action, as he required surgery for his knee. Michaels made his return on the October 8 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, performing Sweet Chin Music to newly crowned WWE Champion Randy Orton during his title ceremony at the end of the show and then celebrating over the knocked-out champion as Vince McMahon watched. On October 28 at Cyber Sunday, Michaels was voted by the fans to face Orton for the WWE Championship, though he won via disqualification when Orton hit Michaels with a low blow, which resulted in Orton retaining the championship. Michaels got another opportunity at the WWE Championship, when he was granted his rematch against Orton on November 18 at Survivor Series. In their match, Michaels was banned from using Sweet Chin Music upon request by Orton, referring to as Michaels superkicking Orton week after week. Michaels lost the match, when Orton performed an RKO for the win, which ended their feud.
Michaels defeated and ended Ric Flair&#x27;s career in a Career Threatening match on March 30, 2008, at WrestleMania XXIV. Afterwards, Batista confronted Michaels about his actions at WrestleMania, calling him selfish and egotistical. On April 27 at Backlash, with Chris Jericho as the guest referee, Michaels defeated Batista. Jericho then confronted Michaels, in which he admitted to faking a knee injury in order to defeat Batista. Michaels defeated Jericho on May 18 at Judgment Day. At One Night Stand on June 1, Michaels lost to Batista in a stretcher match. On the June 9 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels was attacked by Chris Jericho during his talk show segment, &quot;The Highlight Reel&quot;, being thrown directly through a television screen. The following week, it was revealed that, within the context of the storyline, Michaels had suffered a detached retina. On July 20 at The Great American Bash, Jericho defeated Michaels by referee stoppage after assaulting Michaels&#x27;s eyes.

At SummerSlam on August 17, Michaels announced his retirement from professional wrestling. That night, Jericho punched Michaels&#x27;s wife in the face. On the August 25 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels renounced his retirement and challenged Jericho to an unsanctioned match at Unforgiven on September 7, which Jericho accepted. The next week, they had a contract signing for the match and were involved in a brawl, causing a legit small triceps tear for Michaels. He was medically cleared to compete at Unforgiven, and beat Jericho so severely that the referee called the match, making Michaels the winner. Later that night, Jericho replaced CM Punk in the World Heavyweight Championship scramble match, and won the title. On October 5 at No Mercy, Michaels was defeated by Jericho in a ladder match for the World Heavyweight Championship.

In December 2008, having lost his family&#x27;s savings due to the global recession, Michaels grudgingly accepted a one-year general employment contract from John &quot;Bradshaw&quot; Layfield (JBL). After failing to help JBL win the World Heavyweight Championship from John Cena on January 25, 2009, at the Royal Rumble, and being derided for it, Michaels agreed to face JBL in &quot;All or Nothing&quot; match at No Way Out on February 15, which Michaels won thus letting him out of his contract early while still receiving full payment.

On the March 2 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels became the first person to defeat Vladimir Kozlov, and so earned a match with The Undertaker at WrestleMania 25 on April 5, which he lost thus extending The Undertaker&#x27;s WrestleMania winning streak to 17–0. Their match was highly acclaimed by critics and audiences alike and is now considered by many to be one of the greatest WrestleMania matches of all time. After WrestleMania, Michaels took a four-month hiatus from WWE.

==== Final matches and second retirement (2009–2010) ====

Michaels returned to WWE programming in a series of segments that aired on the August 10, 2009, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, where he had, in storyline, left the WWE. Triple H met with Michaels at an office cafeteria in Texas where he was working as a chef; throughout the segments, Triple H tried to convince Michaels to return to WWE and reform DX. After several incidents during the segments, Michaels agreed to team with Triple H to face The Legacy (Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase) at SummerSlam on August 23, where DX defeated Legacy. At on December 13, DX defeated Jeri-Show (Chris Jericho and Big Show) to win the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship in a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match (TLC). On the January 4, 2010, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels buried the hatchet with long-time rival Bret Hart, as they shook hands and hugged in the ring. In contrast to the storylines featured on the show, this was in fact a legitimate reconciliation which laid to rest animosities surrounding the Montreal Screwjob. While some cast doubts on its sincerity, both men have confirmed that it was indeed genuine. DX lost the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship in a triple threat match to the team of The Miz and Big Show on the February 8 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;; the match also included The Straight Edge Society (CM Punk and Luke Gallows). On February 21 at Elimination Chamber, Michaels cost The Undertaker the World Heavyweight Championship in the main event. At WrestleMania XXVI on March 28, Michaels lost to The Undertaker and, as a result, he was forced to retire due to the match stipulation, the same way Michaels ended Ric Flair&#x27;s career. The following night, on the March 29 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels gave an emotional farewell speech, departing with the familiar sentence, &quot;Shawn Michaels has left the building.&quot;

In an interview with Bill Simmons of ESPN.com shortly after his retirement, Michaels stated that his decision to retire came a month before WrestleMania 25, when a backstage employee asked about his son Cameron, and, in response to Shawn telling the employee that he&#x27;d just turned nine, the employee said that he was &quot;halfway gone&quot;; meaning that he was halfway to his eighteenth birthday, and after that, he&#x27;d be &quot;gone&quot;. The statement affected Michaels deeply; he did not want to be absent when his son left home, so he decided that year would be his last year as an active wrestler.

==== WWE Hall of Fame and sporadic appearances (2010–2018) ====

On the December 14, 2010, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels won the Slammy Award for Moment of the Year for his match against The Undertaker at WrestleMania XXVI and accepted it via satellite. Three days later, he announced a long-term deal with WWE, where he would serve in an ambassadorial role. Michaels made his in-person television return at the December 11 &quot;Tribute to the Troops&quot; taping, where he and Triple H had a one-night only DX reunion.Michaels appeared on the January 10, 2011, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, where he was announced as a WWE Hall of Fame class of 2011 inductee. After being ridiculed by Alberto Del Rio later that night, Michaels hit Del Rio with &quot;Sweet Chin Music&quot;. On the March 28 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels addressed Triple H and The Undertaker about their match at WrestleMania XXVII. Michaels was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame on April 2 by Triple H. They were also joined by fellow Kliq members Kevin Nash (who had returned to WWE for the Royal Rumble) and Sean Waltman. He returned on the June 27 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, where he was confronted by CM Punk, and superkicked David Otunga and Michael McGillicutty. Later that night, when Diamond Dallas Page&#x27;s special appearance was interrupted by Drew McIntyre, he superkicked McIntyre.

In June 2011, Jim Ross, Michaels and Hart announced that the three were working on a DVD chronicling the careers of Hart and Michaels that the WWE was planning to release in October 2011. The subject of the DVD was their on-screen rivalry and real-life conflicts, with a particular focus on the Montreal Screwjob. In his tweet, Hart described working on the DVD as a &quot;cathartic&quot; experience, and Ross asserted that both Hart and Michaels had been very honest and emotional in their interviews. The DVD, &quot;Shawn Michaels vs Bret Hart: WWE&#x27;s Greatest Rivalries&quot;, was released in November 2011.

On the February 13, 2012, episode of &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;, Michaels confronted Triple H about accepting The Undertaker&#x27;s challenge for a Hell in a Cell match on April 1 at WrestleMania XXVIII, and announced he would be the special guest referee for it. Michaels appeared on the August 6 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; where he was confronted by Brock Lesnar, who (kayfabe) broke Michaels&#x27;s arm after putting it in a &quot;Kimura Lock&quot; the following week. On the April 1, 2013, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels returned to offer to corner Triple H in his match with Brock Lesnar on April 7 at WrestleMania 29. During that match, Michaels superkicked an interfering Paul Heyman, helping Triple H win and keep his job.

At Hell in a Cell on October 27, Michaels served as the special guest referee for the vacant WWE Championship Hell in a Cell match between Daniel Bryan and Randy Orton, performing Sweet Chin Music on Bryan so Orton could win. The next night on &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels explained he was upset with Bryan for attacking Triple H during the match and degraded him for not showing him respect, turning heel for the first time since 2005. Bryan applied the &quot;&quot;Yes!&quot; Lock&quot; on Michaels to end the segment.

On April 3, 2016, at WrestleMania 32, Michaels, as a face, made an appearance during the event in his in-ring attire, confronting The League of Nations alongside Mick Foley and Stone Cold Steve Austin, where Michaels delivered Sweet Chin Music to Alberto Del Rio and King Barrett before celebrating with Foley, Austin and The New Day. In late 2016, Michaels became a trainer at the WWE Performance Center. According to &quot;Pro Wrestling Torch&quot; in 2017, Michaels along with Terry Taylor teach the finishing class at the Performance Center, the last of four levels of classes. He appeared on the January 9, 2017, episode of &quot;Raw&quot; to promote his new film. He was then confronted by Rusev, Lana and Jinder Mahal, before Enzo Amore and Big Cass came to Michaels&#x27;s side, leading to a match between Big Cass and Mahal, which Cass won after Michaels superkicked Rusev at ringside, distracting Mahal. On the March 13 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels gave Roman Reigns advice about The Undertaker for their match at WrestleMania 33, before Braun Strowman attacked Reigns on the entrance ramp. He was one of the many WWE legends who appeared on the January 22, 2018, episode of Raw 25 Years.

At Super Show-Down on October 6, Michaels assisted Triple H in defeating The Undertaker, after which, he was attacked by The Undertaker and Kane. On the following episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Michaels appeared with Triple H, announcing that he was coming out of retirement for one final match and reforming D-Generation X. On November 2 at Crown Jewel, D-Generation X defeated The Brothers of Destruction. The match was poorly received by fans and critics alike, winning the Wrestling Observer Newsletter&#x27;s &quot;Worst Match of the Year&quot; award, although PWTorch&#x27;s Wade Keller considered that &quot;Michaels shows glimpses and didn&#x27;t embarrass himself&quot;.

==== NXT and corporate roles (2018–present) ====

In November 2018, Michaels announced he was officially working as a writer and producer on WWE&#x27;s NXT brand and show, under former D-Generation X cohort Paul Levesque. In April 2019, Michaels was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame for a second time, this time as a member of D-Generation X. He appeared at Survivor Series on November 22, 2020, during The Undertaker&#x27;s retirement ceremony. In September 2021, Levesque stepped away from the brand after experiencing a &quot;cardiac incident&quot;. Michaels, in his role as Vice President of Talent Development, took over responsibility for the running of the NXT shows. In September 2022, his job title was confirmed as Senior Vice President of Talent Development Creative, responsible for both creative and development at NXT, and for the expansion of NXT UK into NXT Europe in 2023.

On January 23, 2023, at Raw is XXX, Michaels again reunited with D-Generation X (without Billy Gunn, as he was no longer under contract with WWE) until they and Kurt Angle were confronted by Imperium (Gunther, Ludwig Kaiser, and Giovanni Vinci).

== Legacy ==

Widely regarded as one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time, Michaels received praise for several matches, including 15 Match of the Year awards between Pro Wrestling Illustrated and Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Also, his match at WrestleMania 24 against Ric Flair was named Match of the Decade by the Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Dave Meltzer gave him two 5 stars matches (the Ladder match against Razor Ramon at WrestleMania X and the first Hell in a Cell against The Undertaker at Bad Blood 1997). After several acclaimed matches at WrestleMania, Michaels has been known as Mr. WrestleMania. Sumit Rehal of Independent UK in his top 10 WrestleMania matches listed Michaels 3 times (vs Razor Ramon at WrestleMania X, vs Bret Hart at WrestleMania XII and vs The Undertaker at WrestleMania XXV). In 2016, Dave Richard of CBS Sports ranked his match against Steve Austin at WrestleMania XIV as the best main event in WrestleMania history.

His rivalry with Bret Hart has been named one of the best rivalries in WWE history.

His near hourlong match with John Cena on the April 23, 2007, edition of WWE&#x27;s longest weekly episodic show &quot;Raw&quot; is widely regarded as the greatest match in the &quot;Raw&#x27;s&quot; history.

Michaels is cited as an inspiration for many wrestlers such as Chris Jericho, Kevin Owens, Seth Rollins, Johnny Gargano, Adam Cole and numerous other wrestlers.

== Personal life ==
Hickenbottom&#x27;s first marriage, to Theresa Wood, soon ended in an amicably settled divorce. He married Rebecca Curci, a former WCW Nitro Girl known as Whisper, at the Graceland Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas on March 31, 1999. Only the couple and an Elvis impersonator were present. They have a son named Cameron Kade (born January 15, 2000) and a daughter named Cheyenne (born August 19, 2004).

In 1996, Hickenbottom posed for a non-nude layout in &quot;Playgirl&quot;. Only after he posed did he discover &quot;Playgirl&quot; has a mostly homosexual readership, for which some of his fellow wrestlers teased him.

Hickenbottom is ambidextrous, using his left hand for writing and his right hand for drawing. As a wrestler, he typically kicked with his right leg when performing his finishing move, but used either arm for his signature elbow drop. He had trouble differentiating between right and left, which affected his football games as a child.

In 1987, Hickenbottom developed a pattern of &quot;heavy&quot; substance abuse, which eventually alienated some of his closest friends, and may have explained his reputation for being difficult to work with during the 1990s. He contemplated suicide in the late 1980s, and suggested that psychological intervention was &quot;probably sorely needed&quot; by the late 1990s. His wife Rebecca observed, &quot;There was something in him that he despised, and he was self-destructing.&quot; He abandoned his drink-and-drugs lifestyle out of fear that he would negatively influence his young son.

Hickenbottom became a born-again Christian on April 24, 2002. He was raised a Catholic, but became a non-denominational Christian because of his wife. His later ring attire often incorporated cross symbols and he made a praying gesture on his knees during ring entrances. He was in the audience for a televised service of John Hagee&#x27;s Cornerstone Church in his hometown of San Antonio, where he is also a Bible teacher. In 2008, he appeared on a Trinity Broadcasting Network program with fellow wrestler Sting.

Hickenbottom is also a long time fan of the San Antonio Spurs, he&#x27;s attended home games since the late 1970&#x27;s and had season tickets for the 1998-1999 lockout shortened National Basketball Association season as the Spurs won their first NBA Championship in franchise history during that time.

== Other media ==
=== Television ===
Michaels was the host of the outdoor television show, &quot;Shawn Michaels&#x27; MacMillan River Adventures,&quot; in which he and his longtime friend, Keith Mark, owner and operator of the original MacMillan River Adventures camp in Yukon, Canada, hunted big-game animals around the world. This series aired on CarbonTV.

=== HBK Line ===
During their 2015–16 season, the Pittsburgh Penguins of the National Hockey League named a line, consisting of Carl Hagelin, Nick Bonino and Phil Kessel, the &quot;HBK Line&quot; due to the fact that the trio&#x27;s first initials, of their last names, recall Michaels&#x27;s &quot;Heartbreak Kid&quot; moniker. Pens&#x27; game-day staff would regularly play Michaels&#x27;s theme &quot;Sexy Boy&quot; over the Consol Energy Center PA system after goals or excellent shifts by line members.

After weeks of having fun with Penguins fans on Twitter, the team officially invited Michaels for their Eastern Conference Finals Game 5 matchup with the Tampa Bay Lightning (whose fanbase contains a sizable number of pro wrestlers, including Hulk Hogan and Titus O&#x27;Neil, due to Tampa long being a home base for many wrestlers), upon which Michaels accepted. Michaels met with Penguins&#x27; owner Mario Lemieux and sat with former Pittsburgh Steelers&#x27;s defensive lineman Brett Keisel during the game. Keisel also gave Michaels a tour of the city including at the Steelers headquarters and having lunch at Primanti Brothers in the city&#x27;s Strip District. The Penguins lost the game in overtime 4–3 but went on to defeat the Lightning in the series and advance to the Stanley Cup Finals, eventually defeating the San Jose Sharks for the Stanley Cup.

Outside of his numerous appearances with WWE, it was not Michaels first visit to Pittsburgh. In 2013, he appeared at the opening of the first Field &amp; Stream store in suburban Cranberry Township.

While the Penguins successfully defended their Stanley Cup championship the following year, the HBK Line was broken up when Kessel was moved to the 2nd line with Evgeni Malkin and Bonino left the team in free agency.

=== Book ===
On February 10, 2015, Hickenbottom published an autobiography entitled &quot;Wrestling for My Life: The Legend, the Reality, and the Faith of a WWE Superstar&quot;. It was co-written by David Thomas.
*The Unauthorized History of DX. Triple H; Shawn Michaels; Aaron Williams (2009). WWE Books.

== Filmography ==


== Video games ==
== Championships and accomplishments ==

* American Wrestling Association
** AWA World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Marty Jannetty
* The Baltimore Sun
** Feud of the Year (2008) 
** Match of the Year (2007) 
** Match of the Year (2008) 
** Match of the Year (2009) 
** Match of the Year (2010) 
** Wrestler of the Year (2008)
* Cauliflower Alley Club
** Art Abrams Lifetime Achievement/Lou Thesz Award (2018)
* CBS Sports
** Worst Angle of the Year (2018) 
* Central States Wrestling
** NWA Central States Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Marty Jannetty
* Continental Wrestling Association
** AWA Southern Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Marty Jannetty
* Pro Wrestling Illustrated
** Feud of the Decade (2000–2009) 
** Feud of the Year (2008) 
** Match of the Decade (2000–2009) 
**Match of the Decade (2010–2019) vs. The Undertaker at WrestleMania XXVI
** Match of the Year (1993) 
** Match of the Year (1994) 
** Match of the Year (1995) 
** Match of the Year (1996) 
** Match of the Year (2004) 
** Match of the Year (2005) 
** Match of the Year (2006) 
** Match of the Year (2007) 
** Match of the Year (2008) 
** Match of the Year (2009) 
** Match of the Year (2010) 
** Most Inspirational Wrestler of the Decade (2000–2009)
** Most Inspirational Wrestler of the Year (2010)
** Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (1995, 1996)
** Ranked No. 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the &quot;PWI 500&quot; in 1996
** Ranked No. 10 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; in 2003
** Ranked No. 33 and No. 55 of the top 100 tag teams of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; with Marty Jannetty and Diesel, respectively, in 2003
* Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
** Class of 2017
*Sports Illustrated
**Ranked No. 8 of the 20 Greatest WWE Wrestlers Of All Time 
* Texas All-Star Wrestling
** TASW Texas Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Paul Diamond
**TASW Six-Man Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Paul Diamond &amp; DJ Peterson
* Texas Wrestling Alliance
** TWA Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE
** WWF Championship (3 times)
** World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
** WWF Intercontinental Championship (3 times)
** WWF European Championship (1 time)
** WWE Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Triple H
** WWF/World Tag Team Championship (5 times) – with Diesel (2), Stone Cold Steve Austin (1), John Cena (1), Triple H (1)
** Royal Rumble (1995, 1996)
** First Grand Slam Champion
** Fourth Triple Crown Champion
** Slammy Award (15 times)
*** Best Finisher (1997)
*** Best Slammin&#x27; Jammin&#x27; Entrance (1996)
*** Best Tag Team (1994) – 
*** Best Threads (1996)
*** Double-Cross of the Year (2013) – 
*** Leader of the New Generation (1996)
*** Master of Mat Mechanics (1996)
*** Match of the Year (1994, 1996, 1997, 2008, 2009) – 
*** Moment of the Year (2010) – 
*** Squared Circle Shocker (1996) – 
*** Worst Tag Team (1994) – 
** WWE Hall of Fame (2 times)
***Class of 2011 – individually
***Class of 2019 – as a member of D-Generation X
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter
** Best Babyface (1996)
** Feud of the Year (2004) 
** Feud of the Year (2008) 
** Match of the Year (1994) 
** Match of the Year (2008) 
** Match of the Year (2009) 
** Match of the Year (2010) 
** Worst Match of the Year (2018) 
**Best Pro Wrestling DVD (2011) Greatest Rivalries: Shawn Michaels vs. Bret Hart
** Most Charismatic (1995, 1996)
** Tag Team of the Year (1989) 
** Worst Feud of the Year (2006) 
** Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 2003)

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 

==Further reading==

== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="0" end="14" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="21" end="47" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Michael Shawn Hickenbottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="89" end="110" title="professional wrestler" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="128" end="131" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q35903" start="245" end="254" title="NXT (WWE brand)" label="NXT brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="277" end="300" title="Farm team" label="developmental territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q35516" start="501" end="513" title="WrestleMania" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14848230" start="908" end="930" title="WWE Performance Center" label="WWE Performance Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16324425" start="960" end="963" title="WWE NXT" label="NXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q35826" start="1110" end="1129" title="List of WWE pay-per-view events" label="pay-per-view events"/>
<link wikidata="Q50865" start="1235" end="1237" title="WrestleMania 12" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q50874" start="1239" end="1241" title="WrestleMania 14" label="14"/>
<link wikidata="Q50904" start="1243" end="1245" title="WrestleMania 20" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q50917" start="1247" end="1249" title="WrestleMania 23" label="23"/>
<link wikidata="Q50990" start="1254" end="1256" title="WrestleMania 26" label="26"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="1327" end="1341" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q467330" start="1373" end="1403" title="American Wrestling Association" label="American Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q980436" start="1428" end="1448" title="The Rockers" label="The Midnight Rockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q949108" start="1454" end="1468" title="Marty Jannetty" label="Marty Jannetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100482" start="1496" end="1527" title="AWA World Tag Team Championship" label="AWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="1679" end="1695" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="1714" end="1743" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1845" end="1859" title="Professional wrestling championship#World championships" label="world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331393" start="1894" end="1905" title="List of WWE Champions" label="three times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="1921" end="1951" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339517" start="1952" end="1956" title="List of World Heavyweight Champions (WWE)" label="once"/>
<link wikidata="Q36103" start="1980" end="1992" title="Royal Rumble" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2084" end="2103" title="Grand Slam (professional wrestling)#WWE" label="Grand Slam Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2115" end="2136" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)#WWE" label="Triple Crown Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="2160" end="2176" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637295" start="2187" end="2191" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2011)" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090777" start="2218" end="2222" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2019)" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="2274" end="2299" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2312" end="2329" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="2393" end="2402" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="2526" end="2529" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089968" start="2668" end="2682" title="Hell in a Cell" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2690" end="2715" title="Badd Blood: In Your House" label="Badd Blood: In Your House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178703" start="2727" end="2739" title="Ladder match" label="Ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957256" start="2765" end="2788" title="WWF Wrestling Challenge" label="WWF Wrestling Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q50858" start="2845" end="2859" title="WrestleMania X" label="WrestleMania X"/>
<link wikidata="Q50865" start="2939" end="2955" title="WrestleMania XII" label="WrestleMania XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744109" start="2957" end="2971" title="Iron Man match" label="Iron Man match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921364" start="2979" end="2998" title="Elimination Chamber" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q80361" start="3011" end="3026" title="Survivor Series (2002)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q49272" start="3085" end="3102" title="Chandler, Arizona" label="Chandler, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="3303" end="3321" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="3348" end="3366" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q446213" start="3784" end="3794" title="fake blood" label="fake blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="3899" end="3907" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="3928" end="3938" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291833" start="3942" end="3962" title="Randolph High School (Texas)" label="Randolph High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q980034" start="3966" end="3989" title="Randolph Air Force Base" label="Randolph Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495387" start="4054" end="4086" title="Texas State University" label="Southwest Texas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q982353" start="4090" end="4107" title="San Marcos, Texas" label="San Marcos, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370861" start="4182" end="4194" title="Matt Bentley" label="Matt Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031774" start="4364" end="4377" title="Jose Lothario" label="Jose Lothario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="4536" end="4563" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520528" start="4577" end="4596" title="Universal Wrestling Federation (Bill Watts)" label="Mid-South Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796758" start="4636" end="4645" title="Art Crews" label="Art Crews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898163" start="4771" end="4783" title="Terry Taylor" label="Terry Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q682224" start="4907" end="4925" title="Hercules (wrestler)" label="Hercules Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364352" start="4930" end="4966" title="Steve Williams (wrestler)" label="&amp;quot;Dr. Death&amp;quot; Steve Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817448" start="5001" end="5035" title="World Class Championship Wrestling" label="World Class Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="5065" end="5078" title="Dallas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692238" start="5165" end="5189" title="Heart of America Sports Attractions" label="Central States Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q949108" start="5222" end="5236" title="Marty Jannetty" label="Marty Jannetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022564" start="5271" end="5311" title="NWA Central States Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Central States Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="5438" end="5443" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571238" start="5459" end="5483" title="Southwest Championship Wrestling" label="Texas All-Star Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027407" start="5537" end="5549" title="Nick Kiniski" label="Nick Kiniski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743824" start="5557" end="5571" title="American Force (wrestling)" label="American Breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="5572" end="5580" title="tag team" label="tag team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150268" start="5595" end="5607" title="Paul Diamond" label="Paul Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707503" start="5647" end="5673" title="Texas All-Star USA Tag Team Championship" label="TASW Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068550" start="5677" end="5695" title="Chavo Guerrero Sr." label="Chavo Guerrero Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11333367" start="5787" end="5801" title="Footloose (professional wrestling)" label="Japanese Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q467330" start="5938" end="5968" title="American Wrestling Association" label="American Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q980436" start="6070" end="6090" title="The Rockers" label="The Midnight Rockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100482" start="6121" end="6152" title="AWA World Tag Team Championship" label="AWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300921" start="6164" end="6175" title="Doug Somers" label="Doug Somers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863776" start="6180" end="6190" title="Buddy Rose" label="Buddy Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="6321" end="6347" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140048" start="6702" end="6712" title="House show" label="live event"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="6750" end="6763" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q980436" start="6879" end="6890" title="The Rockers" label="The Rockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35826" start="6991" end="7003" title="List of WWE pay-per-view events" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804337" start="7151" end="7172" title="Survivor Series match" label="Survivor Series match"/>
<link wikidata="Q80339" start="7187" end="7202" title="Survivor Series (1989)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="7296" end="7321" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q512696" start="7327" end="7346" title="The Hart Foundation" label="The Hart Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="7348" end="7357" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q727645" start="7362" end="7374" title="Jim Neidhart" label="Jim Neidhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236466" start="7836" end="7851" title="Power and Glory" label="Power and Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q682224" start="7853" end="7861" title="Hercules (wrestler)" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237201" start="7866" end="7875" title="Paul Roma" label="Paul Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q376793" start="8017" end="8027" title="turnbuckle" label="turnbuckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q371049" start="8300" end="8315" title="Brutus Beefcake" label="Brutus Beefcake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8367" end="8386" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Promo" label="promotional segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q111097998" start="8397" end="8406" title="superkick" label="superkick"/>
<link wikidata="Q220277" start="8422" end="8431" title="Defenestration" label="threw him"/>
<link wikidata="Q28243" start="8442" end="8447" title="Sugar glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q282078" start="8765" end="8776" title="Curt Hennig" label="Curt Hennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q461070" start="8875" end="8882" title="Gimmick (professional wrestling)" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="8900" end="8907" title="heel (professional wrestling)" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q721834" start="8950" end="8957" title="Manager (professional wrestling)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q115343" start="8959" end="8977" title="Sherri Martel" label="Sensational Sherri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193470" start="9088" end="9099" title="theme music" label="theme music"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="9319" end="9324" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q50853" start="9357" end="9374" title="WrestleMania VIII" label="WrestleMania VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q959842" start="9411" end="9423" title="Tito Santana" label="Tito Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q36319" start="9542" end="9554" title="Royal Rumble (1992)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="9658" end="9674" title="WWE World Championship" label="WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635" start="9689" end="9701" title="Randy Savage" label="Randy Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966800" start="9770" end="9780" title="UK Rampage (1992)" label="UK Rampage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548891" start="9806" end="9821" title="Motorpoint Arena Sheffield" label="Sheffield Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487310" start="9839" end="9854" title="Sky Movies" label="Sky Movies Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957247" start="9923" end="9943" title="WWF Prime Time Wrestling" label="Prime Time Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="9988" end="10017" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178703" start="10057" end="10069" title="ladder match" label="ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957256" start="10081" end="10100" title="WWF Challenge" label="Wrestling Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474463" start="10176" end="10199" title="WWE Home Video" label="Coliseum/WWE Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q452557" start="10241" end="10260" title="The British Bulldog" label="The British Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783207" start="10270" end="10307" title="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXI" label="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q80664" start="10385" end="10400" title="Survivor Series (1992)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="10528" end="10548" title="Warrior (wrestler)" label="The Ultimate Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="10686" end="10695" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="10700" end="10711" title="Scott Hall" label="Razor Ramon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="10933" end="10936" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="11006" end="11015" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="11043" end="11049" title="Kevin Nash" label="Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="11119" end="11126" title="steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="11280" end="11308" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109904" start="11397" end="11432" title="United States Wrestling Association" label="United States Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q80354" start="11505" end="11520" title="Survivor Series (1993)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q345019" start="11539" end="11551" title="Jerry Lawler" label="Jerry Lawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645473" start="11695" end="11700" title="Bruce Hart (wrestler)" label="Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814322" start="11702" end="11707" title="Keith Hart (wrestler)" label="Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q317365" start="11712" end="11716" title="Owen Hart" label="Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q847506" start="11747" end="11754" title="Feud (professional wrestling)" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q50858" start="12077" end="12091" title="WrestleMania X" label="WrestleMania X"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12254" end="12271" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="12287" end="12312" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="12367" end="12396" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173293" start="12410" end="12422" title="Dave Meltzer" label="Dave Meltzer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12549" end="12565" title="WWE Raw#Recurring segments" label="Heartbreak Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017559" start="12624" end="12634" title="WWF Superstars of Wrestling" label="Superstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855723" start="12716" end="12733" title="The Headshrinkers" label="The Headshrinkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728197" start="12735" end="12739" title="Samula Anoaʻi" label="Samu"/>
<link wikidata="Q360518" start="12744" end="12748" title="Rikishi (wrestler)" label="Fatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q59295" start="12767" end="12777" title="SummerSlam (1994)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80371" start="12958" end="12973" title="Survivor Series (1994)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q36562" start="13007" end="13019" title="Royal Rumble (1995)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q50860" start="13096" end="13111" title="WrestleMania XI" label="WrestleMania XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q730053" start="13177" end="13189" title="Bob Backlund" label="Bob Backlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q703668" start="13237" end="13240" title="Sid Eudy" label="Sid"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="13421" end="13433" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="fan favorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="13554" end="13566" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017510" start="13628" end="13660" title="In Your House 2" label="In Your House 2: The Lumberjacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q59298" start="13726" end="13736" title="SummerSlam (1995)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536699" start="13851" end="13859" title="The Kliq" label="The Kliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="14348" end="14366" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q692991" start="14492" end="14504" title="Shane Douglas" label="Dean Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017513" start="14522" end="14554" title="In Your House 4" label="In Your House: Great White North"/>
<link wikidata="Q317365" start="14662" end="14671" title="Owen Hart" label="Owen Hart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14732" end="14741" title="Professional wrestling attacks#Enzuigiri" label="enzuigiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q36597" start="15186" end="15198" title="Royal Rumble (1996)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="15276" end="15292" title="WWE World Championship" label="WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q50865" start="15320" end="15336" title="WrestleMania XII" label="WrestleMania XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744109" start="15524" end="15538" title="Iron Man match" label="Iron Man match"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15669" end="15681" title="The Kliq#The MSG &amp;quot;Curtain Call&amp;quot;" label="Curtain Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="15811" end="15833" title="Triple H" label="Hunter Hearst Helmsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="16026" end="16033" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q80356" start="16232" end="16247" title="Survivor Series (1996)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q36630" start="16361" end="16373" title="Royal Rumble (1997)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128746" start="16768" end="16785" title="James Andrews (physician)" label="Dr. James Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="16953" end="16976" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43959" start="17738" end="17749" title="Tammy Sytch" label="Tammy Sytch"/>
<link wikidata="Q59301" start="18034" end="18044" title="SummerSlam (1997)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="18126" end="18140" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368555" start="18603" end="18621" title="WWF One Night Only" label="WWF One Night Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="18631" end="18650" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q542333" start="18722" end="18747" title="WWE European Championship" label="WWF European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191410" start="18981" end="19000" title="Grand Slam (professional wrestling)" label="Grand Slam Champion"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19005" end="19030" title="Badd Blood: In Your House" label="In Your House: Badd Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089968" start="19091" end="19105" title="Hell in a Cell" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q466683" start="19397" end="19402" title="Chyna" label="Chyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q732642" start="19408" end="19417" title="Rick Rude" label="Rick Rude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19430" end="19436" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="19437" end="19451" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19521" end="19536" title="The Hart Foundation#The (New) Hart Foundation" label="Hart Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80110" start="19677" end="19690" title="Flag of Canada" label="Canadian Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q80695" start="19846" end="19861" title="Survivor Series (1997)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q35546" start="19948" end="19965" title="Montreal Screwjob" label="Montreal Screwjob"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="20153" end="20161" title="Farce" label="farcical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36654" start="20248" end="20260" title="Royal Rumble (1998)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20267" end="20279" title="Professional wrestling match types#Container-based variations" label="casket match"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20320" end="20334" title="Professional wrestling throws#Back body drop" label="back body drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q184418" start="20392" end="20398" title="Coffin" label="casket"/>
<link wikidata="Q697117" start="20415" end="20433" title="Spinal disc herniation" label="herniate two discs"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20570" end="20604" title="No Way Out of Texas: In Your House" label="No Way Out of Texas: In Your House"/>
<link wikidata="Q50874" start="20735" end="20751" title="WrestleMania XIV" label="WrestleMania XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q452590" start="21014" end="21028" title="Sgt. Slaughter" label="Sgt. Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21036" end="21052" title="Professional wrestling authority figures#Commissioners" label="WWF Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q721130" start="21120" end="21135" title="The Corporation (professional wrestling)" label="The Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814605" start="21674" end="21705" title="Frontier Martial-Arts Wrestling" label="Frontier Martial-Arts Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q48841034" start="21713" end="21734" title="FMW 10th Anniversary Show" label="10th Anniversary Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196914" start="21742" end="21756" title="Yokohama Arena" label="Yokohama Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529667" start="21795" end="21796" title="Hayabusa (wrestler)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q11342055" start="21800" end="21829" title="Mr. Gannosuke" label="fake Hayabusa (Mr. Gannosuke)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="22244" end="22252" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80520" start="22291" end="22303" title="Judgment Day (2000)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="22417" end="22427" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775919" start="22577" end="22589" title="The World (WWE)" label="WWF New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816794" start="22597" end="22607" title="Armageddon (2000)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150268" start="22717" end="22729" title="Paul Diamond" label="Paul Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708217" start="23019" end="23042" title="Texas Wrestling Academy" label="Texas Wrestling Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="23063" end="23069" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="23279" end="23290" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="23575" end="23590" title="The New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24013" end="24021" title="Facebuster#Double underhook facebuster" label="Pedigree"/>
<link wikidata="Q59310" start="24129" end="24139" title="SummerSlam (2002)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981947" start="24190" end="24202" title="sledgehammer" label="sledgehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80361" start="24223" end="24238" title="Survivor Series (2002)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="24272" end="24302" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921364" start="24330" end="24349" title="Elimination Chamber" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085936" start="24375" end="24385" title="Armageddon (2002)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24429" end="24455" title="Professional wrestling match types#Two out of Three falls match" label="Three Stages of Hell match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="24492" end="24505" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944691" start="24638" end="24650" title="Battle royal (professional wrestling)" label="battle royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16599022" start="24686" end="24704" title="Royal Rumble match" label="Royal Rumble match"/>
<link wikidata="Q36735" start="24815" end="24827" title="Royal Rumble (2003)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="24869" end="24878" title="Jason Reso" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q50902" start="25016" end="25032" title="WrestleMania XIX" label="WrestleMania XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936865" start="25079" end="25087" title="Backlash (2003)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="25152" end="25161" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620453" start="25233" end="25242" title="WWE Bad Blood (2003)" label="Bad Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q59369" start="25441" end="25451" title="SummerSlam (2003)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="25546" end="25557" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884404" start="25561" end="25571" title="Unforgiven (2003)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912825" start="25592" end="25602" title="Armageddon (2003)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="25663" end="25670" title="Batista (wrestler)" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="25840" end="25858" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="25865" end="25878" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="26316" end="26328" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q50904" start="26369" end="26384" title="WrestleMania XX" label="WrestleMania XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240712" start="26599" end="26607" title="Backlash (2004)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="26754" end="26762" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275392" start="26875" end="26884" title="WWE Bad Blood (2004)" label="Bad Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="27061" end="27065" title="Adam Copeland" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271664" start="27094" end="27107" title="Taboo Tuesday (2004)" label="Taboo Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27267" end="27272" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#legit" label="legit"/>
<link wikidata="Q846928" start="27278" end="27286" title="Meniscus (anatomy)" label="meniscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36758" start="27342" end="27354" title="Royal Rumble (2005)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="27457" end="27467" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27566" end="27576" title="Professional wrestling holds#Ankle lock" label="ankle lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q50915" start="27664" end="27679" title="WrestleMania 21" label="WrestleMania 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q528182" start="27876" end="27889" title="La Résistance (professional wrestling)" label="La Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288617" start="27891" end="27904" title="Rob Conway" label="Robért Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189475" start="27909" end="27924" title="Sylvain Grenier" label="Sylvain Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="27953" end="27963" title="WWE SmackDown" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241938" start="28338" end="28353" title="Mark Copani" label="Muhammad Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293983" start="28358" end="28365" title="Shawn Daivari" label="Daivari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28473" end="28488" title="Professional wrestling authority figures#Raw brand authorities" label="General Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="28489" end="28502" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28527" end="28541" title="Professional wrestling match types#Handicap match" label="handicap match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="28684" end="28694" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579128" start="28873" end="28881" title="Backlash (2005)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605050" start="29034" end="29047" title="2005 WWE draft lottery" label="draft lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231195" start="29063" end="29072" title="Vengeance (2005)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q296511" start="29132" end="29139" title="Carly Colón" label="Carlito"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="29357" end="29373" title="Piper&amp;#x27;s Pit" label="Piper&amp;#x27;s Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="29401" end="29412" title="Roddy Piper" label="Roddy Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q59383" start="29453" end="29463" title="SummerSlam (2005)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q314837" start="29833" end="29846" title="Chris Masters" label="Chris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296956" start="29866" end="29876" title="Unforgiven (2005)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q85814067" start="29935" end="29949" title="WWE Raw Homecoming" label="WWE Homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744109" start="30036" end="30060" title="Iron Man match" label="30-Minute Iron Man match"/>
<link wikidata="Q80391" start="30181" end="30196" title="Survivor Series (2005)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q35546" start="30356" end="30373" title="Montreal Screwjob" label="Montreal Screwjob"/>
<link wikidata="Q36772" start="30646" end="30658" title="Royal Rumble (2006)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q861110" start="30729" end="30742" title="Shane McMahon" label="Shane McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089296" start="30968" end="30980" title="Spirit Squad" label="Spirit Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q956773" start="30982" end="30987" title="Kenny Dykstra" label="Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472830" start="30989" end="30995" title="Johnny Jeter" label="Johnny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049905" start="30997" end="31002" title="Nick Mitchell" label="Mitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q310683" start="31004" end="31009" title="Nick Nemeth" label="Nicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257408" start="31014" end="31019" title="Michael Brendli" label="Mikey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31326" end="31346" title="WWE Raw#Recurring segments" label="Masterlock challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783207" start="31512" end="31550" title="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXII" label="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31587" end="31599" title="professional wrestling match types#Hardcore-based variations" label="Street Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q50916" start="31883" end="31898" title="WrestleMania 22" label="WrestleMania 22"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31904" end="31925" title="professional wrestling match types#No Disqualification match/No Holds Barred match" label="No Holds Barred match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000047" start="31930" end="31938" title="Backlash (2006)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095430" start="31952" end="31964" title="Team McMahon" label="The McMahons"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="32011" end="32014" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="32651" end="32660" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="32669" end="32685" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32837" end="32851" title="Professional wrestling match types#Gauntlet match" label="gauntlet match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231276" start="32999" end="33008" title="Vengeance (2006)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33051" end="33065" title="professional wrestling match types#Handicap match" label="handicap match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783207" start="33123" end="33162" title="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXIII" label="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q59389" start="33241" end="33251" title="SummerSlam (2006)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296821" start="33256" end="33266" title="Unforgiven (2006)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q666074" start="33313" end="33331" title="ECW Championship" label="ECW World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="33332" end="33344" title="Paul Wight" label="The Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q937627" start="33393" end="33405" title="Cyber Sunday (2006)" label="Cyber Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076463" start="33432" end="33441" title="Rated-RKO" label="Rated-RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="33452" end="33463" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q80528" start="33717" end="33732" title="Survivor Series (2006)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279990" start="33813" end="33839" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution (2007)" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33880" end="33885" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Legit" label="legit"/>
<link wikidata="Q504536" start="33897" end="33907" title="quadriceps femoris muscle" label="quadriceps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34234" end="34246" title="Professional wrestling attacks#One man con-chair-to" label="con-chair-to"/>
<link wikidata="Q36787" start="34301" end="34313" title="Royal Rumble (2007)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="34568" end="34595" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="34614" end="34623" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q50917" start="34654" end="34669" title="WrestleMania 23" label="WrestleMania 23"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34765" end="34769" title="Professional wrestling holds#STF" label="STFU"/>
<link wikidata="Q995575" start="34955" end="34965" title="Hardy Boyz" label="The Hardys"/>
<link wikidata="Q26621" start="34967" end="34971" title="Matt Hardy" label="Matt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="34976" end="34980" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35082" end="35102" title="Professional wrestling match types#Basic non-elimination matches" label="fatal four-way match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025224" start="35118" end="35126" title="Backlash (2007)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901385" start="35426" end="35438" title="Judgment Day (2007)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="35480" end="35506" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35535" end="35542" title="Professional wrestling attacks#Punt" label="punting"/>
<link wikidata="Q774469" start="35808" end="35811" title="Cutter (professional wrestling)" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q669083" start="36314" end="36326" title="Cyber Sunday (2007)" label="Cyber Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36465" end="36473" title="Professional wrestling attacks#Low blow" label="low blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q80386" start="36649" end="36664" title="Survivor Series (2007)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36961" end="36985" title="Professional wrestling match types#Retirement match" label="Career Threatening match"/>
<link wikidata="Q50985" start="37008" end="37025" title="WrestleMania XXIV" label="WrestleMania XXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="37039" end="37046" title="Dave Batista" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920440" start="37154" end="37162" title="Backlash (2008)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37190" end="37203" title="Professional wrestling match types#Special referee" label="guest referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256630" start="37378" end="37390" title="Judgment Day (2008)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856193" start="37395" end="37410" title="One Night Stand (2008)" label="One Night Stand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37452" end="37467" title="Professional wrestling match types#Container-based variations" label="stretcher match"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37586" end="37604" title="WWE Raw#Recurring segments" label="The Highlight Reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430825" start="37797" end="37820" title="The Great American Bash (2008)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q59404" start="37911" end="37921" title="SummerSlam (2008)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244149" start="38191" end="38201" title="Unforgiven (2008)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="38556" end="38563" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="38571" end="38601" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479800" start="38653" end="38661" title="No Mercy (2008)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44692" start="38913" end="38947" title="John Layfield" label="John &amp;quot;Bradshaw&amp;quot; Layfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q36852" start="39063" end="39075" title="Royal Rumble (2009)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241378" start="39170" end="39180" title="No Way Out (2009)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q336143" start="39382" end="39397" title="Vladimir Kozlov" label="Vladimir Kozlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q50988" start="39444" end="39459" title="WrestleMania 25" label="WrestleMania 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029026" start="39523" end="39558" title="The Streak (wrestling)" label="WrestleMania winning streak to 17–0"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="39976" end="39988" title="Kayfabe" label="in storyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q721427" start="40279" end="40289" title="The Legacy (professional wrestling)" label="The Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q299222" start="40291" end="40302" title="Cody Rhodes" label="Cody Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42598" start="40307" end="40318" title="Ted DiBiase, Jr." label="Ted DiBiase"/>
<link wikidata="Q59409" start="40323" end="40333" title="SummerSlam (2009)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070409" start="40405" end="40414" title="Jeri-Show" label="Jeri-Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="40416" end="40429" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="40434" end="40442" title="Big Show" label="Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="40455" end="40488" title="WWE Raw Tag Team Championship" label="Unified WWE Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q60617" start="40494" end="40527" title="Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match" label="Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="40636" end="40645" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q35546" start="40835" end="40852" title="Montreal Screwjob" label="Montreal Screwjob"/>
<link wikidata="Q44379" start="41033" end="41040" title="The Miz" label="The Miz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428781" start="41128" end="41149" title="Straight Edge Society" label="Straight Edge Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="41151" end="41158" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q946637" start="41163" end="41175" title="Luke Gallows" label="Luke Gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q50785" start="41196" end="41215" title="Elimination Chamber (2010)" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="41250" end="41280" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q50990" start="41303" end="41320" title="WrestleMania XXVI" label="WrestleMania XXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029026" start="41343" end="41365" title="The Streak (wrestling)" label="lost to The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q183156" start="41659" end="41680" title="Elvis has left the building" label="has left the building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910873" start="41710" end="41722" title="Bill Simmons" label="Bill Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046137" start="41726" end="41734" title="ESPN.com" label="ESPN.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="42440" end="42452" title="Slammy Award" label="Slammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q36031" start="42741" end="42762" title="WWE Tribute to the Troops" label="Tribute to the Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="42930" end="42946" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637295" start="42947" end="42960" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2011)" label="class of 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q79231" start="42996" end="43011" title="Alberto Del Rio" label="Alberto Del Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q51025" start="43198" end="43216" title="WrestleMania XXVII" label="WrestleMania XXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536699" start="43322" end="43326" title="The Kliq" label="Kliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="43335" end="43345" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q36898" start="43379" end="43391" title="Royal Rumble (2011)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q178796" start="43397" end="43409" title="Sean Waltman" label="Sean Waltman"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="43493" end="43500" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q314646" start="43518" end="43530" title="David Otunga" label="David Otunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q438400" start="43535" end="43555" title="Curtis Axel" label="Michael McGillicutty"/>
<link wikidata="Q382078" start="43580" end="43599" title="Diamond Dallas Page" label="Diamond Dallas Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q311944" start="43645" end="43658" title="Drew Galloway" label="Drew McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089968" start="44449" end="44469" title="Hell in a Cell" label="Hell in a Cell match"/>
<link wikidata="Q51026" start="44484" end="44503" title="WrestleMania XXVIII" label="WrestleMania XXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="44653" end="44665" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="44672" end="44679" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51027" start="44914" end="44929" title="WrestleMania 29" label="WrestleMania 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q15054910" start="45042" end="45056" title="Hell in a Cell (2013)" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q299355" start="45178" end="45190" title="Bryan Danielson" label="Daniel Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="45437" end="45441" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18820013" start="45579" end="45594" title="WrestleMania 32" label="WrestleMania 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q21608916" start="45688" end="45709" title="The League of Nations (professional wrestling)" label="The League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="45720" end="45730" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="45735" end="45758" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79231" start="45805" end="45820" title="Alberto Del Rio" label="Alberto Del Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q203269" start="45825" end="45837" title="Wade Barrett" label="King Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637043" start="45880" end="45891" title="The New Day (wrestling)" label="The New Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q14848230" start="45940" end="45962" title="WWE Performance Center" label="WWE Performance Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898163" start="46038" end="46050" title="Terry Taylor" label="Terry Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26252640" start="46214" end="46226" title="The Resurrection of Gavin Stone" label="his new film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833189" start="46254" end="46259" title="Rusev (wrestler)" label="Rusev"/>
<link wikidata="Q15739824" start="46261" end="46265" title="Lana (wrestling)" label="Lana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068702" start="46270" end="46282" title="Jinder Mahal" label="Jinder Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16027872" start="46291" end="46301" title="Enzo Amore" label="Enzo Amore"/>
<link wikidata="Q769073" start="46306" end="46314" title="Big Cass" label="Big Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q275971" start="46530" end="46542" title="Roman Reigns" label="Roman Reigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="46556" end="46570" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015782" start="46590" end="46605" title="WrestleMania 33" label="WrestleMania 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679732" start="46614" end="46628" title="Braun Strowman" label="Braun Strowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48860802" start="46751" end="46763" title="Raw 25 Years" label="Raw 25 Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q55105180" start="46769" end="46784" title="Super Show-Down (2018)" label="Super Show-Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="46906" end="46910" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="47072" end="47086" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q56650649" start="47105" end="47116" title="Crown Jewel (2018)" label="Crown Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q893281" start="47142" end="47169" title="The Brothers of Destruction" label="The Brothers of Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253451" start="47240" end="47269" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35903" start="47585" end="47595" title="NXT (WWE brand)" label="WWE&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16324425" start="47596" end="47599" title="WWE NXT" label="NXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q100280765" start="47804" end="47819" title="Survivor Series (2020)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q116290412" start="48361" end="48371" title="WWE Raw is XXX" label="Raw is XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q708144" start="48426" end="48436" title="Billy Gunn" label="Billy Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q65129570" start="48528" end="48536" title="Imperium (professional wrestling)" label="Imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330762" start="48538" end="48545" title="Gunther (wrestler)" label="Gunther"/>
<link wikidata="Q29876742" start="48547" end="48560" title="Ludwig Kaiser" label="Ludwig Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935491" start="48566" end="48580" title="Giovanni Vinci" label="Giovanni Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="49665" end="49674" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="49909" end="49922" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q609472" start="49924" end="49935" title="Kevin Owens" label="Kevin Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="49937" end="49949" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809720" start="49951" end="49965" title="Johnny Gargano" label="Johnny Gargano"/>
<link wikidata="Q928045" start="49967" end="49976" title="Adam Cole" label="Adam Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q25359442" start="50163" end="50173" title="Nitro Girls" label="Nitro Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591463" start="50199" end="50223" title="Graceland Wedding Chapel" label="Graceland Wedding Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="50227" end="50236" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301743" start="50279" end="50297" title="Elvis impersonator" label="Elvis impersonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q580633" start="50485" end="50493" title="Playgirl" label="Playgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="50571" end="50581" title="homosexual" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453227" start="50662" end="50674" title="Cross-dominance" label="ambidextrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="51045" end="51060" title="substance abuse" label="substance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q944142" start="51210" end="51230" title="Suicidal ideation" label="contemplated suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256382" start="51269" end="51295" title="psychological intervention" label="psychological intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="51595" end="51615" title="Born again" label="born-again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="51651" end="51659" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="51674" end="51702" title="non-denominational Christian" label="non-denominational Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="51765" end="51778" title="Christian cross" label="cross symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q861718" start="51895" end="51905" title="John Hagee" label="John Hagee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778016" start="52024" end="52052" title="Trinity Broadcasting Network" label="Trinity Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="52082" end="52087" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="52134" end="52151" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="52269" end="52300" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="52665" end="52670" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="52672" end="52678" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649082" start="52784" end="52798" title="2015-16 Pittsburgh Penguins season" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="52804" end="52823" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="52831" end="52853" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238500" start="52862" end="52866" title="Line (ice hockey)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038576" start="52882" end="52894" title="Carl Hagelin" label="Carl Hagelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q459545" start="52896" end="52907" title="Nick Bonino" label="Nick Bonino"/>
<link wikidata="Q723395" start="52912" end="52923" title="Phil Kessel" label="Phil Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q595460" start="53182" end="53202" title="PPG Paints Arena" label="Consol Energy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="53311" end="53318" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q834536" start="53367" end="53385" title="Eastern Conference (NHL)" label="Eastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054654" start="53386" end="53399" title="2016 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="Finals Game 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="53417" end="53436" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="53506" end="53516" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q196166" start="53521" end="53538" title="Titus O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Titus O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="53666" end="53679" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="53700" end="53719" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481576" start="53745" end="53757" title="Brett Keisel" label="Brett Keisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243049" start="53879" end="53896" title="Primanti Brothers" label="Primanti Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624071" start="53916" end="53930" title="Strip District, Pittsburgh" label="Strip District"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190374" start="54044" end="54062" title="2016 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="54089" end="54104" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="54113" end="54124" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="54208" end="54218" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747055" start="54269" end="54287" title="Field &amp;amp; Stream (retailer)" label="Field &amp;amp; Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181916" start="54306" end="54324" title="Cranberry Township, Butler County, Pennsylvania" label="Cranberry Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995070" start="54399" end="54417" title="2017 Stanley Cup Finals" label="the following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q314433" start="54489" end="54502" title="Evgeni Malkin" label="Evgeni Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q467330" start="54933" end="54963" title="American Wrestling Association" label="American Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100482" start="54967" end="54998" title="AWA World Tag Team Championship" label="AWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55000" end="55007" title="AWA World Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q949108" start="55016" end="55030" title="Marty Jannetty" label="Marty Jannetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="55033" end="55050" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="The Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054524" start="55228" end="55250" title="Cauliflower Alley Club" label="Cauliflower Alley Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931052" start="55311" end="55321" title="CBS Sports" label="CBS Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692238" start="55359" end="55383" title="Heart of America Sports Attractions" label="Central States Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022564" start="55387" end="55427" title="NWA Central States Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Central States Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55429" end="55435" title="NWA Central States Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128866" start="55461" end="55494" title="Continental Wrestling Association" label="Continental Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655113" start="55498" end="55532" title="AWA Southern Tag Team Championship" label="AWA Southern Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55534" end="55541" title="AWA Southern Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="55567" end="55592" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55631" end="55647" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Feud of the Year" label="Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="55694" end="55713" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards" label="Match of the Decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="55730" end="55744" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55769" end="55786" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56145" end="56184" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Inspirational Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Inspirational Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56195" end="56228" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Most Popular Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Popular Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56304" end="56311" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated#PWI 500" label="PWI 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q865105" start="56551" end="56586" title="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="56605" end="56623" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571238" start="56687" end="56711" title="Southwest Championship Wrestling" label="Texas All-Star Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707503" start="56715" end="56747" title="Texas All-Star USA Tag Team Championship" label="TASW Texas Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56749" end="56756" title="Texas All-Star USA Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150268" start="56765" end="56777" title="Paul Diamond" label="Paul Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150268" start="56831" end="56843" title="Paul Diamond" label="Paul Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238547" start="56850" end="56861" title="DJ Peterson" label="DJ Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="56932" end="56980" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="56984" end="57000" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331393" start="57002" end="57009" title="List of WWE Champions" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="57014" end="57044" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339517" start="57046" end="57052" title="List of World Heavyweight Champions (WWE)" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="57057" end="57090" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="WWF Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600413" start="57092" end="57099" title="List of WWE Intercontinental Champions" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q542333" start="57104" end="57129" title="WWE European Championship" label="WWF European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245537" start="57131" end="57137" title="List of WWE European Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="57142" end="57167" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWE Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981031" start="57169" end="57175" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE)" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="57196" end="57227" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF/World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823152" start="57229" end="57236" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="5 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="57257" end="57280" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36103" start="57317" end="57329" title="Royal Rumble" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q36562" start="57331" end="57335" title="Royal Rumble (1995)" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q36597" start="57337" end="57341" title="Royal Rumble (1996)" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57346" end="57371" title="Grand Slam (professional wrestling)#List of WWE Grand Slam winners" label="First Grand Slam Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57375" end="57403" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)#List of WWE Men&amp;#x27;s Triple Crown winners" label="Fourth Triple Crown Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="57407" end="57419" title="Slammy Award" label="Slammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57450" end="57454" title="Slammy Award#1997 Slammy Awards" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57502" end="57506" title="Slammy Award#1996 Slammy Awards" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57527" end="57531" title="Slammy Award#1994 Slammy Awards" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57590" end="57594" title="Slammy Award#2013 Slammy Awards" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57715" end="57719" title="Slammy Award#2008 Slammy Awards" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57721" end="57725" title="Slammy Award#2009 Slammy Awards" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57754" end="57758" title="Slammy Award#2010 Slammy Awards" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="57832" end="57848" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637295" start="57862" end="57875" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2011)" label="Class of 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090777" start="57894" end="57907" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2019)" label="Class of 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="57925" end="57939" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="57942" end="57971" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57975" end="57988" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Best Babyface" label="Best Babyface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57999" end="58015" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Feud of the Year" label="Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58055" end="58072" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58171" end="58194" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Match of the Year" label="Worst Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58205" end="58227" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Best Pro Wrestling DVD/Streaming Documentary" label="Best Pro Wrestling DVD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58287" end="58303" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Most Charismatic" label="Most Charismatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58320" end="58340" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Tag Team of the Year" label="Tag Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58352" end="58374" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Feud of the Year" label="Worst Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q373374" start="58386" end="58428" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58430" end="58443" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame#Inductees" label="Class of 2003"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306326" wikidata="Q815577" url="?curid=306326" title="Ignorance">
<text>Ignorance is a lack of knowledge or understanding. Deliberate ignorance is a culturally-induced phenomenon, the study of which is called agnotology. 

The word &quot;ignorant&quot; is an adjective that describes a person in the state of being unaware, or even cognitive dissonance and other cognitive relation, and can describe individuals who are unaware of important information or facts. Ignorance can appear in three different types: factual ignorance (absence of knowledge of some fact), object ignorance (unacquaintance with some object), and technical ignorance (absence of knowledge of how to do something).

== Consequences ==
Ignorance can have negative effects on individuals and societies, but can also benefit them by creating within them the desire to know more. For example, ignorance within science opens the opportunity to seek knowledge and make discoveries by asking new questions. Though this can only take place if the individual possesses a curious mind.

Studies suggest that adults with an adequate education who perform enriching and challenging jobs are happier, and more in control of their environment. The confidence that adults obtain through the sense of control that education provides allows those adults to go for more leadership positions and seek for power throughout their lives.

In 1984, author Thomas Pynchon observed: 

Another effect of ignorance is characterized by the Dunning-Kruger effect, named after the scientists David Dunning and Justin Kruger in 1999. This theory centralizes the behavior of subjects regarding their intellectual capabilities and social behaviors. The limited information or competence of people who possess the Dunning-Kruger translates into a feeling of intellectual superiority.

==See also==
* Agnoiology – the theoretical study of the unknown and the unknowable
* Agnotology – the study of culturally-induced ignorance or doubt
* Avidya (Hinduism), ignorance, a concept in Vedanta. Vidya is knowledge. Literally, Avidya is not knowledge.
* Avidyā (Buddhism), ignorance as a concept in Buddhism
* Dunning–Kruger effect
* Fallibilism is the philosophical principle that human beings could be wrong about their beliefs, expectations, or their understanding of the world, and yet still be justified in holding their incorrect beliefs. 
* General Ignorance, the final round of the BBC quiz show &quot;QI&quot; (2003 onwards), which focuses on seemingly easy questions but whose obvious answers are wrong.
**&quot;The Book of General Ignorance&quot; (2006), based on the BBC quiz show. The book aims to correct common misconceptions.
* Hypocrisy
* Ignorance Is Bliss
* Ignorance management, a knowledge management practice that addresses the concept of ignorance in organizations
* Innocence, a term sometimes used to indicate a naive lack of knowledge or understanding. 
* Jahiliyyah, Islamic concept for &quot;ignorance of divine guidance&quot;.
* Newspeak, the fictional language in the 1949 novel &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;, written by George Orwell. A reduced language created by a totalitarian state as a tool to keep the population in a controlled state of ignorance, and Crimestop described as &quot;protective stupidity&quot;.
* Pluralistic Ignorance a situation in which a majority of group members privately reject a norm, but go along with it because they assume, incorrectly, that most others accept it.
* Rational ignorance a voluntary state of ignorance that can occur when the cost of educating oneself on an issue exceeds the potential benefit that the knowledge would provide
* Sociology of scientific ignorance, the study of ignorance as something relevant.
==References==
==Further reading==

* Gigerenzer, Gerd and Garcia-Retamero, Rocio. Cassandra’s Regret: The Psychology of Not Wanting to Know (March 2017), &quot;Psychological Review,&quot; 2017, Vol. 124, No. 2, 179–196. Paper proposes a regret theory of deliberate ignorance.   A summary discussion of the paper on the website of the &quot;American Psychological Association (APA).&quot;

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q815577" start="0" end="9" title="Ignorance" label="Ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="23" end="32" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q46744" start="36" end="49" title="understanding" label="understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q395027" start="137" end="147" title="agnotology" label="agnotology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338318" start="243" end="250" title="Awareness" label="unaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="260" end="280" title="cognitive dissonance" label="cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188572" start="384" end="388" title="fact" label="fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q35155" start="1334" end="1348" title="Thomas Pynchon" label="Thomas Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q639444" start="1413" end="1434" title="Dunning–Kruger effect" label="Dunning-Kruger effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q24238924" start="1463" end="1476" title="David Dunning" label="David Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q29654717" start="1481" end="1494" title="Justin Kruger" label="Justin Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371551" start="1767" end="1777" title="Agnoiology" label="Agnoiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395027" start="1838" end="1848" title="Agnotology" label="Agnotology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005227" start="1904" end="1921" title="Avidya (Hinduism)" label="Avidya (Hinduism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053923" start="2014" end="2031" title="Avidyā (Buddhism)" label="Avidyā (Buddhism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q639444" start="2070" end="2091" title="Dunning–Kruger effect" label="Dunning–Kruger effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q192600" start="2094" end="2105" title="Fallibilism" label="Fallibilism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2308" end="2325" title="QI#General Ignorance" label="General Ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286698" start="2370" end="2372" title="QI" label="QI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719234" start="2482" end="2511" title="The Book of General Ignorance" label="The Book of General Ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q186174" start="2579" end="2599" title="common misconception" label="common misconception"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2604" end="2613" title="Hypocrisy#Self-deception" label="Hypocrisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16785333" start="2616" end="2634" title="Ignorance Is Bliss (disambiguation)" label="Ignorance Is Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993028" start="2637" end="2657" title="Ignorance management" label="Ignorance management"/>
<link wikidata="Q192060" start="2661" end="2681" title="knowledge management" label="knowledge management"/>
<link wikidata="Q359385" start="2750" end="2759" title="Innocence" label="Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q726805" start="2842" end="2852" title="Jahiliyyah" label="Jahiliyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q654101" start="2918" end="2926" title="Newspeak" label="Newspeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="2975" end="2995" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="3014" end="3027" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3153" end="3162" title="Thoughtcrime#Crimestop" label="Crimestop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3212" end="3233" title="Pluralistic Ignorance" label="Pluralistic Ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q519846" start="3393" end="3411" title="Rational ignorance" label="Rational ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669236" start="3570" end="3603" title="Sociology of scientific ignorance" label="Sociology of scientific ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q108184" start="3689" end="3705" title="Gerd Gigerenzer" label="Gigerenzer, Gerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256370" start="3812" end="3832" title="Psychological Review" label="Psychological Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="3992" end="4026" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306327" wikidata="Q398771" url="?curid=306327" title="HHH">
<text>HHH may refer to:

==People==
* H. H. Holmes, one of America&#x27;s first modern-day serial killers
* Hans-Hermann Hoppe (born 1949), Austrian school economist
* Hubert H. Humphrey (1911–1978), the 38th Vice President of the United States
* Haela Hunt-Hendrix, musician
* Hunter Hearst Helmsley (Triple H), stage name of professional wrestler Paul Levesque

==Places==
* Haven of Hope Hospital, a public hospital in Hong Kong
* Hilton Head Airport, in South Carolina, United States
* Hilton Head Island High School, in South Carolina, United States
* Holland Heineken House

==Groups, organizations, companies==
* Hash House Harriers, an international group of running clubs
* Hog Hoggidy Hog, a South African band
* Hot Hot Heat, a Canadian band

==Other uses==
* Hugo&#x27;s House of Horrors, a 1990 computer game
* &quot;Hungry Hungry Hippos&quot;, a 1978 tabletop game
* Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome, a genetic disorder
* HHH(1,13), a run-length limited code developed by Hirt, Hassner, and Heise

==See also==

* HHHR Tower, in Dubai
* Triple H (disambiguation)
* 3H (disambiguation)
* H3 (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q398771" start="0" end="3" title="HHH" label="HHH"/>
<link wikidata="Q360680" start="32" end="44" title="H. H. Holmes" label="H. H. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q76688" start="102" end="120" title="Hans-Hermann Hoppe" label="Hans-Hermann Hoppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="162" end="180" title="Hubert H. Humphrey" label="Hubert H. Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q94166642" start="241" end="259" title="Haela Hunt-Hendrix" label="Haela Hunt-Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="272" end="305" title="Triple H" label="Hunter Hearst Helmsley (Triple H)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15934184" start="371" end="393" title="Haven of Hope Hospital" label="Haven of Hope Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275021" start="428" end="447" title="Hilton Head Airport" label="Hilton Head Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709511" start="484" end="514" title="Hilton Head Island High School" label="Hilton Head Island High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966490" start="551" end="573" title="Holland Heineken House" label="Holland Heineken House"/>
<link wikidata="Q691700" start="614" end="633" title="Hash House Harriers" label="Hash House Harriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844133" start="677" end="692" title="Hog Hoggidy Hog" label="Hog Hoggidy Hog"/>
<link wikidata="Q978591" start="717" end="729" title="Hot Hot Heat" label="Hot Hot Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933665" start="765" end="793" title="Hugo&amp;#x27;s House of Horrors" label="Hugo&amp;#x27;s House of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943523" start="824" end="844" title="Hungry Hungry Hippos" label="Hungry Hungry Hippos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103627" start="875" end="934" title="Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome" label="Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="957" end="966" title="RLL code#HHH(1,13)" label="HHH(1,13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470076" start="1049" end="1059" title="HHHR Tower" label="HHHR Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553649" start="1072" end="1097" title="Triple H (disambiguation)" label="Triple H (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q229463" start="1100" end="1119" title="3H (disambiguation)" label="3H (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q346181" start="1122" end="1141" title="H3 (disambiguation)" label="H3 (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306332" wikidata="Q3257524" url="?curid=306332" title="Lloyd Hall">
<text>Lloyd Augustus Hall (June 20, 1894 – January 2, 1971) was an American chemist, who contributed to the science of food preservation. By the end of his career, Hall had amassed 59 United States patents, and a number of his inventions were also patented in other countries.

==Biography==
Lloyd Hall was born in Elgin, Illinois on June 20, 1894. Hall&#x27;s grandmother came to Illinois using the &quot;Underground Railroad&quot; at the age of sixteen. His grandfather came to Chicago in 1837 and was one of the founders of the Quinn Chapel A.M.E. Church. He became the church&#x27;s first pastor in 1841. Hall&#x27;s parents, Augustus and Isabel, both graduated high school. Although Lloyd was born in Elgin, his family moved to Aurora, Illinois. He graduated in 1912 from East Aurora High School in Aurora. After graduating school, he studied pharmaceutical chemistry at Northwestern University, earning a Bachelor of Science and a [Master&#x27;s degree]at the University of Chicago. At Northwestern, Hall met Carroll L. Griffith, who with his father, Enoch L. Griffith, founded Griffith Laboratories. The Griffiths later hired Hall as their chief chemist.

After leaving university, Hall was hired by the Western Electric Company after a phone interview. The company refused to hire Hall after they discovered he was black. Hall then went to work as a chemist for the Department of Health in Chicago followed by a job as chief chemist with the John Morrell Company.

During World War I, Hall served with the United States Ordnance Department where he was promoted to Chief Inspector of Powder and Explosives. In 2004, he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame for his work.

Following the war, Hall married Myrrhene Newsome and they moved to Chicago so he could work for the Boyer Chemical Laboratory, again as a chief chemist. Following this, Hall became president and chemical director for Chemical Products Corporation&#x27;s consulting laboratory. In 1925, Hall took a position with Griffith Laboratories where he remained for 34 years.

==Major contributions==
Lloyd Hall devoted much of his life and efforts to food science curing meat, particularly to improving a [curing salt] marketed by Griffith Laboratories known as flash-drying. This product originated with German chemist Karl Max Seifert, developer of a process whereby solutions of sodium chloride and one or more secondary salts were sprayed onto hot metal and rapidly dried, producing crystals of the secondary salts encased inside a shell of sodium chloride. Seifert patented the process in 1934 and sold the rights to Griffith Laboratories. The adaptation of Seifert&#x27;s process specifically for meat curing was then patented by company owner Enoch L. Griffith, who proposed nitrates and nitrites, well-known curing agents, as the secondary butt salts.

Lloyd Hall is often falsely credited with the original invention of Seifert&#x27;s process. However, Hall took a leading role in developing the patent after it was sold to Griffith Laboratories, adding hygroscopic agents such as corn sugar and glycerine to inhibit caking of the powder. Most of his patents in meat curing dealt with either preventing caking of the curing composition, or remedying undesired effects caused by the anticaking agents.

Hall also investigated the role of spices in food preservation. It was common knowledge that certain seasonings had antimicrobial properties, but Hall and co-worker Carroll L. Griffith found that some spices carried many bacteria, as well as yeast and mold spores. To counter these problems, they patented in 1938 a means to sterilize spices through exposure to ethylene oxide gas, a fumigant. Hall and Griffith later promoted the use of ethylene oxide for the sterilization of medical equipment, helping to advance an idea that had been around for several years.

Hall also invented new uses of antioxidants to prevent food spoilage, especially the onset of rancidity in fats and oils. Aware that unprocessed vegetable oils frequently contained natural antioxidants such as lecithin that slowed their spoilage, he developed means of combining these compounds with salts and other materials so that they could be readily introduced to other foods.

After retiring from Griffith in 1959, Hall consulted for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. From 1962 to 1964, he sat on the American Food for Peace Council. He died in 1971 in Pasadena, California. He was awarded several honors during his lifetime, including honorary degrees from Virginia State University, Howard University, and the Tuskegee Institute and in 2004 he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame for his work., football and track. He had the opportunity to choose between four colleges and he picked Northwestern University.

==Personal life==
Charles E. Hall was his uncle.

==Patents==
#1,882,834, 10/18/1932, Asphalt emulsion and manufacture thereof
#1,914,351, 6/13/1933, Protective coating, Enoch L.Griffith (co-inventor)
#2,022,464, 11/26/1935, Vitamin concentrate,
#2,097,405, 10/26/1937, Manufacture of bleached pepper products
#2,107,697, 2/8/1938, Sterilizing foodstuffs, Carroll L. Griffith (co-inventor)
#2,155,045, 4/18/1939, Inhibited detergent composition
#2,189,949, 2/13/1940, Sterilizing colloid materials
#2,251,334, 8/5/1941, Protein composition of matter
#2,321,673, 6/15/1944, Yeast food
#2,357,650, 9/5/1944, Puncture sealing composition and manufacture thereof
#2,363,730, 11/28/1944, Manufacture of nitrogen-fortified whey concentrate
#2,385,412, 9/25/1945, Capsicum-containing seasoning composition
#2,414,299, 1/14/1947, Production of protein hydrolysate flavoring material
#2,464,200, 3/15/1949, Manufacture of stable dry papain composition
#2,464,927, 3/22/1949, Antioxidant
#2,477,742, 8/2/1949, Gelatin-base coating for food and the like
#2,493,288, 1/3/1950, Synergistic antioxidants and the methods of preparing the same
#2,500,543, 3/14/1950, Antioxidant
#2,511,802, 6/13/1950, Synergistic antioxidant
#2,511,803, 7/13/1950, Antioxidant flakes
#2,511,804, 7/13/1950, Antioxidant salt
#2,518,233, 8/8/1950, Synergistic antioxidant containing amino acids
#2,536,171, 1/2/1951, Production of protein hydrolysate
#2,758,931, 8/14/1956, Antioxidant composition
#2,770,551, 11/27/1956, Meat-curing salt composition
#2,772,169, 11/13/1956, Antioxidant material and use of said material in treating meat
#2,845,358, 7/29/1958, Method of preserving frozen pork

==References==
{{reflist}}

==External links==
*Photograph of Lloyd Hall

{{authority control}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Hall, Lloyd}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3257524" start="0" end="19" title="Lloyd Hall" label="Lloyd Augustus Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="113" end="130" title="food preservation" label="food preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="178" end="191" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="192" end="198" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q499887" start="309" end="314" title="Elgin, Illinois" label="Elgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="316" end="324" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q868393" start="400" end="420" title="Underground Railroad" label="Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="538" end="551" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="A.M.E. Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22595" start="727" end="743" title="Aurora, Illinois" label="Aurora, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327761" start="771" end="794" title="East Aurora High School" label="East Aurora High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q243455" start="842" end="866" title="Medicinal chemistry" label="pharmaceutical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="870" end="893" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="905" end="924" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="960" end="981" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="1205" end="1229" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1392" end="1399" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1474" end="1485" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100878" start="1508" end="1541" title="United States Ordnance Department" label="United States Ordnance Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503716" start="2145" end="2151" title="Curing (food preservation)" label="curing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="2152" end="2156" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2243" end="2255" title="flash-drying" label="flash-drying"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2286" end="2292" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2301" end="2317" title="Karl Max Seifert" label="Karl Max Seifert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="2363" end="2378" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="2763" end="2770" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q72157355" start="2776" end="2783" title="nitrite" label="nitrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="3044" end="3055" title="Hygroscopy" label="hygroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="3071" end="3081" title="Glucose" label="corn sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="3086" end="3095" title="Glycerol" label="glycerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q726460" start="3272" end="3288" title="anticaking agent" label="anticaking agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="3327" end="3332" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q68541106" start="3408" end="3421" title="antimicrobial" label="antimicrobial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="3513" end="3521" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="3534" end="3539" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="3544" end="3548" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q407473" start="3654" end="3668" title="ethylene oxide" label="ethylene oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="3888" end="3899" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q859029" start="3951" end="3960" title="Rancidification" label="rancidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="3964" end="3967" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="3973" end="3976" title="Vegetable fats and oils" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q241595" start="4067" end="4075" title="lecithin" label="lecithin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="4302" end="4335" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="4343" end="4357" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465473" start="4401" end="4415" title="Food for Peace" label="Food for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="4444" end="4452" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4454" end="4464" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="4527" end="4542" title="honorary degree" label="honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934591" start="4549" end="4574" title="Virginia State University" label="Virginia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="4576" end="4593" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682329" start="4603" end="4621" title="Tuskegee University" label="Tuskegee Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366018" start="4659" end="4690" title="National Inventors Hall of Fame" label="National Inventors Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4839" end="4854" title="Charles E. Hall" label="Charles E. Hall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306333" wikidata="Q883159" url="?curid=306333" title="William S. Fulton">
<text>William Savin Fulton (June 2, 1795 – August 15, 1844) was an American lawyer and politician who served as a United States Senator from Arkansas from 1836 until his death in 1844. He had previously served as the fourth governor of Arkansas Territory, from 1835 to 1836, and the second secretary of the Arkansas Territory from 1829 to 1835.

== Early life ==
Fulton was born in Cecil County, Maryland, and graduated from Baltimore College in 1813. He had intended to study law, but with the outbreak of the War of 1812 he enlisted in a company of volunteers at Fort McHenry. Fulton was military secretary to General Andrew Jackson during the Seminole War in 1818. After the war, Fulton moved to Gallatin, Tennessee, where he was admitted to the bar in 1817. He owned slaves.

== Political career ==
In 1820, Fulton settled in Florence, Alabama. In 1821, he was elected to the Legislature. He was appointed Secretary of the Arkansas Territory by President Andrew Jackson in 1829. Fulton served as Secretary until 1835, when he was appointed Governor of the Territory. When Arkansas was admitted as a state in 1836, he became one of its first Senators. In the United States Senate he became a member of the Democratic Party. Fulton remained a Senator until his death in 1844.

== Death ==
Fulton died at his home in Little Rock and was buried in the historic Mount Holly Cemetery in Little Rock.

== Legacy ==
Fulton County, Arkansas is named for him.

== See also ==
* List of governors of Arkansas
* List of United States Congress members who died in office (1790–1899)

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* William S. Fulton at The Political Graveyard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q883159" start="0" end="20" title="William S. Fulton" label="William Savin Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="108" end="129" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="135" end="143" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="218" end="226" title="List of governors of Arkansas" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="230" end="248" title="Arkansas Territory" label="Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="301" end="319" title="Arkansas Territory" label="Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q385365" start="376" end="398" title="Cecil County, Maryland" label="Cecil County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852827" start="419" end="436" title="Baltimore College" label="Baltimore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="505" end="516" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438634" start="559" end="571" title="Fort McHenry" label="Fort McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="614" end="628" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q900693" start="640" end="652" title="Seminole Wars" label="Seminole War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464943" start="693" end="712" title="Gallatin, Tennessee" label="Gallatin, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79743" start="824" end="841" title="Florence, Alabama" label="Florence, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270265" start="874" end="885" title="Alabama Legislature" label="Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="953" end="967" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1156" end="1176" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1203" end="1219" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="1312" end="1323" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921230" start="1355" end="1375" title="Mount Holly Cemetery" label="Mount Holly Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q61007" start="1406" end="1429" title="Fulton County, Arkansas" label="Fulton County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="1466" end="1495" title="List of governors of Arkansas" label="List of governors of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027788" start="1498" end="1567" title="List of United States Congress members who died in office (1790–1899)" label="List of United States Congress members who died in office (1790–1899)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757656" start="1633" end="1656" title="The Political Graveyard" label="The Political Graveyard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306334" wikidata="Q21327968" url="?curid=306334" title="Anagallis arvensis">
<text>Anagallis arvensis (syn. Lysimachia arvensis), commonly known as the scarlet pimpernel, red pimpernel, red chickweed, poor man&#x27;s barometer, poor man&#x27;s weather-glass, shepherd&#x27;s weather glass or shepherd&#x27;s clock, is a species of low-growing annual plant with brightly coloured flowers, most often scarlet but also bright blue and sometimes pink. The native range of the species is Europe and Western Asia and North Africa. The species has been distributed widely by humans, either deliberately as an ornamental flower or accidentally. &quot;A. arvensis&quot; is now naturalised almost worldwide, with a range that encompasses the Americas, Central and East Asia, the Indian Subcontinent, Malesia, the Pacific Islands, Australasia and Southern Africa.

Traditionally included in the primrose family Primulaceae, the genus &quot;Anagallis&quot; was placed in the family Myrsinaceae until that family in turn was included in Primulaceae in the APG III system. The genus &quot;Anagallis&quot; is included in &quot;Lysimachia&quot; by some authors.

This common European plant is generally considered a weed and is an indicator of light soils, though it grows opportunistically in clay soils as well. The origin of the name &quot;pimpernel&quot; comes from late Middle English [1400–50], derived from Middle French , from Old French , and ultimately from Vulgar Latin ( &#x27;pepper&#x27; + &#x27;-ine&#x27; + diminutive suffix).

The flower serves as the emblem of the fictional hero the Scarlet Pimpernel.

==Description==
When found as a summer annual, the scarlet pimpernel has a low-growing creeping habit, but as a winter annual, it forms a half-rosette with an upright stem. It has weak sprawling stems with square cross-section growing to about long. They bear bright green, soft, ovate sessile leaves in opposite pairs. The orange, red or blue, radially symmetric flowers, about in diameter, are produced singly in the leaf axils from spring to autumn. The petal margins are somewhat crenate and have small glandular hairs. The stamens have lollipop hairs and therefore attract a variety of pollinators, especially flies, but the flowers are also capable of autopollination. The dehiscent capsule fruits ripen from August to October in the northern hemisphere. The weight of the fruiting body bends the stem, and the seeds are transported by the wind or rain. Blue-flowered plants (&quot;A. arvensis&quot; Forma &quot;azurea&quot;) are common in some areas, such as the Mediterranean region, and should not be confused with the related blue pimpernel, &quot;Anagallis foemina&quot;, sometimes &quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot; ssp. &quot;foemina&quot;. In 2007, a molecular phylogenetic study showed that &quot;Anagallis foemina&quot; is more closely related to &quot;Anagallis monelli&quot; than to &quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot;, and should be treated as a separate species. The taxonomy has however not yet been resolved and various authorities propose either the subspecies &quot;Anagallis arvensis subsp. foemina&quot; (Mill.) Schinz &amp; Thell, or the species &quot;Anagallis foemina&quot; Mill. The plant has a diploid chromosome count of 2n=40.

Scarlet pimpernel flowers open only when the sun shines, and even close in overcast conditions. This habit leads to names such as &quot;shepherd&#x27;s weather glass&quot;. It has been observed along the verges of salted roads, creating a broad red band along the roadside.

Scarlet pimpernel has a wide variety of flower colours. The petals of the type &quot;arvensis&quot; are bright red to minium-coloured; &quot;carnea&quot; is deep peach, &quot;lilacina&quot; is lilac; &quot;pallida&quot; is white; and &quot;azurea&quot; is blue. The blue form can be difficult to distinguish from &quot;A. foemina&quot;, but the petal margins are diagnostic: whereas &quot;foemina&quot; has clearly irregular petal margins with only 5 to 15 glandular hairs, &quot;A. arvensis&quot; f. &quot;azurea&quot; has 50 to 70 hairs on only slightly irregular margins.

==Medical and agricultural significance==
&quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot; is generally unwelcome as a cosmopolitan invasive species; it is harmfully toxic in several respects and accordingly undesirable in pastures. The plant is and bitter, and grazing livestock generally avoid eating it except in conditions of overgrazing or grazing of unsatisfying stubble. Experimental feeding of the plant material to various animals, such as horses and dogs, caused gastroenteritis. Sufficiently high doses proved fatal. Less specifically the herb has been reported as being toxic to poultry and rabbits, and the seed to birds.

&quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot; is less often used in folk medicine worldwide than where it has long been familiar in its countries of origin. In various countries however, the plant material has been applied externally to slow-healing ulcers and wounds. It also has been applied as an expectorant and as a remedy for pruritus, rheumatism, haemorrhoids, rabies, leprosy, and snake-bite. &quot;Anagallis&quot; has been used in treatment of non-specified types of phthisis, and of kidney-related conditions such as dropsy and chronic nephritis. It was used as an antidepressant in ancient Greece, and to treat various mental disorders in European folk medicine, leading to the German name ( meaning &#x27;fool, cuckoo&#x27; and meaning &#x27;heal&#x27;). Generally however, documented evidence for clinical efficacy is lacking. &quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot; is traditionally known by pharmacists as &quot;Arvensis Herba&quot;

&quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot; is insecticidal, or at least is repellent to some insects, possibly by virtue of its pungent essential oil which has a characteristic smell. Taken by mouth, experimental doses of the liquid in humans caused twenty-four hours of intense nausea, headache and bodily pain. Some people also experience dermatitis from contact with the leaf. Reports from Australia state that when grain crops have been infested by the weed, chaff that contains much of the material becomes unpalatable to stock as fodder. When grazing in pasture, livestock usually leave the plant alone, but when they do nonetheless eat significant quantities, they suffer diuretic and narcotic effects sufficiently intense to justify regarding the plant as poisonous. Reportedly an Indian practice of expelling leeches from dog nostrils can lead to fatal results if the animal swallows the fluid.

The herb and its seed contain saponins, which could explain why fresh material is strongly haemolytic. Among other possible glycosides, the root yields the triterpenoid glycoside which is highly toxic and occurs in &quot;Cyclamen&quot; species, also a member of the subfamily Myrsinoideae, and arguably also in the Primulaceae.

The plant contains tanning agents, bitters, and the proteolytic enzyme primverase.

Antibacterial tests of the green parts failed to show any encouraging positive effect.

==In literature==
Scarlet pimpernel ( in Tamil) is one of the two flowers mentioned in the .

&quot;The Scarlet Pimpernel&quot; is the alias of Sir Percy Blakeney in the novel of the same name by Baroness Emma Orczy and its numerous film and musical adaptations.

The fictional flower Elanor is said to be a little enlarged version of pimpernel, according to one of J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s letters.

The flower appears in &quot;The Lord of the Rings: Fellowship of the Ring&quot; and in &quot;Unfinished Tales&quot;.

== References ==
== Sources ==
*Harvey Wickes Felter and John Uri Lloyd (1898) &quot;King&#x27;s American Dispensatory&quot;.

==External links==

*Connecticut Botanical Society: &quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot; 
*USDA Plants Profile: &quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot;
*Ploi - Plant Care Guide: &quot;Anagallis arvensis&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="20" end="24" title="synonym (taxonomy)" label="syn."/>
<link wikidata="Q21327968" start="69" end="86" title="Anagallis arvensis" label="scarlet pimpernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21327968" start="88" end="101" title="Anagallis arvensis" label="red pimpernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21327968" start="103" end="116" title="Anagallis arvensis" label="red chickweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q21327968" start="118" end="143" title="Anagallis arvensis" label="poor man&amp;#x27;s barometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21327968" start="145" end="174" title="Anagallis arvensis" label="poor man&amp;#x27;s weather-glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21327968" start="176" end="205" title="Anagallis arvensis" label="shepherd&amp;#x27;s weather glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21327968" start="209" end="230" title="Anagallis arvensis" label="shepherd&amp;#x27;s clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="260" end="272" title="annual plant" label="annual plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="411" end="423" title="Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="428" end="440" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="649" end="657" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="659" end="666" title="Central Asia" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="671" end="680" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="686" end="705" title="Indian Subcontinent" label="Indian Subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469840" start="707" end="714" title="Malesia" label="Malesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="720" end="735" title="Pacific Islands" label="Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="737" end="748" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="753" end="768" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157115" start="817" end="828" title="Primulaceae" label="Primulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296284" start="887" end="898" title="Myrsinaceae" label="Myrsinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="960" end="974" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="1117" end="1121" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="1195" end="1199" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249536" start="1499" end="1520" title="the Scarlet Pimpernel" label="the Scarlet Pimpernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q753457" start="1666" end="1673" title="Rosette (botany)" label="rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q839659" start="1827" end="1835" title="Phyllotaxis" label="opposite"/>
<link wikidata="Q598159" start="1868" end="1886" title="Symmetry in biology" label="radially symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="2030" end="2045" title="trichome" label="glandular hairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="2051" end="2057" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="2114" end="2124" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="2138" end="2143" title="Fly" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704821" start="2202" end="2211" title="Dehiscence (botany)" label="dehiscent"/>
<link wikidata="Q147768" start="2212" end="2219" title="Capsule (botany)" label="capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="2263" end="2282" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="northern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="2493" end="2506" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q159113" start="2581" end="2598" title="Anagallis foemina" label="Anagallis foemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="2684" end="2706" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460543" start="2788" end="2805" title="Anagallis monelli" label="Anagallis monelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q408757" start="3568" end="3574" title="Minium (mineral)" label="minium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148721" start="3607" end="3617" title="Peach (color)" label="deep peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12894641" start="3643" end="3648" title="Lilac (color)" label="lilac"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="4127" end="4139" title="Cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="4140" end="4156" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="4231" end="4238" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="4338" end="4349" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187955" start="4377" end="4384" title="crop residue" label="stubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="4481" end="4496" title="gastroenteritis" label="gastroenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567921" start="4879" end="4884" title="ulcer" label="ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384342" start="4929" end="4940" title="Mucokinetics" label="expectorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q199602" start="4961" end="4969" title="pruritus" label="pruritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="4971" end="4981" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="4983" end="4994" title="Hemorrhoid" label="haemorrhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="4997" end="5003" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="5005" end="5012" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="5105" end="5113" title="phthisis pulmonalis" label="phthisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="5156" end="5162" title="Edema" label="dropsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="5167" end="5174" title="Chronic condition" label="chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q401402" start="5175" end="5184" title="nephritis" label="nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="5204" end="5218" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="5222" end="5236" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="5693" end="5706" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q30470787" start="6020" end="6025" title="chaff" label="chaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="6093" end="6099" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q200656" start="6236" end="6244" title="diuretic" label="diuretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="6249" end="6257" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207653" start="6492" end="6499" title="saponin" label="saponin"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="6553" end="6563" title="hemolysis" label="haemolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="6586" end="6595" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915788" start="6618" end="6630" title="Triterpene" label="triterpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296284" start="6738" end="6750" title="Myrsinoideae" label="Myrsinoideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="6810" end="6817" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6862" end="6872" title="primverase" label="primverase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249536" start="7063" end="7084" title="The Scarlet Pimpernel" label="The Scarlet Pimpernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q234530" start="7159" end="7178" title="Emma Orczy" label="Baroness Emma Orczy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126679" start="7196" end="7224" title="Scarlet Pimpernel (disambiguation)" label="film and musical adaptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244549" start="7248" end="7254" title="Elanor" label="Elanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="7329" end="7352" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q208002" start="7391" end="7436" title="The Fellowship of the Ring" label="The Lord of the Rings: Fellowship of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q309019" start="7456" end="7472" title="Unfinished Tales" label="Unfinished Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677688" start="7513" end="7533" title="Harvey Wickes Felter" label="Harvey Wickes Felter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809662" start="7538" end="7552" title="John Uri Lloyd" label="John Uri Lloyd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306335" wikidata="Q5228688" url="?curid=306335" title="Dave Dravecky">
<text>David Francis Dravecky (born February 14, 1956) is an American former professional baseball player, a motivational speaker, and an author. A left-handed pitcher, Dravecky played Major League Baseball (MLB) for the San Diego Padres (1982–87) and the San Francisco Giants (1987–89). He was named an All-Star with the Padres in 1983 and played in the 1984 World Series. 

In September 1988, Dravecky was diagnosed with a desmoid tumor in his left arm. He underwent surgery the following month. Dravecky returned to pitch for the Giants in August 1989 and won his first Major League game of the season. In his second start of the year, Dravecky broke his arm throwing a pitch. He retired from baseball after the season and, following a cancer recurrence, had his left arm amputated in 1991.

Following his baseball career, Dravecky became a motivational speaker and an author. He has written three books.

==Early life==
Dravecky was born on February 14, 1956, in Youngstown, Ohio. He has four brothers. Dravecky graduated from Boardman High School in Youngstown and from Youngstown State University, where he played baseball and basketball.

==Professional baseball career==
Dravecky was drafted by the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1978. The Pirates traded him to the San Diego Padres in 1981.

=== San Diego Padres (1982–1987) ===
Dravecky made his Major League debut on June 15, 1982, for the Padres. Pitching as a starter and as a reliever, he amassed a 5-3 record and a 2.57 earned run average.

Dravecky represented the Padres at the 1983 All-Star Game, pitching two scoreless innings and striking out George Brett. He started 28 games in 1983, finishing the season with a 14-10 record and an earned run average of 3.58. 

Dravecky became friends with two other Padres pitchers, Eric Show and Mark Thurmond. Dravecky, Show, and Thurmond all held strong Christian beliefs. In the spring of 1984, Show recruited Dravecky and Thurmond to the John Birch Society, a far-right US political organization. The three players were the subjects of wide reporting after they distributed Birch literature from a booth at the June 1984 Del Mar Fair. Dravecky stated he saw Birch beliefs as the &quot;natural outgrowth&quot; of a born-again Christian philosophy. 

In 1984, the Padres won their first National League pennant. The Padres won a come-from-behind victory over the Chicago Cubs in Game Five of the National League Championship Series, with Dravecky and three other relievers shutting out the Cubs over a combined seven and two-thirds innings of work. Used as a starter and as a reliever, Dravecky finished the season with a 9-8 record, an earned run average of 2.93, and eight saves. In the 1984 postseason, Dravecky appeared out of the bullpen in five games without giving up an earned run. The Padres lost the World Series to the Detroit Tigers, four games to one.

Dravecky won a total of 22 games for the Padres over the 1985 and 1986 seasons.

In 1987, the Associated Press wrote that Dravecky was better known for his association with the John Birch Society than he was for his pitching.

===San Francisco Giants (1987–1989)===
On July 4, 1987, the San Francisco Giants acquired Dravecky, pitcher Craig Lefferts, and third baseman Kevin Mitchell from the San Diego Padres for pitchers Keith Comstock, Mark Davis, and Mark Grant and third baseman Chris Brown for their pennant drive. Dravecky went 7–5 with three shutouts following the trade, helping the Giants to win their division. In the 1987 National League Championship Series, Dravecky pitched a shutout in Game Two against the St. Louis Cardinals and lost Game Six by a score of 1–0. The Cardinals won the series in seven games.

While with the Giants, Dravecky and teammates Scott Garrelts, Atlee Hammaker, and Jeff Brantley became known as the &quot;God Squad&quot; because of their strong Christian faith. Foregoing the hard-partying lifestyle of many of their teammates, they preferred to hold Bible studies in their hotel rooms while on the road.

Dravecky was the Giants&#x27; opening day starter in 1988, defeating the Los Angeles Dodgers 5-1. Shortly thereafter, he noticed stiffness in his pitching arm and was placed on the disabled list.

==== Cancer, comeback, and retirement ====

In September of 1988, Dravecky was diagnosed with a desmoid tumor in his left (pitching) arm. On October 7, 1988, he underwent a surgical procedure in which half of the deltoid muscle in his left arm was removed and his humerus bone was frozen in an effort to eliminate all of the cancerous cells. 

Doctors advised Dravecky to wait until 1990 to pitch again, but Dravecky was determined to pitch in 1989. By July 1989, he was pitching in the minors, and on August 10, he made a highly publicized return to the major leagues, pitching eight innings and defeating Cincinnati 4–3. In his following start, on August 15, 1989, Dravecky faced the Montreal Expos. In the fifth inning, he felt a tingling sensation in his arm. In the sixth inning, when he threw a pitch to Tim Raines, his humerus bone snapped. The sound of his arm breaking could be heard throughout the stadium. Dravecky collapsed on the mound; he had suffered a clean break midway between his shoulder and elbow, ending his season. Dravecky was credited with the win in the Giants&#x27; 3-2 victory.

The Giants won the National League pennant in 1989, defeating the Chicago Cubs in the NLCS in five games. On October 9, 1989, Dravecky&#x27;s left arm was broken a second time when he was running out to the mound to celebrate the Giants&#x27; 3-2 victory in Game Five. The Giants went on to lose the World Series to the Oakland Athletics, four games to none. After a doctor found a lump in Dravecky&#x27;s left arm, he opted to retire from baseball on November 13, 1989 to avoid risking further injury. 

Dravecky ended his career with a 64–57 record with 558 strikeouts and a 3.13 earned run average in innings. He won the 1989 Willie Mac Award honoring his spirit and leadership. Dravecky also won the 1989 Hutch Award.

== Life and career after baseball ==
Dravecky underwent arm surgeries in January 1990 and May 1990 after which his cancer was found to have returned. On June 18, 1991, less than two years after his comeback with the Giants, Dravecky&#x27;s left arm and shoulder were amputated. After recovering from the surgery, Dravecky began a new career as a motivational speaker.

Dravecky wrote two books about his battles with cancer and his comeback attempt: &quot;Comeback&quot; (1990), written with Tim Stafford, and &quot;When You Can&#x27;t Come Back&quot; (1992), co-authored with his wife Janice and Ken Gire. &quot;Comeback&quot; was republished as a self-titled autobiography for children in 1992. Dravecky has also written a Christian motivational book, &quot;Called Up&quot;, published in 2004 by Zondervan.

In 2021, indie-folk artist Cousin Wolf released a song entitled &quot;Dave Dravecky&quot; as part of an album called &quot;Nine Innings.&quot;

Dravecky and his wife, Janice, have two children. Dravecky is a Christian.

==References==
==External links==
*Official website

*Endurance.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5228688" start="0" end="22" title="Dave Dravecky" label="David Francis Dravecky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="83" end="91" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="178" end="199" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="214" end="230" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="249" end="269" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="297" end="305" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q475086" start="418" end="431" title="desmoid tumor" label="desmoid tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="1200" end="1218" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="1258" end="1274" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298305" start="1529" end="1547" title="1983 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1983 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152442" start="1597" end="1609" title="George Brett" label="George Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056407" start="1774" end="1783" title="Eric Show" label="Eric Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q16187342" start="1788" end="1801" title="Mark Thurmond" label="Mark Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="1934" end="1952" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="1956" end="1965" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413631" start="2117" end="2129" title="Del Mar Fair" label="Del Mar Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="2210" end="2230" title="born-again Christian" label="born-again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581851" start="2248" end="2252" title="1984 San Diego Padres season" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="2357" end="2369" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="2824" end="2838" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="2954" end="2970" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="3147" end="3167" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138577" start="3195" end="3209" title="Craig Lefferts" label="Craig Lefferts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11301188" start="3229" end="3243" title="Kevin Mitchell (baseball)" label="Kevin Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384219" start="3283" end="3297" title="Keith Comstock" label="Keith Comstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294048" start="3299" end="3309" title="Mark Davis (pitcher)" label="Mark Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767797" start="3315" end="3325" title="Mark Grant (baseball)" label="Mark Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077035" start="3344" end="3355" title="Chris Brown (baseball)" label="Chris Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511239" start="3489" end="3529" title="1987 National League Championship Series" label="1987 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="3550" end="3557" title="shutout" label="shutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583916" start="3582" end="3601" title="1987 St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436389" start="3731" end="3745" title="Scott Garrelts" label="Scott Garrelts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816911" start="3747" end="3761" title="Atlee Hammaker" label="Atlee Hammaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173403" start="3767" end="3780" title="Jeff Brantley" label="Jeff Brantley"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="4081" end="4100" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q475086" start="4301" end="4314" title="desmoid tumor" label="desmoid tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130243" start="4418" end="4432" title="deltoid muscle" label="deltoid muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q162595" start="4469" end="4481" title="humerus bone" label="humerus bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="4692" end="4698" title="Minor league baseball" label="minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585125" start="4812" end="4822" title="1989 Cincinnati Reds season" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="4891" end="4905" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025632" start="5015" end="5025" title="Tim Raines" label="Tim Raines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585417" start="5316" end="5322" title="1989 San Francisco Giants season" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="5331" end="5346" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q927672" start="5358" end="5362" title="1989 National League Championship Series" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585118" start="5378" end="5390" title="1989 Chicago Cubs season" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="5632" end="5649" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="5872" end="5881" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="5894" end="5912" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021647" start="5941" end="5957" title="Willie Mac Award" label="Willie Mac Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="6302" end="6311" title="amputated" label="amputated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073886" start="6833" end="6842" title="Zondervan" label="Zondervan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306336" wikidata="Q810875" url="?curid=306336" title="Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport">
<text>Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport , also known as Ryan Field, is a public use airport located four miles (7 km) north of the central business district of Baton Rouge, a city in East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana, United States.

The airport was originally Harding Field during World War II and was used by the United States Army Air Forces Technical Service Command as a maintenance and supply base. Its uses also included training pilots to fly P-47 Thunderbolts. One of the Thunderbolt pilots trained at Harding was Quentin Aanenson, who survived the war, and in 2007 appeared in Ken Burns&#x27; &quot;The War&quot;, a PBS film about World War II. Training was dangerous, &quot;The War&quot; noting that &quot;Five members of Aanenson&#x27;s group of 40 trainees died before they got a chance to go overseas&quot;.

Many other aircraft were used at Harding, including P-40 Warhawks, P-39 Airacobras, A-36 Apaches, and B-26 Marauders.

Today, other than the runways, virtually no traces remain of the military installation.

==Facilities and aircraft==
The airport covers an area of at an elevation of 70 feet (21 m) above mean sea level. It has three runways: 4L/22R is 7,500 by 150 feet (2,286 × 46 m) with a concrete surface; 4R/22L is 3,799 by 75 feet (1,158 × 23 m) with an asphalt surface; 13/31 is 7,005 by 150 feet (2,135 × 46 m) with an asphalt surface.

Air Traffic Services are provided by dedicated Air Traffic Controllers in the tower and the Terminal Radar Approach Control.

For 2018, the airport had 51,070 aircraft operations with 17,695 of those being commercial air carrier flights. Other aircraft operations include 32,362 General Aviation (GA) and 1,013 military.

This airport is also the main airport used by the Louisiana State Police Air Support Unit.

==Airlines and destinations==
===Passenger===


Historically, the Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport (BTR) was served by American Airlines, Continental Airlines (now United Airlines), Eastern Airlines, Northwest Airlines (now Delta Air Lines), Southern Airways, which merged with North Central Airlines to form Republic Airlines which in turn then continued to serve the airport, and Trans-Texas Airways (TTa) which subsequently changed its name to Texas International Airlines. All of these airlines operated mainline jet service from the airport with the exception of Eastern which flew Martin 4-0-4 and Convair 440 twin prop &quot;Silver Falcon&quot; airliners from Baton Rouge in the 1950s. Mainline jet aircraft types operated in passenger service from Baton Rouge in the past included Boeing 727-100, 727-200, 737-200, 737-300 and 737-500 jetliners as well as Douglas DC-9-10 and DC-9-30 jets and also McDonnell Douglas MD-80 jetliners.

Currently, commercial airline service at the airport is primarily operated with Canadair CRJ or Embraer ERJ regional jets flown by the regional affiliates of the major airlines that serve Baton Rouge. Most Delta and American flights are operated with larger, multi-class regional jets including CRJ-700, CRJ-900, and E175 aircraft that offer coach, premium coach, and first class seating options. Delta also uses mainline Boeing 717 jets for some flights. United Express flights are operated with a mix of E175, CRJ-700, and ERJ-145 aircraft.

===Top destinations===
==Cargo terminal==

Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport has a cargo facility. It is currently being expanded to .

==Challenges==
Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport is slightly smaller than might be expected for a city and metro area of its size due in part to its proximity to New Orleans&#x27; Armstrong International Airport. Despite aggressive advertising campaigns encouraging catchment area residents to use the airport, passenger numbers are in the FAA&#x27;s small-hub classification (slightly over 800,000 passengers per year). However, the airport is the second largest in Louisiana by passenger volume and is served by the major, network airlines: American, Delta and United. With service to some of largest hub airports in the U.S., connections are available to and from destinations worldwide. At one time, ViaAir started low-cost, nonstop service to Austin (year-round) and Orlando (June–August).

In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, and the ensuing increase in Baton Rouge&#x27;s (temporary and permanent) population, BTR saw its destination portfolio expanded dramatically. New services were initiated to Cincinnati, New York City (both Newark Liberty and LaGuardia airports), Chicago–O&#x27;Hare, Denver, Washington-National, St. Louis, and Orlando. The new destinations were discontinued by the end of 2008, as New Orleans air service returned to pre-Katrina levels. After experiencing record fuel prices in 2008 and the subsequent recession, the carriers returned their focus to the most efficient hub options for BTR, resulting in the current service schedule of daily jet flights to four major hubs. Vision Airlines also briefly served Baton Rouge with Boeing 737 jetliner service nonstop to Las Vegas (LAS) and Fort Walton Beach/Destin, FL (VPS); however, these flights were suspended when Vision discontinued scheduled, commercial air service.

==Expansion and development==

Louisiana Aircraft Inc., a fixed-base operator on the south side of the airport has been purchased by a real estate developer. The developer has plans to build more hangar space and has purchased the old Capitol Jet Center / LuxJet FBO located on the east side of the airport. Future plans include a ramp and hangars on the north side of the airfield. The increase in hangar space is most noticeable during the College Football season. This future expansion is causing the Army National Guard armory of the 769th Combat Engineer Battalion to relocate to the other side of Baton Rouge.

On June 24, 2010, US Airways recommenced operations to Charlotte from BTR.

In March 2012, a project to expand the rotunda area of the terminal began. The purpose of the project is to relieve the traffic jams inside the terminal caused by passengers going through security screening or departing the airport in the same general area that the walkway from the parking garage and waiting area are located. The renovation project is expected to be completed sometime in August 2013.

In September 2013, Baton Rouge Metro Airport announced the August passenger volume hit a 5 year high. The Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport experienced its best August passenger count in five years. A total of 66,860 passengers passed through the airport for the month. The August departing passengers (enplanements) were up 11% at 33,465. Arriving passengers (deplanements) were up 7.08% at 33,395. Delta maintained the top August market share at 42%, followed by United at 25%, American Eagle at 24% and US Airways at 9%. Delta had the biggest passenger increase among the BTR airlines at +13.03% in enplanements and +10.15% in deplanements.

Delta has also begun scheduling larger, dual-class aircraft into BTR, including CRJ 700/900, MD-88, Boeing 717, and Airbus A319 aircraft. All four aircraft types have both first and economy class seating.

Since 2016, United has begun scheduling larger ERJ-175 aircraft which include first, economy plus, and coach class seating.

In September 2013, Baton Rouge Metro Airport announced Delta&#x27;s &quot;Red Coat&quot; Service has been implemented at the check in terminal to assist customers.

The expanded rotunda opened in October 2013 and the TSA checkpoint has been re-located to the new area, providing more room and allowing an additional line to be added when necessary. The original rotunda now serves as a spacious arrival court where un-ticketed guests can wait on arriving passengers. Construction of new restrooms and vending in the arrival court are complete. New restrooms on Concourse A are also open, including a family restroom and lactation room. The new rotunda provides an airy space for passengers that includes a floor-to-ceiling glass wall with a great view of the airfield and runways. New seating in the rotunda provides an outlet at each seat, and a charging station has been added at the beginning on Concourse A. The renovated food court now includes PJ&#x27;s Coffee and WOW Cafe: American Grill and Wingery. The airport sports lounge has also been expanded and renovated. Other airport amenities include free Wi-Fi, a business center, chapel, and a children&#x27;s playroom.

In January 2016, it was announced the airport is seeking to open a hotel that would connect to the BTR terminal. Baton Rouge Metro Airport is looking to add a hotel and restaurant to its north Baton Rouge terminal in hopes of growing airport revenue and adding convenience for travelers.

The airport&#x27;s board of commissioners accepted a request for proposals from Holiday Inn representatives to explore building a 147-room hotel with a Mike Anderson&#x27;s Seafood. Holiday Inn representatives are still studying the market, but they are expected to make a determination in the next couple of months on whether they can build the hotel.

==Accidents and incidents==
*On March 16, 1984, sex offender Jeff Doucet was shot in the head while being escorted through the airport by police officers; the shooter Gary Plauché was captured on the spot, while Doucet died the following day in hospital. The incident had occurred because Plauché had found out that Doucet had been sexually abusing his son. 
*On September 2, 2011, Atlantic Southeast Airlines Flight 5058 operated by Canadair CRJ-200 N875AS landed with the port main undercarriage retracted. There were no injuries among the 50 passengers and three crew on board.
*On June 7, 2013, a Beechcraft Super King Air operated by Osage Air LLC crashed 2.9 miles N of Baton Rouge Int&#x27;l Airport shortly after takeoff. Probable causes were the pilot&#x27;s failure to maintain airspeed and lack of knowledge of the avionics. The crash occurred in a residential area, damaging two homes. The sole occupant, the pilot, was killed.

==See also==
* List of airports in Louisiana
* Louisiana World War II Army Airfields

==References==
* 

==External links==
* Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport, official site
** Airport terminal diagram 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q810875" start="0" end="32" title="Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport" label="Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q810875" start="49" end="59" title="Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport" label="Ryan Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="77" end="84" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="124" end="149" title="central business district" label="central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="153" end="164" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q491949" start="176" end="199" title="East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana" label="East Baton Rouge Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="201" end="210" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="212" end="225" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q810875" start="255" end="268" title="Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport" label="Harding Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="276" end="288" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="309" end="338" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="445" end="462" title="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt" label="P-47 Thunderbolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271249" start="517" end="533" title="Quentin C. Aanenson" label="Quentin Aanenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q490194" start="603" end="610" title="The War (miniseries)" label="The War"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="869" end="882" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="P-40 Warhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q385778" start="884" end="899" title="Bell P-39 Airacobra" label="P-39 Airacobras"/>
<link wikidata="Q780893" start="901" end="913" title="North American A-36 Apache" label="A-36 Apaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q836438" start="919" end="933" title="Martin B-26 Marauder" label="B-26 Marauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="1089" end="1098" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="1123" end="1137" title="mean sea level" label="mean sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="1152" end="1158" title="runway" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="1211" end="1219" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="1279" end="1286" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q862632" start="1411" end="1434" title="Air Traffic Controllers" label="Air Traffic Controllers"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="1897" end="1914" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="1916" end="1936" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="1942" end="1957" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="1960" end="1976" title="Eastern Airlines" label="Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="1978" end="1996" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="2002" end="2017" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492303" start="2020" end="2036" title="Southern Airways" label="Southern Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054722" start="2056" end="2078" title="North Central Airlines" label="North Central Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744520" start="2087" end="2104" title="Republic Airlines" label="Republic Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q539218" start="2160" end="2179" title="Trans-Texas Airways" label="Trans-Texas Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q539218" start="2225" end="2253" title="Texas International Airlines" label="Texas International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q133913" start="2365" end="2377" title="Martin 4-0-4" label="Martin 4-0-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="2382" end="2393" title="Convair 440" label="Convair 440"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="2567" end="2581" title="Boeing 727-100" label="Boeing 727-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="2583" end="2590" title="727-200" label="727-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="2592" end="2599" title="737-200" label="737-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="2601" end="2608" title="737-300" label="737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="2613" end="2620" title="737-500" label="737-500"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="2642" end="2657" title="Douglas DC-9-10" label="Douglas DC-9-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="2662" end="2669" title="DC-9-30" label="DC-9-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="2684" end="2707" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000403" start="2800" end="2812" title="Canadair CRJ" label="Canadair CRJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="2816" end="2827" title="Embraer ERJ" label="Embraer ERJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="3142" end="3152" title="Boeing 717" label="Boeing 717"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461076" start="3578" end="3609" title="Armstrong International Airport" label="Armstrong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="4209" end="4226" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q151121" start="4401" end="4411" title="Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q466786" start="4433" end="4447" title="Newark Liberty International Airport" label="Newark Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q319654" start="4452" end="4461" title="LaGuardia Airport" label="LaGuardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213717" start="4473" end="4492" title="Chicago–O&amp;#x27;Hare" label="Chicago–O&amp;#x27;Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q330015" start="4494" end="4500" title="Denver International Airport" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q676576" start="4502" end="4521" title="Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport" label="Washington-National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425838" start="4523" end="4532" title="St. Louis Lambert International Airport" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q929859" start="4538" end="4545" title="Orlando International Airport" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461076" start="4609" end="4620" title="Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189014" start="4901" end="4916" title="Vision Airlines" label="Vision Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="4954" end="4964" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q670113" start="5206" end="5225" title="fixed-base operator" label="fixed-base operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q689764" start="5652" end="5671" title="Army National Guard" label="Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="5692" end="5707" title="Combat Engineer" label="Combat Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="5708" end="5717" title="Battalion" label="Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208046" start="5783" end="5793" title="US Airways" label="US Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525759" start="9208" end="9220" title="Gary Plauché" label="Gary Plauché"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="9373" end="9389" title="sexually abusing" label="sexually abusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178765" start="9423" end="9450" title="Atlantic Southeast Airlines" label="Atlantic Southeast Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000403" start="9475" end="9491" title="Canadair CRJ-200" label="Canadair CRJ-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094597" start="9642" end="9667" title="Beechcraft Super King Air" label="Beechcraft Super King Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="9867" end="9875" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432600" start="9997" end="10026" title="List of airports in Louisiana" label="List of airports in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931361" start="10029" end="10066" title="Louisiana World War II Army Airfields" label="Louisiana World War II Army Airfields"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306338" wikidata="Q833629" url="?curid=306338" title="San Leonardo de Yagüe">
<text>San Leonardo de Yagüe is a Spanish town and municipality located in the province of Soria, in the autonomous community of Castile and León. It is one of the most populated municipalities of the Sorian county of Pinares.

It has primary and secondary schools (I.E.S. San Leonardo), attended by students from surrounding municipalities (Navaleno, Hontoria del Pinar, Casarejos, Espeja, Espejón, La Hinojosa, and others).

The town, which has about 2,000 inhabitants, is home to the Puertas Norma timber products factory, a manufacturer of doors and pre-hung door units. The factory is the main labor center and the factory employed about 600 workers until 2012, when they dismissed or temporarily suspended a majority of their employees.

== History ==
The foundation date of the village is unknown, but it is supposed to be in the 10th or 11th century. The oldest document where the village is mentioned is from 1173, in a privilege card given by Alfonso VIII.

The village is the birthplace of Juan Yagüe in 1891. Yagüe, a general in Franco&#x27;s army, became notorious for instigating the massacre at Badajoz in 1936. The village was renamed after Yagüe following his death in 1952, becoming San Leonardo de Yagüe.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q833629" start="0" end="21" title="San Leonardo de Yagüe" label="San Leonardo de Yagüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="44" end="56" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q55276" start="72" end="89" title="province of Soria" label="province of Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="98" end="118" title="autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739" start="122" end="138" title="Castile and León" label="Castile and León"/>
<link wikidata="Q516654" start="335" end="343" title="Navaleno" label="Navaleno"/>
<link wikidata="Q295268" start="946" end="958" title="Alfonso VIII" label="Alfonso VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q969735" start="994" end="1004" title="Juan Yagüe" label="Juan Yagüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="1034" end="1040" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181920" start="1091" end="1110" title="Massacre of Badajoz" label="massacre at Badajoz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306339" wikidata="Q2876121" url="?curid=306339" title="Lafayette Regional Airport">
<text>Lafayette Regional Airport(French: Aéroport régional de Lafayette) is a public use airport two miles (4 km) southeast of Lafayette, in Lafayette Parish, Louisiana, United States. It is owned and operated by the City Parish of Lafayette.

The Lafayette Regional airport is located next to U.S. Highway 90 (future Interstate 49) on the east side of the city, close to offshore oil and gas activity in the Gulf of Mexico. Lafayette Regional is home to one of the largest helicopter companies in the world, Petroleum Helicopters International (formerly PHI-Petroleum Helicopters Inc.).

Lafayette Regional airport does not have international flights; however, regional jet service is operated nonstop to four hubs: Atlanta (ATL), Charlotte (CLT), Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW) and Houston (IAH).

==Historical airline service==
Eastern Airlines began the first service to Lafayette in the latter 1940s with flights to Houston and New Orleans that made intermediate stops. Eastern ended their service in 1966.

Trans-Texas Airways began service in the latter 1950s with flights to Dallas, Houston, and New Orleans, all with intermediate stops. Trans-Texas became Texas International Airlines in 1969 and was merged into Continental Airlines in 1982. Continental continued serving Lafayette with nonstop service to Houston and was merged into United Airlines in 2012.

American Eagle with service on behalf of American Airlines began nonstop flights to Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW) in 1984. MetroFlight, the codeshare affiliate for American Eagle, had begun the flights to DFW under their own branding the year before in 1983. American Eagle nonstop service to Charlotte, NC was added in 2021.

Delta Connection with service on behalf of Delta Air Lines began service to DFW in 1987 and later added one-stop flights to Atlanta. Delta mainline Boeing 717-200 jet service nonstop to Atlanta was added on July 3, 2014, in addition to its regional jet flights operated by Delta Connection; however, the mainline service was soon discontinued.

Northwest Airlink with service on behalf of Northwest Airlines began flights to its hub in Memphis, Tennessee in 1991. Northwest was merged into Delta in 2010 and Delta Connection continued to serve Lafayette from Memphis through 2011. 

United Airlines began expanded service from Lafayette featuring a new daily nonstop flight to Denver which became effective August 19, 2014, and was operated by its regional partner United Express until this flight was discontinued on October 23, 2015. 

Allegiant Air initiated nonstop service to Las Vegas on November 3, 2011, but then discontinued these flights in February 2012.

Frontier Airlines began new service into Lafayette with Airbus A320 jetliners effective October 24, 2018 with two nonstop flights a week to Denver (DEN) as well as two nonstop flights a week to Orlando (MCO), with both of these destinations being hub cities for Frontier. Frontier ended its seasonal service to Orlando from Lafayette in August 2019 and then ended its seasonal service from Lafayette to Denver on November 10, 2019, with flights to both cities planned to resume in the spring of 2020. However, Frontier has since stated it will not be resuming flights from Lafayette with its service now suspended indefinitely.

==Passenger growth==

The airport serves the greater Lafayette metropolitan area as well as nearby New Iberia and other population centers in south central Louisiana, which has a combined population of approximately 530,000 people. In 2019, 527,460 passengers flew in and out of the airport, the highest in its history.

==Facilities and aircraft==
Lafayette Regional Airport (LFT) covers at an elevation of above mean sea level. The airport officially operates two asphalt runways: 4R/22L, and 11/29, . It has one helipad, . The airport previously had a third runway (4L/22R) which was parallel to 4R/22L and served for GA aircraft, but that runway was disabled after the airport built a new cargo ramp on the approach of the 4L&#x27;s path. That runway is now used as a taxiway. 

During the years in which the airport&#x27;s new terminal was being constructed, 4R/22L was the only active runway at the airport, as 11/29 was closed for additions and repaving. Following its necessary work, it was used as the main taxiway to reach the terminals with its runway markers erased and removed until the old terminal was demolished and the new terminal completed construction. The airport also awaited FAA clearance to resume operations on the runway, which was achieved in mid-2024. It serves as the airport&#x27;s crosswind runway, yet at 5,400 feet, it is only long enough for general aviation and light regional aircraft.

In the year ending February 28, 2022, the Lafayette Regional airport had 45,467 aircraft operations, an average of 124 per day: 53% general aviation, 34% air taxi, 2% military and 12% scheduled commercial. At that time, there were 138 aircraft based at this airport: 75 single-engine, 23 multi-engine, 27 jet and 13 helicopter.

==Airlines and destinations==
===Passenger===


===Top destinations===
==Cargo operations==
Lafayette Regional Airport has now completed a new cargo terminal on the southwest side of the airfield near the PHI headquarters. It is approximately 22,500 square feet. Construction commenced in September 2010. It provides parking for several Boeing 757 aircraft on its apron and also is accessible to existing taxiways that connect to runways 4R/22L. The relocation of the cargo ramp provides cargo carriers such as UPS and FedEx direct access to U.S. Highway 90 (future Interstate 49 freeway corridor). Currently, UPS bases a Boeing 757-200 aircraft at the airport. FedEx previously based two Boeing 727-200 trijets on the airfield until this aircraft type was retired from their fleet on June 21, 2013. The FedEx Boeing 727s have now been replaced with Boeing 757-200 aircraft. These Boeing 757 jets operated by both FedEx and UPS are currently the largest aircraft to use the airport on a regular basis. DHL had operated a Douglas DC-9 aircraft configured for freight operations from Lafayette; however, this company subsequently shut down all of their flight operations in the U.S. It was envisioned by airport officials that the old cargo ramp would create more room for a planned main terminal building extension. However, the Lafayette Regional Airport has constructed a completely new passenger terminal which replaced the existing terminal. This new facility opened on January 20, 2022.

==Terminal expansion study==

A preliminary study was conducted concerning the existing terminal building at Lafayette Regional Airport in planning for future growth and construction. Adding an extension to the terminal would have allowed Lafayette Regional Airport to handle more air traffic, which could entice international carriers to use it as a connecting airport. This would require a U.S. Customs department office stationed at the airport, which would bring Lafayette Regional Airport to &quot;international airport&quot; status. However, international service from Lafayette appears unlikely due to the relatively small population base in the area as well as the presence of large international and domestic passenger hubs located relatively nearby in Atlanta (Delta Air Lines), Charlotte (American Airlines), Dallas/Fort Worth (American Airlines) and Houston (United Airlines).

==New airport terminal==

On December 6, 2014, local voters approved a ballot measure that would enable a new one percent sales tax to be collected in order to fund construction of a completely new passenger air terminal at Lafayette Regional Airport. According to an article in the Lafayette &quot;Daily Advertiser&quot; newspaper, airport officials planned to use the funds generated by the sales tax to select a design firm, finalize a design and develop construction plans. While construction of the new terminal was underway, the existing passenger terminal continued to be used. The new terminal was completed and opened for airline flights on January 20, 2022, and the previous terminal was demolished in August later that year.

Construction of the new terminal began in September 2018. As of the beginning of October 2018, the hangar that was in the area of the new terminal location had been demolished with the site cleaned up in order to allow construction of the new terminal. A public live webcam was added at the airport facing where the new terminal was under construction and could be viewed on the airport&#x27;s website. The live webcam now faces the area of the previous terminal, which is now demolished.

According to the 2021 Lafayette Regional Airport annual report, all funding for the new terminal had been obtained.

The new passenger terminal was dedicated on January 19, 2022, and was then opened for airline flights on January 20, 2022. The terminal has five gates, two more than the previous terminal, and will have the ability to add two more gates if needed in the future according to airport officials.

==History==

===World War II===
The airport opened as Lafayette Municipal Airport on November 29, 1930. On July 5, 1942, during World War II, the airport was commandeered by the United States Army Air Forces and used as a contract primary pilot training airfield under the AAF Gulf Coast Training Center (later Central Flying Training Command). The 384th Army Air Force Base Unit administered the contract to a civilian-operated primary flying school (Lafayette School of Aeronautics) as a sub-base of DeRidder Army Air Base, Louisiana, which also had four auxiliary airfields located nearby for emergency and overflow landings. Fairchild PT-19s were the primary trainer; several PT-17 Stearmans and a few P-40 Warhawks were assigned.

Control of the airfield was transferred from DeRidder AAB to Third Air Force (Esler Field) on March 24, 1944. The mission of base became training of replacement combat aircrews. On September 30, 1945, the airfield was deactivated and returned to civil control.

===Postwar civil use: airline service===
In 1948, Eastern Air Lines began the first scheduled passenger service into Lafayette. During the 1950s, Eastern operated up to ten flights a day with Martin 4-0-4 and Convair 340 twin prop &quot;Silver Falcon&quot; airliners with up to five flights a day to New Orleans via Baton Rouge and up to five flights a day to Houston Hobby Airport via Lake Charles, LA and Beaumont/Port Arthur, TX. According to its December 1, 1958 system timetable, Eastern was operating a daily round trip flight with a Convair 340 on a routing of BrownsvilleCorpus ChristiHouston Hobby AirportBeaumont/Port ArthurLake CharlesLafayetteBaton RougeNew OrleansMobilePensacolaMontgomeryBirminghamAtlanta. Other Eastern flights featured continuing, no change of plane service to such destinations as Charlotte and San Antonio. Eastern served Lafayette until the mid-1960s with Convair 440 propliners when it then ceased all service into the airport.

Trans-Texas Airways (TTa) began serving Lafayette during the mid-1950s. In 1956, TTa was operating two departures a day with Douglas DC-3 aircraft to Shreveport via an intermediate stop in Lake Charles with continuing service to Dallas and on to Fort Worth via stops in the east Texas cities of Longview, Marshall and Tyler. By 1959, Trans-Texas had expanded its DC-3 service from the airport with four nonstop flights a day to New Orleans as well as two nonstop flights a day to Alexandria, LA with continuing service to Little Rock via stops in El Dorado, AR and Camden, AR in addition to maintaining its two flights a day schedule to Shreveport and Dallas. Flights to Houston were then introduced during the 1960s which were operated with Douglas DC-3 and Convair 240 propliners followed by Convair 600 turboprops. By 1969, Trans-Texas Airways had changed its name to Texas International Airlines. Also in 1969, locally-based Acadiana Airlines, a commuter air carrier, was operating scheduled passenger flights nonstop between the airport and New Orleans with five roundtrip services operated on weekdays flown with de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter turboprop aircraft.

The first jet service into the airport was operated by Texas International Airlines (TI) with Douglas DC-9-10 twinjets to Houston, Dallas/Fort Worth, New Orleans and other cities. Texas International introduced jets into Lafayette with the DC-9 in the early 1970s. TI also served the airport with Convair 600 turboprops. According to the Official Airline Guide (OAG), during the 1970s Texas International was operating direct one stop, no change of plane DC-9 jet flights from Mexico City to Lafayette via a stop in Houston in addition to nonstop DC-9 jet service to the airport from New Orleans, Baton Rouge, Beaumont, TX and Lake Charles, LA as well as direct DC-9 flights from Dallas/Fort Worth, Abilene and San Angelo. In February 1976, TI was operating direct DC-9 jet service from Los Angeles (LAX) to Lafayette with six intermediate stops en route via Albuquerque, Roswell, NM, Midland/Odessa, TX, Dallas/Fort Worth, Houston and Beaumont. By December 1979, Texas International was operating nine jet flights a day into Lafayette with Douglas DC-9-10s and McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30s with nonstop service from Houston (IAH), New Orleans, Baton Rouge, Beaumont, TX and Lake Charles, LA with direct, no change of plane jet service from Dallas/Ft. Worth (DFW), Denver, Los Angeles (LAX), Baltimore, Salt Lake City, Albuquerque, Brownsville, TX, McAllen, Amarillo and Lubbock. In 1982, Texas International was operating three DC-9 flights a day from Dallas/Ft. Worth (DFW) to Lafayette via Houston (IAH). A fourth daily DC-9 flight was operated from Houston to Lafayette as well by TI at this time. Later that year Texas International was merged into Continental Airlines which in turn continued to serve Lafayette with Boeing 727-100, Boeing 727-200, Douglas DC-9-10 and McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30 jet flights to Houston. Continental jets were then replaced by Continental Express ATR 72, ATR 42 and Embraer EMB-120 Brasilia regional turboprop aircraft. Continental later reintroduced mainline nonstop jet service between the airport and Houston (IAH). In May 1994, Continental was operating direct one stop Boeing 727-200 service from Austin via Houston. By September 1994, Continental was operating direct McDonnell Douglas MD-80 service from New York Newark Airport to Lafayette via Baltimore and Houston.

During the 1990s, American Eagle and Delta Connection were competing with nonstop service to Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW) with American Eagle flying Saab 340 turboprops and Delta Connection (operated by code sharing partner Atlantic Southeast Airlines) flying Embraer EMB-120 Brasilia propjets. At this same time, Atlantic Southeast Airlines operating as Delta Connection was operating direct service to Atlanta with Embraer EMB-120 propjets via an intermediate stop in Meridian, MS. Delta Connection would eventually introduce Embraer ERJ-135 regional jet service to Dallas/Fort Worth which was subsequently discontinued when Delta Air Lines shut down their DFW hub operation in 2005. The American Eagle service to Dallas/Fort Worth had been previously operated by Metroflight Airlines, a division of Metro Airlines, flying Convair 580 turboprops on behalf of American Airlines via a code sharing agreement during the mid-1980s.

Several independent commuter airlines served Lafayette over the years as well. In 1970, Air East Airlines was operating nonstop service to New Orleans with up to five flights a day. Royale Airlines, based in Shreveport, Louisiana, served the airport with Beechcraft 99, Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirante, Grumman Gulfstream I and Short 330 turboprops. In November 1984 Royale was flying to Houston Intercontinental Airport and New Orleans from Lafayette with hourly shuttle service operated to both destinations on weekdays in addition to operating direct flights to Shreveport. Another commuter air carrier, Metro Airlines, served Lafayette with Short 330 turboprops nonstop to Houston Intercontinental. L&#x27;Express Airlines, based in the New Orleans area, operated nonstop to Houston Hobby Airport and New Orleans with Beechcraft turboprops. Air New Orleans served Lafayette during the mid-1980s with flights to New Orleans. Hammond Air Service flew nonstop to Houston Hobby Airport with de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter turboprops and Piper prop aircraft. Other commuter air carriers operating nonstop service to New Orleans in the past included Vantage Airlines in 1974 and Southern Skies in 1981. In early 1987, Rio Airways was operating &quot;TranStar SkyLink&quot; code sharing service with Beechcraft 1900C commuter propjets on behalf of TranStar Airlines (formerly Muse Air) with seven direct one stop flights every weekday to Houston Hobby Airport (HOU) via Lake Charles, LA as well as seven nonstop flights also operated every weekday to New Orleans (MSY) with connections to TranStar jet service being available in HOU and MSY.

Past mainline jet service previously operated by Continental Airlines was also flown with Boeing 737-300 and Boeing 737-500 jetliners nonstop to Houston until Continental turned over all service into Lafayette to its regional affiliates, Continental Express operated by ExpressJet and Continental Connection operated by Colgan Air. Following the merger of Continental with United Airlines, ExpressJet and Colgan Air then became United Express air carriers. Major airline mainline jet service resumed on July 3, 2014, when Delta Air Lines began Boeing 717-200 flights between Lafayette and Atlanta. The airport was also served by Northwest Airlink with nonstop Saab 340 turboprop and Canadair CRJ200 regional jet flights to Memphis. Following the merger of Northwest Airlines with Delta Air Lines, Canadair CRJ200 regional jet service operated by Delta Connection to Memphis was discontinued. The majority of American Airlines passenger flights from the airport to Dallas/Fort Worth are currently flown with Canadair CRJ900 and Embraer ERJ-175 regional jets operated by PSA Airlines, SkyWest Airlines or Envoy Air with these air carriers operating as American Eagle on behalf of American. American Eagle also now operates CRJ700 regional jet service nonstop to Charlotte with these flights being operated by PSA Airlines on behalf of American. United Express service to Houston is operated by Republic Airlines with larger Embraer ERJ-170 regional jets and also by Mesa Airlines with larger Embraer ERJ-175 regional jets. Some American Eagle flights to DFW were being operated by ExpressJet with Canadair CRJ200 regional jets in the past. Colgan Air, operating as United Express, ceased serving Lafayette during the summer of 2012. Colgan had flown Bombardier Q400 high-speed propjets (which is the largest and fastest member of the DHC-8 Dash 8 aircraft family) as well as Saab 340 turboprops operating feeder service for United to Houston. ExpressJet replaced the Colgan service with additional Embraer ERJ-135 and Embraer ERJ-145 regional jet frequencies operating as United Express nonstop to Houston. Vision Airlines briefly served Lafayette during the summer of 2011 with Dornier 328 propjets nonstop to Ft. Walton Beach/Destin, FL via the Northwest Florida Regional Airport located on Eglin Air Force Base.

===Current and past airline jet operations===
The three regional airlines serving Lafayette, American Eagle, Delta Connection and United Express, currently operate regional jets on their respective flights. The exception was Delta Air Lines which began mainline service nonstop to Atlanta on July 3, 2014, using the Boeing 717-200 jetliner but is not currently operating this aircraft type into Lafayette. Delta Connection also began serving Lafayette with 76-seat Canadair CRJ900 regional jets which like the B717 feature first class, &quot;Economy Comfort&quot; and standard coach seating. Previously, the only mainline jet aircraft type serving Lafayette (following the cessation of Continental Airlines mainline jet service) was the twice weekly McDonnell Douglas MD-80 service flown by Allegiant Air nonstop to Las Vegas. On June 7, 2012 Delta Connection began daily service to Atlanta on Canadair CRJ700s with wi-fi, 9 first class seats, and 56 economy class seats including an enhanced &quot;Economy Comfort&quot; section featuring increased legroom. These flights provided the only first class service available at the time from Lafayette. In Delta&#x27;s November 2012 timetable all CRJ700 service to Lafayette was replaced with smaller Canadair CRJ200s. Delta Connection then resumed dual-class service between Lafayette and Atlanta on June 10, 2013, with Canadair CRJ700 and CRJ900 regional jet flight featuring wi-fi as well as 9 First Class seats, 8 &quot;Economy Comfort&quot; seats and 48 Economy seats. Several of the other Delta Connection flights between LFT and ATL continue to use single class Canadair CRJ200 regional jets. The CRJ700 was the largest airliner type to serve Lafayette at this time. However, that changed when Delta began 110-seat Boeing 717 service nonstop to Atlanta on July 3, 2014. The B717, featuring first class, &quot;Economy Comfort&quot; and standard coach seating, was one of the larger aircraft types to serve Lafayette with scheduled passenger flights and marked the return of mainline jet aircraft service at the airport at the time. One of the largest aircraft types to previously serve Lafayette was the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 flown by Allegiant Air with nonstop service to Las Vegas before this airline ceased all flights from the airport. Another large aircraft type to serve the airport was the Airbus A320 flown by Frontier Airlines before this air carrier discontinued its service to Lafayette.

Other airlines are now operating larger regional jet types into Lafayette. United Express introduced larger Canadair CRJ700 (operated by SkyWest Airlines), Embraer ERJ-170 (operated by Republic Airlines) and Embraer ERJ-175 (operated by Mesa Airlines) regional jet service with first class and coach seating on a number of flights to Houston. American Eagle then introduced larger Canadair CRJ900 as well as Embraer ERJ-175 regional jets featuring first class and coach seating on its nonstop service to Dallas/Fort Worth in addition to its all coach ERJ-145 flights to DFW. American Eagle currently operates Canadair CRJ700 regional jets on its nonstop flights to Charlotte (CLT).

===Previous nonstop Denver service: United Express===
United Airlines began daily nonstop service to Denver from the airport effective on August 19, 2014. These flights were operated by United regional affiliate and code sharing partner United Express with Embraer ERJ-145 regional jets. This service marked the first time Lafayette had nonstop flights to the United hub in Denver. However, on July 27, 2015, United Airlines announced it would be ending this United Express service to Denver and the flight was discontinued on October 23, 2015.

===Previous nonstop Denver and Orlando service: Frontier Airlines===

Frontier Airlines began serving Lafayette on October 24, 2018, with nonstop Airbus A320 jetliner flights operated twice a week to both Denver (DEN) and Orlando (MCO) with both of these cities serving as hubs for the airline. Frontier ended its seasonal service to Orlando in August 2019 and then also ended its seasonal service to Denver on November 12, 2019, with flights to both cities said to resume in the spring of 2020. However, Frontier has since stated that it will not resume flights into Lafayette, with its service now suspended indefinitely.

===Other notable past operations===

In March 2001, Air Force One landed in Lafayette transporting President George W. Bush, the 43rd President of the United States. This Boeing 747-200B (USAF aircraft designation VC-25A) flight into Lafayette with President Bush on board appears to have been the largest aircraft ever to land at the airport. More recently, U.S. Air Force C-17 &quot;Globemaster III&quot; aircraft were flown into Lafayette. These large, four engine, military transport jets were supporting air show activities at the airfield at the time and were also later operated into the airport in order to transport motorcade vehicles for the Vice President of the United States in March 2022 when VP Kamala Harris visited Acadiana for a visit to Sunset, LA regarding new high-speed internet service. In addition, United Airlines uses Lafayette Regional as a diversion airport when inclement weather disrupts flight operations at the airline&#x27;s major connecting hub located at Houston Intercontinental Airport (IAH) in Texas. Up to five Boeing 737 jetliners operated by United have been observed on the airport ramp at one time due to weather diversions.

==Accidents and incidents==
* On December 28, 2019, a Piper PA-31T Cheyenne crashed shortly after takeoff, approximately one nautical mile from LFT. The pilot was able to avoid an apartment complex but the aircraft struck a vehicle and a USPS branch on its way down. Four passengers and the pilot were killed on impact. One passenger and one person on the ground were seriously injured, while two additional people on the ground suffered minor injuries. The NTSB released a preliminary report and is investigating the accident.

==See also==

* List of airports in Louisiana
* Louisiana World War II Army Airfields
* 29th Flying Training Wing (U.S. Army Air Forces)

==References==


===Sources===
* Manning, Thomas A. (2005), &quot;History of Air Education and Training Command, 1942–2002&quot;. Office of History and Research, Headquarters, AETC, Randolph AFB, Texas 
* Shaw, Frederick J. (2004), &quot;Locating Air Force Base Sites, History&#x27;s Legacy&quot;, Air Force History and Museums Program, United States Air Force, Washington DC. 

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2876121" start="0" end="26" title="Lafayette Regional Airport" label="Lafayette Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="83" end="90" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q128891" start="121" end="130" title="Lafayette, Louisiana" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q506892" start="135" end="151" title="Lafayette Parish, Louisiana" label="Lafayette Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="153" end="162" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q94313" start="312" end="325" title="Interstate 49" label="Interstate 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="403" end="417" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052181" start="503" end="538" title="Petroleum Helicopters International" label="Petroleum Helicopters International"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="711" end="718" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="726" end="735" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="743" end="749" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="750" end="760" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="771" end="778" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="818" end="834" title="Eastern Airlines" label="Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q539218" start="1000" end="1019" title="Trans-Texas Airways" label="Trans-Texas Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="1209" end="1229" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="1331" end="1346" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="1357" end="1371" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="1398" end="1415" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824470" start="1474" end="1485" title="Metro Airlines" label="MetroFlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370696" start="1678" end="1694" title="Delta Connection" label="Delta Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="1721" end="1736" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="1826" end="1840" title="Boeing 717-200" label="Boeing 717-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370696" start="1951" end="1967" title="Delta Connection" label="Delta Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q874625" start="2023" end="2040" title="Northwest Airlink" label="Northwest Airlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="2067" end="2085" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="2261" end="2276" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="2443" end="2457" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="2516" end="2529" title="Allegiant Air" label="Allegiant Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="2645" end="2662" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="2701" end="2712" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q991355" start="3373" end="3383" title="New Iberia" label="New Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="3669" end="3678" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="3688" end="3702" title="mean sea level" label="mean sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="3740" end="3747" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="3748" end="3754" title="runway" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q534159" start="3789" end="3796" title="helipad" label="helipad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="4829" end="4845" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133228" start="4851" end="4859" title="air taxi" label="air taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q627716" start="4864" end="4872" title="military aviation" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="4881" end="4901" title="airline" label="scheduled commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="4974" end="4980" title="aircraft engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="5002" end="5005" title="jet aircraft" label="jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="5013" end="5023" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="5363" end="5373" title="Boeing 757" label="Boeing 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q155026" start="5537" end="5540" title="United Parcel Service" label="UPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="5545" end="5550" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q410756" start="5568" end="5583" title="U.S. Highway 90" label="U.S. Highway 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q94313" start="5592" end="5605" title="Interstate 49" label="Interstate 49"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="5648" end="5662" title="Boeing 757-200" label="Boeing 757-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="5715" end="5729" title="Boeing 727-200" label="Boeing 727-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="5876" end="5890" title="Boeing 757-200" label="Boeing 757-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q323329" start="6028" end="6031" title="DHL Aviation" label="DHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="6047" end="6059" title="Douglas DC-9" label="Douglas DC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q849706" start="6312" end="6320" title="Airport terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331518" start="6910" end="6922" title="U.S. Customs" label="U.S. Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="7289" end="7304" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="7318" end="7335" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="7389" end="7404" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728613" start="7707" end="7723" title="The Daily Advertiser (Lafayette)" label="Daily Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9174" end="9186" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="9224" end="9253" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061102" start="9357" end="9388" title="Central Flying Training Command" label="Central Flying Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656454" start="9548" end="9570" title="DeRidder Army Air Base" label="DeRidder Army Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393116" start="9675" end="9690" title="Fairchild PT-19" label="Fairchild PT-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q660944" start="9726" end="9740" title="PT-17 Stearman" label="PT-17 Stearman"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="9752" end="9764" title="P-40 Warhawk" label="P-40 Warhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784754" start="9843" end="9858" title="Third Air Force" label="Third Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398357" start="9860" end="9871" title="Esler Field" label="Esler Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="10094" end="10111" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q133913" start="10236" end="10248" title="Martin 4-0-4" label="Martin 4-0-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="10253" end="10264" title="Convair 340" label="Convair 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q771340" start="10412" end="10425" title="Hobby Airport" label="Hobby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="10936" end="10947" title="Convair 440" label="Convair 440"/>
<link wikidata="Q539218" start="11010" end="11029" title="Trans-Texas Airways" label="Trans-Texas Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="11135" end="11147" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="11752" end="11764" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="11769" end="11780" title="Convair 240" label="Convair 240"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="11804" end="11815" title="Convair 600" label="Convair 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q539218" start="11881" end="11909" title="Texas International Airlines" label="Texas International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q683041" start="12129" end="12165" title="de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter" label="de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q539218" start="12242" end="12270" title="Texas International Airlines" label="Texas International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="12281" end="12296" title="Douglas DC-9-10" label="Douglas DC-9-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="12309" end="12316" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="12318" end="12324" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="12325" end="12335" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="12337" end="12348" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="12427" end="12431" title="DC-9" label="DC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="12484" end="12495" title="Convair 600" label="Convair 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q174252" start="12525" end="12547" title="Official Airline Guide" label="Official Airline Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="12664" end="12675" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="12784" end="12795" title="Baton Rouge" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="12797" end="12809" title="Beaumont, TX" label="Beaumont, TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q864106" start="12814" end="12830" title="Lake Charles, LA" label="Lake Charles, LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q128295" start="12886" end="12893" title="Abilene, Texas" label="Abilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q925598" start="12898" end="12908" title="San Angelo" label="San Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="12974" end="12985" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="12987" end="12990" title="LAX" label="LAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="13046" end="13057" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q33561" start="13059" end="13070" title="Roswell, NM" label="Roswell, NM"/>
<link wikidata="Q128321" start="13072" end="13079" title="Midland, Texas" label="Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q128361" start="13080" end="13090" title="Odessa, TX" label="Odessa, TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="13249" end="13274" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="13450" end="13456" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="13471" end="13474" title="LAX" label="LAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="13477" end="13486" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="13488" end="13502" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="13517" end="13532" title="Brownsville, TX" label="Brownsville, TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q51698" start="13534" end="13541" title="McAllen" label="McAllen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51691" start="13543" end="13551" title="Amarillo, Texas" label="Amarillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="13556" end="13563" title="Lubbock" label="Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="13839" end="13859" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="13908" end="13922" title="Boeing 727-100" label="Boeing 727-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="13924" end="13938" title="Boeing 727-200" label="Boeing 727-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="13940" end="13955" title="Douglas DC-9-10" label="Douglas DC-9-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="13960" end="13985" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q968694" start="14049" end="14068" title="Continental Express" label="Continental Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="14069" end="14075" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q218637" start="14077" end="14083" title="ATR 42" label="ATR 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163407" start="14088" end="14112" title="Embraer EMB-120 Brasilia" label="Embraer EMB-120 Brasilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="14324" end="14330" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="14396" end="14419" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q466786" start="14442" end="14456" title="Newark Airport" label="Newark Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="14474" end="14483" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="14516" end="14530" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370696" start="14535" end="14551" title="Delta Connection" label="Delta Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q277491" start="14642" end="14650" title="Saab 340" label="Saab 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="14696" end="14708" title="code sharing" label="code sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178765" start="14717" end="14744" title="Atlantic Southeast Airlines" label="Atlantic Southeast Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163407" start="14753" end="14777" title="Embraer EMB-120 Brasilia" label="Embraer EMB-120 Brasilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="15021" end="15036" title="Embraer ERJ-135" label="Embraer ERJ-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="15120" end="15135" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824470" start="15259" end="15279" title="Metroflight Airlines" label="Metroflight Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824470" start="15295" end="15309" title="Metro Airlines" label="Metro Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="15318" end="15329" title="Convair 580" label="Convair 580"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375100" start="15606" end="15621" title="Royale Airlines" label="Royale Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q120323" start="15679" end="15692" title="Beechcraft 99" label="Beechcraft 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335137" start="15694" end="15721" title="Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirante" label="Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457281" start="15723" end="15743" title="Grumman Gulfstream I" label="Grumman Gulfstream I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140283" start="15748" end="15757" title="Short 330" label="Short 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="15808" end="15840" title="Houston Intercontinental Airport" label="Houston Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824470" start="16027" end="16041" title="Metro Airlines" label="Metro Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140283" start="16065" end="16074" title="Short 330" label="Short 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455721" start="16123" end="16146" title="L&amp;#x27;Express Airlines" label="L&amp;#x27;Express Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q771340" start="16207" end="16220" title="Hobby Airport" label="Hobby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q634227" start="16242" end="16252" title="Beechcraft" label="Beechcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033619" start="16265" end="16280" title="Air New Orleans" label="Air New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q771340" start="16392" end="16405" title="Hobby Airport" label="Hobby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q683041" start="16411" end="16447" title="de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter" label="de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q934012" start="16463" end="16468" title="Piper Aircraft" label="Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335143" start="16642" end="16653" title="Rio Airways" label="Rio Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="16697" end="16709" title="code sharing" label="code sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q661819" start="16723" end="16739" title="Beechcraft 1900C" label="Beechcraft 1900C"/>
<link wikidata="Q125687967" start="16771" end="16788" title="TranStar Airlines" label="TranStar Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q125687967" start="16799" end="16807" title="Muse Air" label="Muse Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q864106" start="16893" end="16909" title="Lake Charles, LA" label="Lake Charles, LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="17115" end="17135" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="17156" end="17170" title="Boeing 737-300" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="17175" end="17189" title="Boeing 737-500" label="Boeing 737-500"/>
<link wikidata="Q968694" start="17304" end="17323" title="Continental Express" label="Continental Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q46676" start="17336" end="17346" title="ExpressJet" label="ExpressJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q871477" start="17351" end="17373" title="Continental Connection" label="Continental Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q260807" start="17386" end="17396" title="Colgan Air" label="Colgan Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="17439" end="17454" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="17494" end="17508" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="17588" end="17603" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="17610" end="17624" title="Boeing 717-200" label="Boeing 717-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q874625" start="17695" end="17712" title="Northwest Airlink" label="Northwest Airlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q277491" start="17726" end="17734" title="Saab 340" label="Saab 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="17749" end="17757" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000403" start="17758" end="17764" title="CRJ200" label="CRJ200"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="17822" end="17840" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="17846" end="17861" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="17863" end="17871" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000403" start="17872" end="17878" title="CRJ200" label="CRJ200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370696" start="17912" end="17928" title="Delta Connection" label="Delta Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="17974" end="17991" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="18073" end="18081" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="18082" end="18088" title="CRJ900" label="CRJ900"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="18093" end="18108" title="Embraer ERJ-175" label="Embraer ERJ-175"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536988" start="18135" end="18147" title="PSA Airlines" label="PSA Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q773662" start="18149" end="18165" title="SkyWest Airlines" label="SkyWest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q371306" start="18169" end="18178" title="Envoy Air" label="Envoy Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="18216" end="18230" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="18287" end="18293" title="CRJ700" label="CRJ700"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="18326" end="18335" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536988" start="18373" end="18385" title="PSA Airlines" label="PSA Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744520" start="18458" end="18475" title="Republic Airlines" label="Republic Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="18488" end="18503" title="Embraer ERJ-170" label="Embraer ERJ-170"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922297" start="18530" end="18543" title="Mesa Airlines" label="Mesa Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="18556" end="18571" title="Embraer ERJ-175" label="Embraer ERJ-175"/>
<link wikidata="Q46676" start="18645" end="18655" title="ExpressJet" label="ExpressJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="18661" end="18669" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000403" start="18670" end="18676" title="CRJ200" label="CRJ200"/>
<link wikidata="Q260807" start="18704" end="18714" title="Colgan Air" label="Colgan Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="18729" end="18743" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="18814" end="18829" title="Bombardier Q400" label="Bombardier Q400"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="18898" end="18903" title="DHC-8" label="DHC-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="18904" end="18910" title="Bombardier Dash 8" label="Dash 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q277491" start="18939" end="18947" title="Saab 340" label="Saab 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q46676" start="19007" end="19017" title="ExpressJet" label="ExpressJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="19062" end="19077" title="Embraer ERJ-135" label="Embraer ERJ-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="19082" end="19097" title="Embraer ERJ-145" label="Embraer ERJ-145"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="19136" end="19150" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189014" start="19171" end="19186" title="Vision Airlines" label="Vision Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q937949" start="19243" end="19254" title="Dornier 328" label="Dornier 328"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305748" start="19311" end="19345" title="Northwest Florida Regional Airport" label="Northwest Florida Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298115" start="19357" end="19377" title="Eglin Air Force Base" label="Eglin Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="19473" end="19487" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370696" start="19489" end="19505" title="Delta Connection" label="Delta Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="19510" end="19524" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="19605" end="19620" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="19696" end="19710" title="Boeing 717-200" label="Boeing 717-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370696" start="19786" end="19802" title="Delta Connection" label="Delta Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="19845" end="19853" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="19854" end="19860" title="CRJ900" label="CRJ900"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="20066" end="20086" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="20130" end="20153" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="20171" end="20184" title="Allegiant Air" label="Allegiant Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370696" start="20223" end="20239" title="Delta Connection" label="Delta Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="20274" end="20282" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="20283" end="20289" title="CRJ700" label="CRJ700"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="20746" end="20754" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="20755" end="20761" title="CRJ700" label="CRJ700"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="20766" end="20772" title="CRJ900" label="CRJ900"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="20994" end="21002" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000403" start="21003" end="21009" title="CRJ200" label="CRJ200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="21147" end="21157" title="Boeing 717" label="Boeing 717"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="21535" end="21558" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="21568" end="21581" title="Allegiant Air" label="Allegiant Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="21730" end="21741" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="21751" end="21768" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="21908" end="21922" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="21941" end="21949" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="21950" end="21956" title="CRJ700" label="CRJ700"/>
<link wikidata="Q773662" start="21970" end="21986" title="SkyWest Airlines" label="SkyWest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="21989" end="22004" title="Embraer ERJ-170" label="Embraer ERJ-170"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669658" start="22018" end="22035" title="Republic Airways" label="Republic Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="22041" end="22056" title="Embraer ERJ-175" label="Embraer ERJ-175"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922297" start="22070" end="22083" title="Mesa Airlines" label="Mesa Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="22176" end="22190" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="22214" end="22222" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="22223" end="22229" title="CRJ900" label="CRJ900"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="22241" end="22256" title="Embraer ERJ-175" label="Embraer ERJ-175"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="22384" end="22391" title="ERJ-145" label="ERJ-145"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="22442" end="22450" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="22451" end="22457" title="CRJ700" label="CRJ700"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="22570" end="22585" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="22732" end="22744" title="code sharing" label="code sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="22753" end="22767" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="22773" end="22788" title="Embraer ERJ-145" label="Embraer ERJ-145"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="23132" end="23149" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="23208" end="23219" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q179969" start="23739" end="23752" title="Air Force One" label="Air Force One"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="23796" end="23810" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="23858" end="23873" title="Boeing 747-200B" label="Boeing 747-200B"/>
<link wikidata="Q645289" start="23901" end="23907" title="VC-25A" label="VC-25A"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="24046" end="24060" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q211369" start="24061" end="24065" title="Boeing C-17 Globemaster III" label="C-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q211369" start="24072" end="24087" title="Globemaster III" label="Globemaster III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="24339" end="24374" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="24397" end="24410" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q337417" start="24419" end="24427" title="Acadiana" label="Acadiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356280" start="24443" end="24453" title="Sunset, LA" label="Sunset, LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="24510" end="24525" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="24677" end="24709" title="Houston Intercontinental Airport" label="Houston Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="24737" end="24747" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582144" start="24910" end="24931" title="Piper PA-31T Cheyenne" label="Piper PA-31T Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="25094" end="25098" title="USPS" label="USPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="25314" end="25318" title="NTSB" label="NTSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432600" start="25401" end="25430" title="List of airports in Louisiana" label="List of airports in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931361" start="25433" end="25470" title="Louisiana World War II Army Airfields" label="Louisiana World War II Army Airfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057498" start="25473" end="25521" title="29th Flying Training Wing (U.S. Army Air Forces)" label="29th Flying Training Wing (U.S. Army Air Forces)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306343" wikidata="Q1665115" url="?curid=306343" title="Rayleigh quotient">
<text>In mathematics, the Rayleigh quotient () for a given complex Hermitian matrix formula_1 and nonzero vector &quot;formula_2&quot; is defined as:formula_3For real matrices and vectors, the condition of being Hermitian reduces to that of being symmetric, and the conjugate transpose formula_4 to the usual transpose formula_5. Note that formula_6 for any non-zero scalar &quot;formula_7&quot;. Recall that a Hermitian (or real symmetric) matrix is diagonalizable with only real eigenvalues. It can be shown that, for a given matrix, the Rayleigh quotient reaches its minimum value formula_8 (the smallest eigenvalue of &quot;formula_1&quot;) when &quot;formula_2&quot; is formula_11 (the corresponding eigenvector). Similarly, formula_12 and formula_13.

The Rayleigh quotient is used in the min-max theorem to get exact values of all eigenvalues. It is also used in eigenvalue algorithms (such as Rayleigh quotient iteration) to obtain an eigenvalue approximation from an eigenvector approximation.

The range of the Rayleigh quotient (for any matrix, not necessarily Hermitian) is called a numerical range and contains its spectrum. When the matrix is Hermitian, the numerical radius is equal to the spectral norm. Still in functional analysis, formula_14 is known as the spectral radius. In the context of formula_15-algebras or algebraic quantum mechanics, the function that to &quot;formula_1&quot; associates the Rayleigh–Ritz quotient formula_17 for a fixed &quot;formula_2&quot; and &quot;formula_1&quot; varying through the algebra would be referred to as &quot;vector state&quot; of the algebra.

In quantum mechanics, the Rayleigh quotient gives the expectation value of the observable corresponding to the operator &quot;formula_1&quot; for a system whose state is given by &quot;formula_2&quot;.

If we fix the complex matrix &quot;formula_1&quot;, then the resulting Rayleigh quotient map (considered as a function of &quot;formula_2&quot;) completely determines &quot;formula_1&quot; via the polarization identity; indeed, this remains true even if we allow &quot;formula_1&quot; to be non-Hermitian. However, if we restrict the field of scalars to the real numbers, then the Rayleigh quotient only determines the symmetric part of &quot;formula_1&quot;.

==Bounds for Hermitian &quot;M&quot;==
As stated in the introduction, for any vector &quot;x&quot;, one has formula_27, where formula_28 are respectively the smallest and largest eigenvalues of formula_1. This is immediate after observing that the Rayleigh quotient is a weighted average of eigenvalues of &quot;M&quot;:
formula_30
where formula_31 is the formula_32-th eigenpair after orthonormalization and formula_33 is the formula_32th coordinate of &quot;x&quot; in the eigenbasis. It is then easy to verify that the bounds are attained at the corresponding eigenvectors formula_35.

The fact that the quotient is a weighted average of the eigenvalues can be used to identify the second, the third, ... largest eigenvalues. Let formula_36 
be the eigenvalues in decreasing order. If formula_37 and formula_2 is constrained to be orthogonal to formula_39, in which case formula_40, then formula_41 has maximum value formula_42, which is achieved when formula_43.

==Special case of covariance matrices==
An empirical covariance matrix formula_1 can be represented as the product formula_45 of the data matrix formula_46 pre-multiplied by its transpose formula_47. Being a positive semi-definite matrix, formula_1 has non-negative eigenvalues, and orthogonal (or orthogonalisable) eigenvectors, which can be demonstrated as follows.

Firstly, that the eigenvalues formula_49 are non-negative:
formula_50

Secondly, that the eigenvectors formula_51 are orthogonal to one another:
formula_52 
if the eigenvalues are different – in the case of multiplicity, the basis can be orthogonalized.

To now establish that the Rayleigh quotient is maximized by the eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue, consider decomposing an arbitrary vector formula_2 on the basis of the eigenvectors formula_51:
formula_55
where
formula_56
is the coordinate of formula_2 orthogonally projected onto formula_51. Therefore, we have:
formula_59
which, by orthonormality of the eigenvectors, becomes:
formula_60

The last representation establishes that the Rayleigh quotient is the sum of the squared cosines of the angles formed by the vector formula_2 and each eigenvector formula_51, weighted by corresponding eigenvalues.

If a vector formula_2 maximizes formula_41, then any non-zero scalar multiple formula_65 also maximizes formula_66, so the problem can be reduced to the Lagrange problem of maximizing formula_67 under the constraint that formula_68.

Define: formula_69. This then becomes a linear program, which always attains its maximum at one of the corners of the domain. A maximum point will have formula_70 and formula_71 for all formula_72 (when the eigenvalues are ordered by decreasing magnitude).

Thus, the Rayleigh quotient is maximized by the eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue.

=== Formulation using Lagrange multipliers ===
Alternatively, this result can be arrived at by the method of Lagrange multipliers. The first part is to show that the quotient is constant under scaling formula_73, where formula_7 is a scalar
formula_75

Because of this invariance, it is sufficient to study the special case formula_76. The problem is then to find the critical points of the function
formula_77
subject to the constraint formula_78 In other words, it is to find the critical points of 
formula_79
where formula_80 is a Lagrange multiplier. The stationary points of formula_81 occur at
formula_82
and 
formula_83

Therefore, the eigenvectors formula_84 of formula_1 are the critical points of the Rayleigh quotient and their corresponding eigenvalues formula_86 are the stationary values of formula_87. This property is the basis for principal components analysis and canonical correlation.

==Use in Sturm–Liouville theory==
Sturm–Liouville theory concerns the action of the linear operator
formula_88
on the inner product space defined by
formula_89
of functions satisfying some specified boundary conditions at &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot;. In this case the Rayleigh quotient is
formula_90

This is sometimes presented in an equivalent form, obtained by separating the integral in the numerator and using integration by parts:
formula_91

==Generalizations==
# For a given pair (&quot;A&quot;, &quot;B&quot;) of matrices, and a given non-zero vector &quot;x&quot;, the generalized Rayleigh quotient is defined as: formula_92 The generalized Rayleigh quotient can be reduced to the Rayleigh quotient formula_93 through the transformation formula_94 where formula_95 is the Cholesky decomposition of the Hermitian positive-definite matrix &quot;B&quot;.
# For a given pair (&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) of non-zero vectors, and a given Hermitian matrix &quot;H&quot;, the generalized Rayleigh quotient or sometimes two-sided Rayleigh quotient can be defined as: formula_96 which coincides with &quot;R&quot;(&quot;H&quot;,&quot;x&quot;) when &quot;x&quot; = &quot;y&quot;. In quantum mechanics, this quantity is called a &quot;matrix element&quot; or sometimes a &quot;transition amplitude&quot;.

==See also==
* Numerical range
* Courant minimax principle
* Min-max theorem
* Rayleigh&#x27;s quotient in vibrations analysis
* Dirichlet eigenvalue

==References==
==Further reading==
* Shi Yu, Léon-Charles Tranchevent, Bart Moor, Yves Moreau, &quot;Kernel-based Data Fusion for Machine Learning: Methods and Applications in Bioinformatics and Text Mining&quot;, Ch. 2, Springer, 2011.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665115" start="20" end="37" title="Rayleigh quotient" label="Rayleigh quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q652941" start="61" end="77" title="Hermitian matrix" label="Hermitian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="100" end="106" title="vector (geometry)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q339011" start="241" end="250" title="Symmetric matrix" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051983" start="260" end="279" title="conjugate transpose" label="conjugate transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="303" end="312" title="transpose" label="transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425077" start="445" end="486" title="spectral theorem" label="diagonalizable with only real eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="602" end="612" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="699" end="710" title="eigenvector" label="eigenvector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454958" start="789" end="804" title="min-max theorem" label="min-max theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766437" start="864" end="884" title="eigenvalue algorithm" label="eigenvalue algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298489" start="895" end="922" title="Rayleigh quotient iteration" label="Rayleigh quotient iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579053" start="1089" end="1104" title="numerical range" label="numerical range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365748" start="1122" end="1130" title="spectrum_(functional_analysis)" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q249748" start="1271" end="1286" title="spectral radius" label="spectral radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="1607" end="1624" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918589" start="1658" end="1675" title="expectation value (quantum mechanics)" label="expectation value"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2004" end="2025" title="polarization identity#Complex numbers" label="polarization identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q339011" start="2226" end="2235" title="symmetric matrix" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134404" start="3289" end="3306" title="covariance matrix" label="covariance matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264358" start="3369" end="3380" title="data matrix (multivariate statistics)" label="data matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411166" start="4201" end="4215" title="orthonormality" label="orthonormality"/>
<link wikidata="Q598870" start="4626" end="4642" title="Lagrange multipliers" label="Lagrange problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q202843" start="4747" end="4761" title="linear program" label="linear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q598870" start="5164" end="5184" title="Lagrange multipliers" label="Lagrange multipliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q577705" start="5423" end="5438" title="critical point (mathematics)" label="critical points"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873" start="5904" end="5933" title="principal components analysis" label="principal components analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115542" start="5938" end="5959" title="canonical correlation" label="canonical correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154082" start="5996" end="6018" title="Sturm–Liouville theory" label="Sturm–Liouville theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="6046" end="6061" title="linear operator" label="linear operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="6080" end="6099" title="inner product space" label="inner product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332643" start="6161" end="6180" title="boundary conditions" label="boundary conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q273328" start="6381" end="6401" title="integration by parts" label="integration by parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q515375" start="6748" end="6770" title="Cholesky decomposition" label="Cholesky decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579053" start="7288" end="7303" title="Numerical range" label="Numerical range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178096" start="7306" end="7331" title="Courant minimax principle" label="Courant minimax principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454958" start="7334" end="7349" title="Min-max theorem" label="Min-max theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590263" start="7352" end="7399" title="Rayleigh&amp;#x27;s quotient in vibrations analysis" label="Rayleigh&amp;#x27;s quotient in vibrations analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280763" start="7402" end="7422" title="Dirichlet eigenvalue" label="Dirichlet eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638172" start="7506" end="7517" title="Yves Moreau" label="Yves Moreau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306344" wikidata="Q251076" url="?curid=306344" title="Hallowe'en Party">
<text>Hallowe&#x27;en Party is a work of detective fiction by English writer Agatha Christie, first published in the United Kingdom by the Collins Crime Club in November 1969 and in the United States by Dodd, Mead and Company later in the same year. This book was dedicated to writer P. G. Wodehouse. It has been adapted for television, radio, and most recently for the film &quot;A Haunting in Venice&quot; (2023).

The novel features Belgian detective Hercule Poirot and the mystery novelist Ariadne Oliver. A boastful girl at a Hallowe&#x27;en party tells Mrs Oliver she once witnessed a murder; the same girl is later drowned in an apple-bobbing bucket, and Poirot must solve a two-pronged mystery: who killed the girl, and what, if anything, did she witness?

==Synopsis==
While visiting her friend Judith Butler in Woodleigh Common, Ariadne Oliver assists the neighbors in planning a children&#x27;s Hallowe&#x27;en Party at wealthy Rowena Drake&#x27;s house. Upon meeting Mrs Oliver, 13-year-old Joyce Reynolds claims she once witnessed a murder, though at the time she was too young to recognize it as such. Though no one appears to believe her, Joyce is found drowned in an apple-bobbing bucket after the party; distraught, Mrs Oliver summons Hercule Poirot to solve the case.

With help from retired Superintendent Spence, Poirot makes a list of recent deaths and disappearances in the area of Woodleigh Common. Of these, three stand out as significant:

* Rowena&#x27;s aunt, Mrs Llewellyn-Smythe, died suddenly, but of what was believed to be natural causes. 
* Her au pair, Olga Seminoff, disappeared when a codicil that favoured her in her employer&#x27;s will was found to be a forgery.
* Leslie Ferrier, a lawyer&#x27;s clerk with unsavory connections and prior convictions for forgery, was stabbed in the back by an unknown assailant.

Interviewing the townsfolk, Poirot learns a few interesting facts:

* Judith&#x27;s daughter Miranda was Joyce&#x27;s closest friend, and the pair shared secrets.
* Joyce was known to lie to get attention.
* Elizabeth Whittaker, a mathematics teacher, witnessed Rowena become startled and drop a vase of water outside the library while the party-goers were playing snap-dragon.
* A one-time cleaner of Mrs Llewellyn-Smythe had been witness to her employer making the supposedly forged codicil.
* A beautiful garden built within an abandoned quarry was designed by Michael Garfield, a handsome narcissistic man, for Mrs Llewellyn-Smythe. He lived in a lodge on the grounds to oversee the work, and still lives there.
* The victim&#x27;s brother, Leopold Reynolds, has become flush with money of late.

Leopold is found dead. Rowena informs Poirot that she had seen him in the library the night of the party, and she believes he witnessed his sister&#x27;s murder.

Poirot advises the police to search the woods near the quarry. The search finds Olga&#x27;s body in an abandoned well, stabbed in the same manner as Ferrier. Fearing another murder, Poirot sends a telegram to Mrs Oliver, instructing her to take Judith and her daughter to London.

Miranda meets with Garfield, who takes her to a pagan sacrificial altar, intending to poison her. However, he commits suicide when two youths recruited by Poirot save Miranda&#x27;s life. Miranda reveals that she was the one who saw Garfield and Rowena drag Olga&#x27;s body through the quarry garden, and she secretly told Joyce. Miranda had not been present at the preparations for the party, so Joyce tried to seek famous Ariadne&#x27;s attention by claiming Miranda&#x27;s story as her own.

Poirot lays out the solution to Mrs Oliver and Mrs Butler. Rowena began an affair with Garfield while her dying husband was still alive. Disgusted by this, Rowena&#x27;s aunt wrote a codicil that left her fortune to Olga. The lovers then plotted to discredit Olga&#x27;s claim, hiring Ferrier to replace the codicil with a deliberately clumsy forgery to ensure Rowena inherited everything; the real codicil has now been found by the police. Both Olga and Ferrier were murdered to conceal the deceit, but Rowena suspected someone had witnessed the disposal of Olga&#x27;s body. Rowena killed Joyce when she claimed she had witnessed a murder, unaware that Joyce had appropriated Miranda&#x27;s story. The dropping of the vase, which Mrs Whittaker witnessed, was to disguise the fact that Rowena was already wet from drowning Joyce. Leopold was murdered because he asked Rowena for money, and she suspected he knew something.

Poirot muses that Rowena likely would have shared a similar fate to Olga, as Garfield&#x27;s motivation for the murder was his obsession with constructing a second, more perfect garden. Once he had Rowena&#x27;s money, he would soon have no more need of her, as she had already provided him with a Greek island.

Poirot also reveals that Judith is not really a widow. She once had a brief affair with Michael Garfield, and Miranda is the child of that union. The Butlers met Michael again by chance years later; though fond of Miranda, Michael was willing to kill his own child to satisfy his need to create. Satisfied with Poirot&#x27;s help, Judith thanks him.

==Characters==

* Hercule Poirot – Belgian detective, asked to help investigate the murder of Joyce Reynolds by his friend Mrs Oliver.
* Ariadne Oliver – mystery writer and Poirot&#x27;s friend.
* Alfred Richmond – Chief Constable of the local police.
* Dr Ferguson – local physician and the appointed police surgeon.
* Joyce Reynolds – first victim of the case. A thirteen-year-old girl attending Rowena&#x27;s Halloween party. 
* Olga Seminoff – an au pair girl from Herzegovina.
* Mrs Llewellyn-Smythe – a wealthy widow.
* Leslie Ferrier – a local solicitor&#x27;s clerk, murdered before the start of the novel.
* Janet White – a local teacher, dead from strangulation before the start of the novel. 
* Leopold Reynolds – second victim of the case. Joyce&#x27;s younger brother.
* Rowena Drake – Mrs Llewellyn-Smythe&#x27;s niece.
* Miranda Butler – a twelve-year-old girl who was ill and unable to attend the party.
* Judith Butler – Mrs Oliver&#x27;s friend, and mother of Miranda.
* Ann Reynolds – Joyce&#x27;s and Leopold&#x27;s older sister.
* Mrs Reynolds – Joyce&#x27;s and Leopold&#x27;s mother.
* Michael Garfield – a landscape gardener, recently returned to the area.
* Elizabeth Whittaker – a teacher of mathematics and Latin at The Elms school. 
* Miss Emlyn – local headmistress of The Elms school.
* Mrs Goodbody – a local cleaning woman, attending the party in the role of a witch.
* Jeremy Fullerton – Mrs Llewellyn-Smythe&#x27;s solicitor, and the employer of Ferrier.
* Nicholas Ransom – an 18-year-old, who attended the party. 
* Desmond Holland – a 16-year-old, who attended the party. 
* Harriet Leaman – Mrs Llewellyn-Smythe&#x27;s former cleaner.
* George – Poirot&#x27;s faithful valet.
* Superintendent Spence – a retired police officer. 
* Elspeth McKay – Superintendent Spence&#x27;s sister.

==Literary significance and reception==

Contemporaneous reviews were largely negative, though tempered by an appreciation of Christie&#x27;s advanced years. Author and academic Robert Barnard, who in 1980 wrote a monograph on Christie, stated, &quot;The plot of this late one is not too bad, but the telling is very poor: it is littered with loose ends, unrealised characters, and maintains only a marginal hold on the reader&#x27;s interest. Much of it reads as if spoken into a tape-recorder and never read through afterward.&quot; Christie did sometimes use a dictaphone when writing. According to her grandson, &quot;She used to dictate her stories into a machine called a dictaphone and then a secretary typed this up into a typescript, which my grandmother would correct by hand.&quot;

Robert Weaver in the &quot;Toronto Daily Star&quot; of 13 December 1969 wrote &quot;&quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot;...is a disappointment, but with all her accomplishments Miss Christie can be forgiven some disappointments...Poirot seems weary and so does the book.&quot;

Critical reassessment in more recent years has led to more favorable reviews, however. In &quot;Poirot: The Greatest Detective in the World&quot;, a 2020 non-fiction study of every Poirot novel for the character&#x27;s centennial, Mark Aldridge describes &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot; as &quot;a highly memorable and intriguing novel that makes a lasting impression on the reader.&quot; While commenting on the novel&#x27;s flaws, such as unresolved story threads and an &quot;unusually underwritten murderer&quot;, Aldridge writes it has &quot;an energetic and exciting opening, one excellent clue hiding in plain sight, and a tone of grim fascination towards the murder throughout.&quot; He notes how Christie was downbeat about what she perceived as rising cruelty and criminality in the wider world and that she read reports on current crime as a part of her inspiration.

==References and allusions==

===References to other works===

* Superintendent Spence brought to Poirot the case solved in &quot;Mrs McGinty&#x27;s Dead,&quot; which they discuss in Chapter 5. The case is recollected by Poirot in Chapter 3 when Poirot recalls Mrs Oliver getting out of a car and &quot;a bag of apples breaking&quot;. This is a reference to her second appearance in &quot;Mrs McGinty&#x27;s Dead&quot;, Chapter 10.
* Miss Emlyn mentions in Chapter 10 that she knows of Poirot from Miss Bulstrode, who previously appeared as a character in &quot;Cat Among the Pigeons&quot;.
* When Joyce suggests to Ariadne Oliver in Chapter 1 that she should have themed the party around a fake murder in honour of her presence, Ariadne replies &quot;never again&quot;. This is a reference to &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Folly&quot;, an earlier Poirot novel where she is asked to write a fake murder for a charity fête that turns into a real one.
* A letter was sent to Hercule Poirot from Mr Goby, who appeared in &quot;The Mystery of the Blue Train&quot;, &quot;After the Funeral&quot;, and &quot;Third Girl&quot;.
* Mrs Goodbody, a rich source of local insight, uses a well-known children&#x27;s rhyme to express her view of the likely fate of Olga, when Poirot asks her in Chapter 16: &quot;Ding dong dell, pussy&#x27;s in the well&quot;.
* There are several allusions to classical, Biblical, and literary characters in this book:
** Mrs Rowena Drake is compared to Lady Macbeth.
** The thin, blonde Mrs Butler is frequently compared to Undine.
** Mrs Butler and Mrs Oliver reflect upon the differences between their own lives and those of their namesakes (Judith and Ariadne, respectively).
**Miranda and Mrs Butler reference the story of Jael and Sisera when discussing how different people might commit a murder.
** Michael Garfield is referred to as both Narcissus and Satan/Lucifer.
** Michael Garfield also titles his sketch of Miranda as Iphigenia, reflecting his plan.

===References to actual history, geography and current science===

* The first half of the novel contains several discussions in which anxiety is voiced about the criminal justice system in Great Britain. This in part reflects the abolition in 1965 of capital punishment for murder.
* The novel reflects in many respects its time of publication at the end of the permissive 1960s, but nowhere more so than when a character uses the word &quot;lesbian&quot; in Chapter 15.
* Mrs Llewellyn-Smythe placed her codicil in a book titled &quot;Enquire Within upon Everything&quot;, a real book of domestic tips published from 1856 to 1994.

==Publication history==

* 1969, Collins Crime Club (London), November 1969, Hardback, 256 pp
* 1969, Dodd Mead and Company (New York), 1969, Hardback, 248 pp
* 1970, Pocket Books (New York), Paperback, 185 pp
* 1972, Fontana Books (Imprint of HarperCollins), Paperback, 189 pp
* 1987, Ulverscroft Large-print Edition, Hardcover, 
* 2009, HarperCollins; Facsimile edition, Hardcover: 256 pages, 
* 2023, HarperCollins; Paperback: 266 pages, (Retitled &quot;A Haunting in Venice&quot; to match the 2023 Branagh film) 

The novel was first serialised in the weekly magazine &quot;Woman&#x27;s Own&quot; in seven abridged instalments from 15 November to 27 December 1969, illustrated with uncredited photographic montages.

In the US, the novel appeared in the December 1969 issue of &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot; magazine.

==Adaptations==

===Radio===

&quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot; was adapted for radio and broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 30 October 1993, featuring John Moffatt as Hercule Poirot, with Stephanie Cole as Ariadne Oliver.

===Television===

;British
The novel was adapted as part of the twelfth series of &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Poirot&quot; with David Suchet, with Zoë Wanamaker reprising her role as Ariadne Oliver. Guest stars include Deborah Findlay as Rowena Drake, Julian Rhind-Tutt as Michael Garfield, Amelia Bullmore as Judith Butler, and Fenella Woolgar as Elizabeth Whittaker. Charles Palmer (who also directed &quot;The Clocks&quot; for the series) directs this instalment, with the screenplay written by Mark Gatiss (who wrote the screenplay for &quot;Cat Among the Pigeons&quot;; he also appeared as a guest star in the adaptation of &quot;Appointment with Death&quot;).

The television adaptation shifted the late 1960s setting to the 1930s, as with nearly all episodes in this series, and changed a number of the fates and details of the characters, but is otherwise faithful to the novel.

;French
The novel was adapted as a 2014 episode of the French television series &quot;Les Petits Meurtres d&#x27;Agatha Christie&quot;.

===Graphic novel===

&quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot; was released by HarperCollins as a graphic novel adaptation on 3 November 2008, adapted and illustrated by &quot;Chandre&quot; ().

===Film===

The novel was loosely adapted by Kenneth Branagh in 2023 for his third Poirot film, re-titled &quot;A Haunting in Venice&quot; and relocated from England to the titular city. The film followed Branagh&#x27;s previous Poirot adaptations &quot;Murder on the Orient Express&quot; (2017) and &quot;Death on the Nile&quot; (2022).

==See also==
* Bibliography of Halloween

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot; at the official Agatha Christie website
* &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot; at the new official Agatha Christie website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="35" end="52" title="detective fiction" label="detective fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="71" end="86" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147368" start="133" end="151" title="Collins Crime Club" label="Collins Crime Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287721" start="197" end="219" title="Dodd, Mead and Company" label="Dodd, Mead and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="278" end="293" title="P. G. Wodehouse" label="P. G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q114589148" start="375" end="395" title="A Haunting in Venice" label="A Haunting in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="448" end="462" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q777062" start="488" end="502" title="Ariadne Oliver" label="Ariadne Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q777062" start="833" end="847" title="Ariadne Oliver" label="Ariadne Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q168739" start="1177" end="1190" title="bobbing for apples" label="apple-bobbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="1246" end="1260" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q212816" start="1572" end="1579" title="au pair" label="au pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q699126" start="1615" end="1622" title="Codicil (will)" label="codicil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295761" start="2212" end="2223" title="Snap-dragon (game)" label="snap-dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="5195" end="5209" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q777062" start="5314" end="5328" title="Ariadne Oliver" label="Ariadne Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788811" start="7178" end="7192" title="Robert Barnard" label="Robert Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350916" start="7794" end="7807" title="Robert Weaver (editor)" label="Robert Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="7821" end="7839" title="Toronto Daily Star" label="Toronto Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q845106" start="9080" end="9103" title="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead" label="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q914197" start="9512" end="9533" title="Cat Among the Pigeons" label="Cat Among the Pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130299" start="9750" end="9771" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly"/>
<link wikidata="Q636815" start="9966" end="9995" title="The Mystery of the Blue Train" label="The Mystery of the Blue Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q426600" start="10009" end="10026" title="After the Funeral" label="After the Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q654170" start="10044" end="10054" title="Third Girl" label="Third Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278123" start="10240" end="10280" title="Ding Dong Bell" label="Ding dong dell, pussy&amp;#x27;s in the well"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454065" start="10415" end="10427" title="Lady Macbeth" label="Lady Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192032" start="10486" end="10492" title="Undine" label="Undine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202129" start="10606" end="10612" title="Judith" label="Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q184874" start="10617" end="10624" title="Ariadne" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q954820" start="10689" end="10693" title="Jael" label="Jael"/>
<link wikidata="Q976765" start="10698" end="10704" title="Sisera" label="Sisera"/>
<link wikidata="Q179256" start="10808" end="10817" title="Narcissus (mythology)" label="Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="10894" end="10903" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379490" start="11464" end="11494" title="Enquire Within upon Everything" label="Enquire Within upon Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015512" start="12139" end="12155" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Own" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q97707952" start="12446" end="12463" title="Hercule Poirot (radio series)" label="adapted for radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249054" start="12523" end="12535" title="John Moffatt (actor)" label="John Moffatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="12539" end="12553" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831958" start="12560" end="12574" title="Stephanie Cole" label="Stephanie Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q777062" start="12578" end="12592" title="Ariadne Oliver" label="Ariadne Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q391101" start="12683" end="12712" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q211831" start="12724" end="12736" title="David Suchet" label="David Suchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q227142" start="12743" end="12756" title="Zoë Wanamaker" label="Zoë Wanamaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248240" start="12815" end="12830" title="Deborah Findlay" label="Deborah Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q920094" start="12848" end="12865" title="Julian Rhind-Tutt" label="Julian Rhind-Tutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548368" start="12887" end="12902" title="Amelia Bullmore" label="Amelia Bullmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443309" start="12925" end="12940" title="Fenella Woolgar" label="Fenella Woolgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081477" start="12965" end="12979" title="Charles Palmer (director)" label="Charles Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q759467" start="13005" end="13015" title="The Clocks (novel)" label="The Clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q560286" start="13094" end="13105" title="Mark Gatiss" label="Mark Gatiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q914197" start="13142" end="13163" title="Cat Among the Pigeons" label="Cat Among the Pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q752439" start="13231" end="13253" title="Appointment with Death" label="Appointment with Death"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13267" end="13288" title="List of Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot episodes#Series 12 (2010-11)" label="television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234618" start="13570" end="13612" title="Les Petits Meurtres d&amp;#x27;Agatha Christie" label="Les Petits Meurtres d&amp;#x27;Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="13711" end="13724" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="13853" end="13868" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q114589148" start="13920" end="13940" title="A Haunting in Venice" label="A Haunting in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q27689100" start="14062" end="14090" title="Murder on the Orient Express (2017 film)" label="Murder on the Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q56816969" start="14114" end="14131" title="Death on the Nile (2022 film)" label="Death on the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000668" start="14162" end="14187" title="Bibliography of Halloween" label="Bibliography of Halloween"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306345" wikidata="Q57218" url="?curid=306345" title="Rudi Dutschke">
<text>Alfred Willi Rudolf &quot;Rudi&quot; Dutschke (; 7 March 1940 – 24 December 1979) was a German sociologist and political activist who, until severely injured by an assassin in 1968, was a leading charismatic figure within the Socialist Students Union (SDS) in West Germany, and that country&#x27;s broader &quot;extra-parliamentary opposition&quot; (APO).

Dutschke claimed both Christian and Marxist inspiration for a socialism that rejected both the Leninist model of party dictatorship that he had experienced as a youth in East Germany, and the compromises of West German social democracy. He advocated the creation of alternative or parallel social, economic and political institutions structured on the principles of direct democracy. At the same time, he joined Moscow- and Beijing-oriented communists in hailing Third World national liberation struggles as fronts in a world-wide socialist revolution.

Controversially for many of those who had protested with him in the 1960s, Dutschke in the 1970s styled himself a patriotic socialist (&quot;Pro Patria Sozi&quot;), and called on the left to re-engage the &quot;national question&quot; and seek a bloc-free path to German reunification.

Shortly before his death in 1979 from complications arising from his injuries in 1968, Dutschke was elected as a delegate to the founding congress of the environmentalist and social-justice Greens. It was a project then understood as the creation of an &quot;anti-party party&quot;, engaging with parliamentary politics but remaining a grass-roots movement.

==Christian youth in East Germany==
Dutschke was born in Schönefeld (present-day Nuthe-Urstromtal) near Luckenwalde, Brandenburg, the fourth son of a postal clerk. He was raised and educated in East Germany (the German Democratic Republic — GDR), obtaining his high-school diploma (&quot;Gymnasium&quot; &quot;Abitur&quot;) in 1958, and apprenticed as an industrial salesman.

He had joined the regime-directed Free German Youth in 1956, aiming at a sporting career as a decathlete. However, he also engaged in the barely tolerated youth organisation of the East German Protestant Church. Dutschke allowed that religion played an &quot;important role&quot; in his life: that he &quot;incorporated&quot; its &quot;fantastical explanation of the nature of man and his possibilities&quot; into his later political work.For me, the decisive question, from a real historical point of view, was always: What was Jesus actually doing there? How did he want to change his society and what means did he use? That has always been the crucial question for me. For me, the question of transcendence is also a question of real history, how is the existing society to be transcended, a new design for a future society, that is perhaps materialistic transcendence.In Easter 1963, he wrote: Jesus is risen. The decisive revolution in world history has happened – a revolution of all-conquering love. If people would fully receive this revealed love into their own existence, into the reality of the &#x27;now&#x27;, then the logic of insanity could no longer continue.It was in this religious milieu outside of approved party and state structures, that Dutschke developed the courage (at the cost of any prospect of further education) to refuse compulsory service in the National People&#x27;s Army and to encourage others to likewise resist conscription. Dutschke also cited the impact of the Hungarian Uprising of 1956. Its mobilization in workers&#x27; councils suggested to him a democratic socialism beyond the official line of the GDR&#x27;s governing Socialist Unity Party (but consistent with his reading of the Polish and German revolutionary and theorist, Rosa Luxemburg).

Refused his chosen course of study in sports journalism, in October 1960 Dutschke began regularly crossing into West Berlin to attend the Askanisches Gymnasium in Berlin-Tempelhof. With his new Abitur, he secured a job (working for nine months) with the Axel Springer tabloid, &quot;Bild Zeitung.&quot;

On 10 August 1961, just three days before the restrictions of Barbed Wire Sunday were introduced to close passage to the west, Dutschke registered as a refugee at the Marienfelde transit camp. On 14 August, Dutschke and some friends tried to tear down part of what was to become the &quot;Berlin Wall&quot; with a rope and threw leaflets over it. It was his first political action.

== Student political activist, 1960s ==

=== The Free University and &quot;Subversive Action&quot; ===
Dutschke enrolled at the Free University in West Berlin. Formed in 1948 by students abandoning the Communist Party-controlled Humboldt University in East Berlin, the constitution of the new school incorporated a degree of student representation unknown elsewhere in Germany. But the &quot;democratic&quot; faculty and city officials appeared to Dutschke and his classmates to have broken faith with the model of student co-determination. At senate meetings they confronted student delegates with common positions decided in advance.

Dutschke&#x27;s scepticism with regard to the democratic credentials of the new institutions in the West were reinforced by his study of sociology, ethnology, philosophy and history under Richard Löwenthal and Klaus Meschkat. He was introduced to the existentialist theories of Martin Heidegger, Karl Jaspers and Jean-Paul Sartre, to György Lukács&#x27;s theories of reification and class consciousness, and to the critical sociology of the Frankfurt School. Together these sources provided links with the pre-Hitler and pre-Stalin left and encouraged alternative, libertarian interpretations of Marx and of labour history. While increasingly engaged in consciously Marxist polemics, bolstered by his reading of the socialist theologians Karl Barth and Paul Tillich, Dutschke retained an emphasis on individual conscience and freedom of action.

Dutschke believed he had found the means of transforming these critical perspectives into &quot;praxis&quot; in the dissonant, consciousness-raising provocations of the Situationists (in the propositions of Guy Debord, Rauul Vaneigem, Ivan Chtcheglov and others). In 1963 Dutschke joined the group Subversive Action (&quot;Subversiven Aktion&quot;), conceived as the German branch of the Situationist International. He co-edited their paper &quot;Anschlag,&quot; to which he contributed articles on the revolutionary potential of developments in the Third World.

In December 1964, Dutschke&#x27;s group joined a demonstration against the state visit of the Congolese Prime Minister Moïse Tschombé. Dutschke spontaneously led the protesters toward Schöneberg Town Hall, seat of the West Berlin House of Representatives, where Tschombé is said to have been hit “full in the face” with tomatoes. Dutschke described this action as the “beginning of our cultural revolution”.

=== SDS, the strategy of confrontation ===
In 1964, Dutschke&#x27;s group entered the German Socialist Students Union (&quot;Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund&quot;), the former collegiate wing of the Social Democrats (SPD). The SDS had been expelled from the moderate SPD for its unreconstructed leftism, although this had amounted to little more than organising lectures on Marxism.

Dutschke, elected in 1965 to the political council of the West Berlin SDS, in the face of some considerable resistance argued for confrontations in the university and on the streets. The theory as expounded by Dutschke in relation to protests against the Vietnam War, which soon dominated the agenda, was that &quot;systematic, limited and controlled confrontations with the power structure&quot; would &quot;force the representative &#x27;democracy&#x27; to show openly its class character, its authoritarianism, ... to expose itself as a &#x27;dictatorship of force&#x27;&quot;. The awareness produced by such provocations would free people to rethink democratic theory and practice.

Dutschke and his faction had an important ally in Michael Vester, SDS vice-president and international secretary. Vester, who had studied in the US in 1961–62, and worked extensively with the American SDS (Students for a Democratic Society), introduced the theories of the American New Left and supported the call for “direct action” and civil disobedience.

In April 1965 Dutschke traveled with an SDS group to the Soviet Union. His hosts, who would have been aware of his critical, in their view anti-Soviet, commentary in &quot;Anschlag,&quot; classified him as a Trotskyite. On his return in May 1965, his group&#x27;s target was the United States, driven in particular by outrage over its invasion of the Dominican Republic.

In the summer of 1965 Dutschke took part in student protests over the Free University&#x27;s refusal of speaking rights to the writer Erich Kuby. This was a prelude to a sit-in at the university in June the following year. Just as in the Berkeley Free Speech Movement two years earlier, West Berlin students were making a connection between the imperiousness of the university authorities and the broader absence of democratic practice.

=== Marriage to Gretchen Klotz and rejection of free-love commune ===
On 23 March 1966, Dutschke privately married the German-American theology student Gretchen Klotz. She credits herself with making her husband aware of the misogyny in their revolutionary ranks: “What shocked me was, when the women talked in meetings, the men laughed. I said to Rudi ‘this is impossible’ but I don&#x27;t think he was aware of it up to that point, he couldn&#x27;t see it before then&quot;. 

The couple declined invitations to join a newly founded residential Kommune in West Berlin, suggesting that in opposing permanent couple relationships the group were merely substituting a “bourgeois principle of exchange under pseudo-revolutionary auspices”. They had three children together.

Shortly after the birth of their first child, a son they named Hosea-Che, Dutschke and Klotz were forced to leave their apartment after the appearance of threatening graffiti (“Gas Dutschke!”) and attacks using smoke bombs and excrement. The CSU member of the Bundestag, Franz Xaver Unertl, described Dutschke as an &quot;unwashed, lousy and filthy creature&quot;.

=== Revolutionary &quot;voluntarist&quot; ===
On 2 June 1967, SDS member Benno Ohnesorg was shot and killed by a policeman in West Berlin. Heeding Ulrike Meinhof&#x27;s call in the journal &quot;konkret&quot;, he had been among students protesting a visit by the Shah of Iran. Writing in &quot;konkret&quot; (since revealed to have been subsidised by the East Germans) Sebastian Haffner argued that &quot;with the student pogrom of 2 June 1967 fascism in West Berlin had thrown off its mask&quot;. Outrage was directed not only at the city authorities. Dutschke called for the expropriation of his (and Haffner&#x27;s) former employer, the conservative Axel Springer Press, which at that time controlled around 67 percent of the leading media in West Berlin. Along with many on the left, he accused the Springer press of incitement (the response of Springer&#x27;s &quot;Bild Zeitung&quot; to the death was “Students threaten, We shoot back”). A general wave of student protest shook the universities and major cities. Springer offices were attacked and print and distribution operations disrupted.

At a hastily convened university congress in Hanover, the sociologist and philosopher Jürgen Habermas charged Dutschke with a “voluntarism” akin &quot;to leftist fascism&quot;. He argued that Dutschke&#x27;s notion of calculated disturbance to unmask the veiled force of the state was mistaken. There was not a revolutionary situation in Germany. Dutschke, he said, was putting the lives of other students at risk.

Dutschke responded that he was honoured by the accusation of voluntarism; Habermas&#x27;s “objectivity” served only to hold back a rising movement. In his diary Dutschke cited Che Guevara: “Revolutionaries must not just wait for the objective conditions for a revolution. By creating a popular ‘armed focus’ they can create the objective conditions for a revolution by subjective initiative&quot;. After Guevara&#x27;s death as a guerrilla in Bolivia in October 1967, Dutschke and the Chilean Gaston Salvatore translated and wrote an introduction to the Argentinian&#x27;s last public statement, &quot;Message to the Tricontinental&quot;, with its famous appeal for &quot;two, three, many Vietnams&quot;.

Within a month, Dutschke recognized that the campaign against Springer, from which both trade unions and the liberal press distanced themselves, could not &quot;mobilise the masses&quot; and called for a halt. Vietnam, and German complicity in the escalating American war, was to be the new focus.

=== Vietnam mobilisation ===
In 1966, Dutschke and the SDS had staged the &quot;Vietnam – Analysis of an Example&quot; congress at the University of Frankfurt, with Herbert Marcuse as the main speaker and around 2,200 students and trade unionists attending. Following the example of the Amsterdam Provo movement they began &quot;walking demonstrations&quot; against the Vietnam War on Kurfürstendamm in West Berlin. These were broken up by riot police and along with 84 others, the Dutschkes were arrested. It was at this point in December 1966 that the press began to refer Dutschke as the &quot;spokesman for the SDS&quot;.

On 21 October 1967 Dutschke joined about 10,000 people on the streets of West Berlin, while 250,000 anti-war protesters besieged the Pentagon in Washington. On Christmas Eve, he led SDS members to the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church with banners displaying the picture of a tortured Vietnamese and Jesus&#x27;s words &quot;Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me&quot; (Matthew 25.40). Dutschke was prevented from speaking from the pulpit by a bloody blow to the head.

At the beginning of 1968, the SDS decided to organise an international conference in West Berlin, a site chosen as the &quot;intersection&quot; of the rival Cold War blocs and as a &quot;provocation&quot; to the city&#x27;s American military presence. After the Free University refused to host the conference, and despite a concerted campaign in the Springer press and opposition in the Berlin Senate, the Technische Universität Berlin agreed to host the two-day event.

Forty-four socialist-youth delegations from fourteen countries (including the FDJ from East Germany) attended. In addition to Dutschke, who appeared to direct much of the discussion, they were addressed by Alain Krivine and Daniel Bensaïd (both &quot;Jeunesse Communiste Révolutionnaire,&quot; JCR) as well as Daniel Cohn-Bendit (&quot;Liaison d&#x27;Étudiants Anarchistes&quot;) from France, Tariq Ali and Robin Blackburn (New Left Review and Vietnam Solidarity Campaign) from Great Britain, Bahman Nirumand (of the international Confederation of Iranian Students) and Bernardine Dohrn (Students for a Democratic Society) from the USA. The floor was also given to Dutschke&#x27;s friend, the veteran Belgian Trotskyist Ernest Mandel. Characterising the national liberation struggle of the Vietnamese people as an active front in a worldwide socialist revolution, the final declaration charged &quot;US imperialism&quot; with &quot;trying to incorporate the Western European metropolises into its policy of colonial counterrevolution via NATO&quot;.

Under the slogan &quot;Smash NATO,&quot; and encouraging American soldiers stationed in West Berlin to desert en masse, Dutschke wanted to lead the closing demonstration of more than 15,000 people (&quot;above a sea of red flags rose huge portraits of Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht, Che Guevara, and Ho Chi Minh&quot;) in a march on the U.S. Army McNair Barracks in Berlin-Lichterfelde. But once the U.S. Command cautioned that it would use force to defend the barracks, and following discussions with the novelist Günter Grass, Bishop Kurt Scharf and the former West Berlin mayor Heinrich Albertz, Dutschke was persuaded that this was a provocation from which it would be best to desist. He called on the students to &quot;leave here quietly and spread out in small groups across the city to distribute your pamphlets&quot;.

Three days later, on 21 February 1968, at a counter demonstration of some 60,000 West Berliners organized by the Berlin Senate and Springer Press at Schöneberg Town Hall, there were placards identifying Dutschke as &quot;The Enemy of the People [&quot;Volkfeind&quot;] no. 1&quot;. When the crowd mistook a young man for Dutschke, they pushed him to the ground and chased him to a police van, which they then almost toppled over.

=== Rejects vanguardist model ===
From the summer of 1967, Ernest Mandel had been trying persuade Dutschke to transform the Marxist wing of the SDS into a revolutionary socialist youth organisation on the model of the French JCR; to &quot;select the best comrades to create an organisation within the SDS ... to form a cadre ... and to build a vanguard from inside the social-democratic union.&quot; Klaus Meschkat, who had founded the rival &quot;Republikanischer Club&quot; in response to what he saw as the anarchist tendency within the SDS, did not believe this strategy was viable. He advised Mandel that Dutschke was able to maintain his position in the SDS only by virtue of his political flexibility.

In a televised interview with Gunther Gaus in October 1967, Dutschke was unequivocal: &quot;We are not a Leninist cadre party, we are a completely decentralised organisation&quot;. It was something he claimed was a &quot;great advantage&quot;. Because the SDS was &quot;set up in a decentralised manner&quot; it was &quot;in a position to set the movement in motion at any time, that is, people are always ready to participate, we don&#x27;t need to force them, it is a voluntary matter&quot;. They know that there is no &quot;apparatus&quot; giving precedence to the interests of office holders or professional politicians.

At the same time, Dutschke asserted that, while it might be otherwise for the right, &quot;in organised late capitalism&quot; there could be &quot;no victory for left minorities&quot;. The SDS remained only a small group. In West Berlin, he suggested it might have &quot;90 very active people and maybe 300, 400 active people&quot;, and in the wider movement, four to five thousand people ready to take part in its &quot;awareness-raising events&quot; and campaigns.

=== Revolution as a &quot;march through institutions&quot; ===
&quot;Revolution&quot;, Dutschke argued, &quot;is a long complicated process in which people have to change&quot;, and such change is effected only by a &quot;long march through the institutions&quot;. By this he meant not the pushing aside of Nazi holdovers and conservative careerists in an attempt to promote reform from within existing structures, but instead the creation of new institutions to replace those that are irredeemable in their present state.

These institutions include the existing parliamentary system and its party-political apparatus. Such a system does not represent &quot;the real interests of our people&quot;, which Dutschke described to Gaus as &quot;the right to reunification, safeguarding jobs, safeguarding state finances, the reordering of the economy&quot;. The problem is that &quot;there is a total separation between the representatives in parliament and the people&quot; and consequently no &quot;critical dialogue&quot;. Elections are held every four years, and there is a chance to confirm existing parties, but &quot;less and less&quot; an opportunity to endorse new parties &quot;and thus new alternatives to the existing order&quot;. The trade unions he also deemed “absolutely unsuitable for democratization from below&quot;.

The place of universities in this schema remained unclear. On the one hand, Dutschke dismissed them as &quot;factories&quot; geared to the production of &quot;Fachidioten&quot; (people incapable of critical thought beyond their narrowly-defined field of training). On the other, he cast them in the role of “safety zones&quot; and &quot;social bases&quot; from which the march of change could be initiated. In 1966, at the SDS delegates&#x27; conference, he called for “the organization of the permanent counter-university as a basis for the politicization of universities”. Following the example of similar experiments at the University of California, Berkeley and the Paris Sorbonne, in November 1967 he attempted to promote the &quot;Critical University&quot; through a series of seminars at the FU.

=== The APO and support for the Prague Spring ===
Dutschke did not share the reformist euphoria surrounding Willy Brandt, the former anti-Nazi resister and West Berlin mayor who, as junior partner to the ruling Christian Democrats, led the Social Democrats for the first time into federal government in December 1966. Dutschke joined calls for an extra-parliamentary opposition &quot;(Außerparlamentarische Opposition&quot;, APO). This loose grouping of disaffected social democrats, militant trade unionists, students and writers believed that with the formation Grand Coalition the Federal Republic had abandoned any semblance of a democratic counterweight to vested interests. &quot;We have to say no&quot;, declared Dutschke, to a parliament in which &quot;we are no longer represented! We have to say no to a grand coalition ... created to maintain the rule of the government clique, the bureaucratic oligarchy&quot;.

At the same time, Dutschke was concerned that student protests and the APO not be instrumentalised by Soviet and East German propaganda. In March 1968 the Dutschkes traveled to Czechoslovakia in solidarity with the Prague Spring. In two lectures for the Christian Peace Conference (CFK) (and with citations from Marx&#x27;s &quot;Theses on Feuerbach&quot;) he encouraged Czech students to combine socialism and civil rights.

=== The right to German reunification ===
The interview in October 1967 on Gaus&#x27;s SWR programme &quot;Zur Person&quot; gave Dutschke the kind of media exposure reserved for the Federal Republic&#x27;s leading statesmen and intellectuals. It also highlighted a facet of Dutschke thinking that distinguished him from, and disturbed, many of his West German comrades in the SDS. Gaus&#x27;s first question to Dutschke was why he wished to upend the republic&#x27;s social order. Dutschke replied first with a classic socialist observation:
[In 1918] the German workers &#x27;and soldiers&#x27; councils fought for the eight-hour day. In 1967 our workers worked a measly four or five hours less a week. And that with a tremendous development of the productive forces, the technical achievements, which could really bring about a very, very great reduction in working hours. Instead, in the interests of the ruling order, working-time reduction is resisted so as to maintain the lack of consciousness that the [long] hours induce.
Then, as an illustration of this system-induced lack of political consciousness, Dutschke offered as examples not the mendacity of the mass-circulation Springer Press, the assassination of Ohnesorg, German complicity in the Vietnam war or any other contemporary issues that might have been anticipated from his billing as a generational spokesman, but instead the lack of progress on German re-unification.For example: after the Second World War, governments talked incessantly of reunification. But in twenty years and more instead of reunification we have had a succession of governments that we can describe as institutional instruments for lying, for half-truths, for distortions. The people are not being told the truth. There is no dialogue with the masses, no critical dialogue that could explain what is going on in this society: why the economic miracle [&quot;Wirtschaftswunder&quot;] suddenly came to an end; why no progress has been made on the question of reunification?
Dutscke believed that, even after Hitler, Germans had the right to decide for themselves whether to live in a reunified state. Ironically, no prominent West German stood closer to Dutschke on this point than his nemesis Axel Springer. In what he described as the &quot;central political event of my life&quot;, in 1958 Springer had gone to Moscow to personally press the case for an &quot;Austrian solution&quot;: national unity in return for permanent neutrality. The difference was that German neutrality for Dutschke was a condition not only for national unity but for social transformation.
We criticise the GDR and we have the task of overthrowing capitalist rule in the Federal Republic in order to make a whole Germany possible, which is not identical with the GDR, which really has nothing in common with today&#x27;s Federal Republic, but a whole Germany, where producers, students, workers and housewives, the different strata of the people, can really represent their interests.
Dutschke confessed himself perplexed as to why the German left did not &quot;think nationally&quot;; the socialist opposition in the GDR and the Federal Republic should work together, recognizing that &quot;the GDR is not the better Germany. But it is part of Germany&quot;. The &quot;socialist reunification of Germany&quot; would to undermine the &quot;idiocy of the East-West antagonism&quot; and the hegemony of the superpowers in Central Europe.

In June 1967, Dutschke proposed that West Berlin, then still under Western Allied sovereignty, declare itself a council republic. &quot;West Berlin supported by direct council democracy&quot; could &quot;be a strategic transmission belt for the future reunification of Germany,&quot; triggering by its example an intellectual, and ultimately also political, upheaval in both German states.

==Attempted assassination and its aftermath==
=== The shooting and protest reaction ===
On his return from Prague, Dutschke wanted to live with his wife for one to two years in the US and to study Latin American liberation movements. The main reason he gave was that he objected in principle to the role in which he had been cast by the media, as leader of the APO. The APO should not require a leader, and should demonstrate initiative without his presence. He had prepared the move and in the interim had accepted an invitation to a 1 May demonstration in Paris when, on 11 April 1968 he was shot.

Josef Bachmann, his assailant, a builder&#x27;s labourer and petty criminal, had left East Germany as a child. In 1961, aged 17, he made contact with a Neo-Nazi cell in Peine with whom he handled weapons. Bachman testified that the immediate inspiration for his attack was the assassination the week before of Martin Luther King Jr. He had waited for Dutschke outside the SDS office on Kurfürstendamm. When the student leader stepped out of the office to collect a prescription for his newborn son Hosea Che, Bachmann approached him, shouting &quot;you dirty, communist pig&quot;, and fired three shots striking him twice in the head and once in the shoulder. Bachmann fled to a nearby basement, where, after a shootout with the police, he was arrested.

Springer once again was accused of complicity (&quot;Bild schoss mit!&quot;). Demonstrators tried to storm the Springer house in Berlin and set fire to &quot;Bild&quot; delivery vans. The Hamburg print shop was besieged to prevent the paper leaving the presses, and in Munich a demonstrator and a policeman were killed after students ransacked the &quot;Bild&quot; editorial offices. There were over a thousand arrests.

The Federal Chancellor Kurt Kiesinger cut short his Easter holiday, claiming on his return to Bonn that a planned political action was in progress which had a &quot;revolutionary character&quot;. He appealed to all those who felt responsible for the maintenance of democracy to show vigilance and calm.

Borrowing the American SDS slogan &quot;From Protest to Resistance&quot;, in &quot;konkret&quot; Ulrike Meinhof suggested the events marked a new phase in the struggle for socialism, and famously intoned:Protest is when I say that I don’t like this and that. Resistance is when I make sure that the things I don’t like no longer occur. Protest is when I say I will no longer go along with it. Resistance is when I make sure that no one else goes along with it anymore either.

=== England, Ireland, Denmark ===
Dutschke survived, but the attack left him with aphasia, brain damage, memory loss, epileptic seizures and several other health problems. The Dutschkes began a time of convalescence in Italy, guest of the composer Hans-Werner Henze. Once the press discovered their presence, and after Canada, the Netherlands and Belgium had denied them entry, they left for England. Clare Hall at the University of Cambridge had offered Dutschke the opportunity to complete his doctoral thesis (an analysis of the early Commintern and the differences between Asian and European paths to socialism). For ten days in May 1969 he returned to the Federal Republic to discuss the future of the APO with, among others, Ulrike Meinhof. He seemed to welcome the fact that many left groups wanted to go their own way and, if only on the basis of his health, ruled out a further strategizing role for himself. Back in England, however, the Labour government denied him a student visa. Neal Ascherson arranged for refuge in Ireland.

Between January and March 1969, the Dutschkes were guests, outside Dublin, of Conor Cruise O&#x27;Brien, who had been distinguished since his UN service during the Congo Crisis by his criticism of U.S. policy both in Vietnam and at home in the repression of the Black Panthers. During their stay, Rudi and Gretchen Dutschke were visited by their lawyer Horst Mahler, who tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade them to support his underground activity in the group that was to become the Red Army Faction (the &quot;Baader Meinhof Gang&quot;).

As the student movement back home splintered and radicalized, the Dutschkes considered staying in Ireland, but returned to the UK in mid-March 1969, proposing as a condition that Rudi avoid engaging in political activity. At the beginning of 1971 it was an undertaking the UK Home Office believed he had breached, ruling that his meetings with visitors from Germany, Israel, Jordan, Chile and the United States had &quot;far exceeded normal social activities&quot;. In a House of Commons debate on the question of his exclusion, which Labour now in opposition protested, Dutschke was described from governing Conservative benches as &quot;a disciple of Professor Marcuse, who is the patron saint of the urban guerrillas and who is out to destroy the society we hold dear&quot;. The University of Aarhus offered him a position teaching sociology and the Dutschkes moved to Denmark.

== Re-engagement in the 1970s ==

=== Solidarity with East Bloc dissidents ===
Dutschke visited the Federal Republic again in May 1972. He sought talks with trade unionists and social democrats, including former president Gustav Heinemann, whose vision of a non-aligned, demilitarized Germany as a whole he shared. In July 1972 he visited East Berlin several times, meeting Wolf Biermann, with whom he remained friends. He later made contact with Robert Havemann and Rudolf Bahro and East-Bloc dissidents such as Milan Horáček and Adam Michnik, among others.

In 1973 he finally received his doctorate from the Free University of Berlin. At the Free University he participated in a research project by the German Research Foundation comparing the labor-market regimes of the Federal Republic, the GDR and the USSR.

Increasingly, Dutschke was associated with concerns for civil and political rights. Having renewed contact with East Bloc dissidents, in West Germany and abroad (in Norway and in Italy), he critically reviewed the rights record of Warsaw Pact states as well as of the Federal Republic where he made an issue of the bans (&quot;Berufsverbot&quot;) on the professional employment of those deemed radical (anti-constitutional) leftists. After Rudolf Bahro was sentenced to eight years in prison in the GDR, Dutschke organized and led the Bahro Solidarity Congress in West Berlin in November 1978.

In October 1979, sensing that Federal Chancellor Helmut Schmidt was impatient with questioning at a press conference with Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party Hua Guofeng, Dutschke, representing the left-wing daily &quot;taz&quot;, reminded the Chancellor that he was in presence of a free press, not the hierarchical Bundeswehr nor the totalitarian regimes of Beijing, Moscow or East Berlin. Having breached decorum, he was then unable to pose his intended question: why had the chancellor failed to raise with his guest the issue of human rights in China?

=== On political violence ===
While Dutschke was touring West Germany in 1972, the Red Army Faction launched their &quot;May offensive&quot;, a series of bombings directed at the police and judiciary, the U.S. army presence and the Springer press, which together killed 4 people and injured 41. In November 1974, Holger Meins, one of the three RAF members detained and convicted in the wake of these attacks, died on hunger strike. Dutschke created a political furore when, at the graveside, he declared &quot;Holger, the struggle continues!&quot;

The direct actions and provocations that Dutschke defended as a means of &quot;unmasking the authoritarian structures&quot; of capitalist society, did not in principle exclude armed violence. In July 1967, in discussions following a lecture by Marcuse on &quot;The End of Utopia&quot;, Dutschke dismissed &quot;pacifism on principle&quot; as counterrevolutionary. Insisting on the need to think in terms of a global system, he argued for &quot;full identification with the necessity of revolutionary terrorism and revolutionary struggle in the Third World&quot; and recognition that this solidarity was indispensable to &quot;the development of forms of resistance in our country&quot;. At the SDS delegate conference in Frankfurt in September 1967, Dutschke proposed the creation of urban &quot;sabotage and &quot;refusnik&quot; guerrilla&quot; (&quot;Sabotage und Verweigerungsguerilla&quot;) groups.

Although Dutschke had assured Gaus that &quot;we fight so that it need never come to the point of having to reach for arms,&quot; Gretchen Dutschke concedes they had considered the possibility of taking direct violent action. Early in 1968 the young parents had transported explosives (provided by the Milan publisher Giangiacomo Feltrinelli) through Berlin in a pram under their newborn son. To express their solidarity with the Vietnamese, Dutschke and his friends were considering using the explosives to carry out attacks on ships carrying war materiel, railroad tracks or overhead lines. But recognizing the risk of injury to people, they thought better of it, and had the dynamite quietly dropped into the sea.

As the RAF, who showed no such scruples, continued their attacks, the Dutschkes argued that they &quot;would destroy the achievements the &#x27;68 movement had fought for.&quot; Dutschke sought to distance himself from the activities of the RAF by noting that when he had considered violence it had been directed at things, not people. In an interview, shortly before he was shot, Dutschke acknowledged only &quot;one terror – that is the terror against inhuman machineries. To blow up Springer&#x27;s printing machinery without destroying people, that seems to me to be an emancipating act&quot;.

In December 1978, reflecting on the turmoil of the preceding decade, Dutschke was more emphatic: Individual terror is anti-mass and anti-humanist. Every small citizens&#x27; initiative, every political and social youth, women, unemployed, pensioner and class struggle movement is a hundred times more valuable and qualitatively different than the most spectacular action of individual terror.

=== &quot;Pro Patria Socialist&quot; ===
In the 1970s, Dutschke contended with charges of guilt by intellectual association not only with terrorism on the left but also with nationalism on the right. He returned, it seemed increasingly, to the theme of German re-unification.

In November 1974, in Meinhof&#x27;s former magazine &quot;konkret&quot;, under the title “Pro Patria Sozi?” Dutschke proposed that &quot;the struggle for national independence is ... becoming an elementary point of the socialist struggle&quot;. In a paper prepared for a meeting to create an organisational basis for the “New Left” in Hanover in 1975, Dutschke wrote: “In the context of a German socialist transition program, the social question cannot be separated from the national question – and this Dialectic has not stopped at the Elbe.” It was time, he argued, to recognize that the attempt by the “great powers” to pacify Central Europe by dividing Germany had failed. It was leading instead to &quot;ever increasing militarization&quot;.

In the autumn of 1976 in an interview with a Stuttgart school newspaper, Dutschke suggested that in other countries the left had a distinct advantage: they could invoke “a national identity”, not of the bourgeoisie, but &quot;of the people and the class in relation to the social movement.&quot; If the question of socialism was to be posed in Germany, it was essential that we overcome the country&#x27;s &quot;special loss of identity&quot; (&quot;Identitätsverlust&quot;) after World War II, so that we too could &quot;look outwards ... both feet on our ground&quot;. &quot;The class struggle&quot;, he insisted, &quot;is international, but its form is national&quot;.

On the West German left there was very little understanding of such &quot;national thinking&quot;. Arno Klönne, peace campaigner and early guiding spirit of the APO, responded to Dutschke&#x27;s &quot;thesis on the national question&quot; with an article entitled: “Be careful, national socialists!”.

===Green ===
From 1976 Dutschke was a member of the &quot;Socialist Bureau&quot;, created after the final dissolution of the SDS. He was an advocate for a new &quot;eco-socialist&quot; constellation that would embrace activists in the anti-nuclear, anti-war, feminist and environmentalist movements but, in contrast to the APO of the sixties, would necessarily exclude Leninists (the communists, the &quot;K-gruppen&quot;) and others not in sympathy to the spirit and practice of citizen initiatives (&quot;Bürgerinitiativen&quot;) and of grass-roots democracy. Dutschke established his credentials with the new generation of activists by participating in the attempted occupation of a nuclear power construction site, just over the border from Denmark, at Brokdorf, Schleswig-Hollstein.

From 1978 he campaigned with others for a green alternative list that should take part in the upcoming European elections. In June 1979 Joseph Beuys persuaded him to make joint campaign appearances. His appearance in Bremen, just three days before polling in the city-state elections, was credited with pushing the Green List over the five percent parliamentary threshold.

The first green-alternative alliance, and the first new left political force, to be represented in a German parliament, the Bremen Greens elected Dutschke as a delegate for the founding congress for a federal Green Party planned for mid-January 1980. The Greens then were promising an &quot;anti-party party&quot;; a party which, true to their origins in environmentalist, feminist, and anti-war/anti-nuclear protest would remain a grass-roots democratic (&quot;basisdemokratische&quot;) movement.

In his last major appearance at pre-congress of the Greens in Offenbach am Main, Dutschke again raised the “German Question”. He advocated the right of nations to self-determination and thus a right of resistance to the military blocs in West and East. Nobody else raised this issue because it contradicted the majority position of strict nonviolence and pacifism.

==Death and tributes==
Dutschke had continued to struggle with health problems due to brain injuries sustained in the assassination attempt against him. On 24 December 1979, he had an epileptic seizure in the bathtub and drowned, dying at age 39. Dutschke was survived by his American wife Gretchen Dutschke-Klotz whom he had married in 1966, and by their two children Hosea Che Dutschke (named after the Old Testament minor prophet Hosea and Che Guevara), and sister Polly Nicole Dutschke, both born in 1968. They had a third child, Rudi-Marek Dutschke (named after a Bulgarian Communist), born in 1980 after his father&#x27;s death.

In what was reported as a symbolic laying to rest of their &quot;hopes of the 1960s for social change&quot;, thousands attended Dutschke&#x27;s funeral service at St Anne&#x27;s Parish Church (St. Annen Dorfkirche) in Dahlem, Berlin. The service was conducted by Rev. Helmut Gollwitzer, a Protestant theologian renowned as a member, under the Nazis, of the dissident Confessing Church movement. Gollwitzer praised Dutschke as a man who had &quot;fought passionately, but not fanatically, for a more humane world&quot;, and had sought &quot;a unity of socialism and Christianity&quot;. In a party statement, West Berlin&#x27;s governing Social Democrats described Dutschke&#x27;s early death as &quot;the terrible price he had to pay for his attempts to change a society whose politicians and news media showed a lack of understanding, maturity, and tolerance&quot;.

In 2018, it emerged that Rudolf Augstein, publisher of &quot;Der Spiegel&quot;, provided financial support to Dutschke so he could continue to work on his dissertations. Between 1970 and 1973, he paid 1,000 German Marks per year. At the same time they started an exchange of letters in which they also discussed the student revolts.

== Memorials ==
There is a memorial stone (&quot;Gedenktafel&quot;) laid in pavement in front of Kurfürstendamm 141, Berlin, marking the spot where Dutschke was shot in 1969. It reads (translated from the German): &quot;Attack on Rudi Dutschke, April 11, 1968. As a late complication of the wound he received, Dutschke died in 1979. The student movement lost one of their most outstanding personalities&quot;.

In Berlin-Kreuzberg there is a Rudi-Dutschke-Straße. As a continuation of Oranienstrasse, the street leads from Lindenstrasse/Axel-Springer-Strasse to Friedrichstrasse, where it merges into Kochstrasse. Rudi-Dutschke-Strasse was created after years of political and legal disputes by renaming the eastern section of Kochstrasse. The renaming, which was suggested by the national daily newspaper &quot;Die Tageszeitung (taz)&quot;, was completed on 30 April 2008 with the unveiling of a street sign on the corner of Rudi-Dutschke-/Axel-Springer-Straße in front of the Axel Springer high-rise. Acknowledging the controversy, &quot;Die Tageszeitung&quot; published the objections of the former CDU parliamentarian Gerd Langguth, author of &quot;Mythos ’68 – Die Gewaltphilosophie von Rudi Dutschke&quot; (The Myth of &#x27;68: The Violent Philosophy of Rudi Dutschke) (2001). &quot;Only those who can prove that Dutschke was an irreproachable democrat&quot;, Langguth argued, &quot;should advocate renaming a traditional Berlin street after a historically highly controversial figure&quot;.

==Legacy==
In her 2018 memoir, &quot;1968: Worauf wir stolz sein dürfen&quot; (“What we can be proud of”), Gretchen Dutschke-Klotz argues that her husband helped advance an anti-authoritarian revolution in the German Federal Republic, and that this served in turn to protect the republic against the right-wing extremism and nationalist populism that had infected many of its neighbors. She believes that Germany has &quot;held out pretty well so far against the extreme right-wing, and that has to do with the democratization process and culture revolution which the 68ers [Rudi Dutschke among them] carried out. It’s still having an effect.”

Others have taken a different view. The Bavarian Information Center against Extremism (&quot;BIGE&quot;) notes that some of Dutschke&#x27;s remarks on the German question have been cited by right-wing extremists. On the 40th anniversary of his death, the neo-Nazi grouping The Third Way &quot;(III. Weg&quot;) claimed that if he were alive Dutschke would be one of them (&quot;&quot;Rudi Dutschke wäre heute einer von uns!&quot;“). As evidence for this thesis, reference is made to the biographies of some of his former comrades: Horst Mahler, whose solicitation on behalf of the nascent RAF the Dutschkes rejected in Dublin, had been in a right-wing Studentenverbindung before joining Dutschke in the SDS and, after serving ten years in prison for his RAF activity has twice been imprisoned for Holocaust denial. Perhaps more significant is the case of Bernd Rabehl, who, in a biography of his former comrade, has sought to justify his own turn to right-wing extremism by characterising Dutschke&#x27;s position as &quot;national revolutionary&quot;

Johannes Agnoli, who spoke alongside Dutschke at the Vietnam Congress, denies any such &quot;national revolutionary departure&quot; in their frequent debates. Accounting him an opponent within the SDS, Dutschke had not worked with Rabehl politically since 1966, and subsequently dismissed him as a cynical opportunist. Gretchen Dutschke-Klotz insists that: Rudi wanted to abolish subservience as a personality trait of German identity. [...] He was not a &#x27;national revolutionary&#x27; but an internationalist socialist who, unlike others, had understood that it was politically wrong to ignore the national question. [...] He was looking for something completely new that did not follow the authoritarian, national-chauvinist German past. Those, like Ralf Dahrendorf, satisfied that Dutschke was &quot;a decent, honest and trustworthy man,&quot; can nonetheless take a dismissive view of his contributions. Reviewing Dutschke&#x27;s theories and social science research, Dahrendorf found him &quot;muddle-headed&quot; and with no lasting legacy: &quot;I don&#x27;t know anyone who would say: that was Dutschke&#x27;s idea, we have to pursue it now.&quot;
==Works==
* (1963–1979).

==Bibliography==
* Baer, Willi, Karl-Heinz Dellwo (2012), &quot;Rudi Dutschke – Aufrecht Gehen. 1968 und der libertäre Kommunismus,&quot; Laika, Hamburg, .
* Chaussy, Ulrich (2018). &quot;Rudi Dutschke. Die Biographie&quot;. Droemer eBook. .
* Dutschke, Gretchen (2018). &quot;1968: Worauf wir stolz sein dürfen&quot;. Hamburg: Kursbuch Kulturstiftung, .
* Dutschke, Rudi-Marek (2001): &quot;Spuren meines Vaters.&quot; Kiepenheuer und Witsch, Köln, .
* Ditfurth, Jutta (2008): &quot;Rudi und Ulrike: Geschichte einer Freundschaft.&quot; Droemer Knaur, München, .
* Fichter, Tilman, Siegward Lönnendonker (2011), &quot;Dutschkes Deutschland. Der Sozialistische Deutsche Studentenbund, die nationale Frage und die DDR-Kritik von links.&quot; Klartext, Essen, .
* Karl, Michaela (2003), &quot;Rudi Dutschke – Revolutionär ohne Revolution.&quot; Neue Kritik, Frankfurt am Main, .
* Prien, Carsten (2015), &quot;Dutschkismus – die politische Theorie Rudi Dutschkes&quot;, Ousia Lesekreis Verlag, Seedorf, .

==See also==
* Kommune 1
* Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund
* Rudi Dutschke – German Wikipedia

==References==
==External links==
* 
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57218" start="0" end="45" title="Rudi Dutschke" label="Alfred Willi Rudolf &amp;quot;Rudi&amp;quot; Dutschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q558439" start="226" end="256" title="Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund" label="Socialist Students Union (SDS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="260" end="272" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q531996" start="306" end="354" title="Außerparlamentarische Opposition" label="&amp;quot;extra-parliamentary opposition&amp;quot; (APO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="379" end="388" title="Christian socialism" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="393" end="400" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="419" end="428" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="452" end="466" title="Leninism" label="Leninist model"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="527" end="539" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="576" end="592" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="723" end="739" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="769" end="775" title="Soviet Union" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="781" end="788" title="China" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="798" end="807" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="820" end="831" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006311" start="832" end="860" title="national liberation struggle" label="national liberation struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1157" end="1161" title="Cold War" label="bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="1388" end="1394" title="Green Party (Germany)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q622139" start="1614" end="1624" title="Nuthe-Urstromtal" label="Schönefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q622139" start="1638" end="1654" title="Nuthe-Urstromtal" label="Nuthe-Urstromtal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574146" start="1661" end="1672" title="Luckenwalde" label="Luckenwalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q700264" start="1674" end="1685" title="Province of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1751" end="1763" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1845" end="1854" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q708387" start="1867" end="1873" title="Abitur" label="Abitur"/>
<link wikidata="Q76845" start="1968" end="1985" title="Free German Youth" label="Free German Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q184654" start="2028" end="2038" title="decathlete" label="decathlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="2127" end="2144" title="Protestant Church in Germany" label="Protestant Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="2809" end="2815" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q155740" start="3312" end="3339" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="3435" end="3453" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="3525" end="3545" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="3599" end="3620" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="Socialist Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="3707" end="3721" title="Rosa Luxemburg" label="Rosa Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="3837" end="3848" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q363830" start="3895" end="3904" title="Tempelhof" label="Tempelhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q708387" start="3919" end="3925" title="Abitur" label="Abitur"/>
<link wikidata="Q216183" start="3979" end="3992" title="Axel Springer" label="Axel Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156203" start="4008" end="4020" title="Bild" label="Bild Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687224" start="4091" end="4109" title="Barbed Wire Sunday" label="Barbed Wire Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q882022" start="4196" end="4220" title="Marienfelde refugee transit camp" label="Marienfelde transit camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="4318" end="4329" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="4540" end="4555" title="Free University of Berlin" label="Free University"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="4559" end="4570" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="4641" end="4660" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Humboldt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="4664" end="4675" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="5186" end="5195" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="5197" end="5206" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="5208" end="5218" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q97771" start="5237" end="5254" title="Richard Löwenthal" label="Richard Löwenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="5300" end="5314" title="existentialism" label="existentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="5327" end="5343" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q76509" start="5345" end="5357" title="Karl Jaspers" label="Karl Jaspers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="5362" end="5378" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q151523" start="5383" end="5396" title="György Lukács" label="György Lukács"/>
<link wikidata="Q863448" start="5416" end="5427" title="Reification (Marxism)" label="reification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066261" start="5432" end="5451" title="class consciousness" label="class consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="5490" end="5506" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5559" end="5565" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="5574" end="5580" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852084" start="5614" end="5625" title="Libertarian socialism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="5645" end="5649" title="Karl Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="5723" end="5731" title="Polemic" label="polemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473" start="5787" end="5797" title="Karl Barth" label="Karl Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60104" start="5802" end="5814" title="Paul Tillich" label="Paul Tillich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247560" start="5991" end="5997" title="Praxis (process)" label="praxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="6064" end="6077" title="Situationist International" label="Situationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q298075" start="6102" end="6112" title="Guy Debord" label="Guy Debord"/>
<link wikidata="Q537924" start="6114" end="6128" title="Raoul Vaneigem" label="Rauul Vaneigem"/>
<link wikidata="Q704805" start="6130" end="6145" title="Ivan Chtcheglov" label="Ivan Chtcheglov"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="6283" end="6309" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="6553" end="6562" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congolese"/>
<link wikidata="Q334830" start="6578" end="6592" title="Moïse Tshombe" label="Moïse Tschombé"/>
<link wikidata="Q695194" start="6643" end="6663" title="Schöneberg Town Hall" label="Schöneberg Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q640859" start="6677" end="6713" title="Abgeordnetenhaus of Berlin" label="West Berlin House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q558439" start="6993" end="7032" title="Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund" label="Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="7075" end="7097" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats (SPD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="7250" end="7257" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="8153" end="8186" title="Students for a Democratic Society" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q160637" start="8229" end="8237" title="New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="8285" end="8303" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="8514" end="8524" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyite"/>
<link wikidata="Q955457" start="8641" end="8676" title="Dominican Civil War" label="invasion of the Dominican Republic."/>
<link wikidata="Q1352648" start="8812" end="8822" title="Erich Kuby" label="Erich Kuby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="8848" end="8854" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412282" start="8916" end="8945" title="Free Speech Movement" label="Berkeley Free Speech Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q104647" start="9268" end="9282" title="Gretchen Dutschke-Klotz" label="Gretchen Klotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="9341" end="9349" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780493" start="9663" end="9670" title="Kommune 1" label="Kommune"/>
<link wikidata="Q49763" start="10131" end="10134" title="Christian Social Union in Bavaria" label="CSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="10149" end="10158" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10160" end="10178" title=":de:Franz_Xaver_Unertl" label="Franz Xaver Unertl"/>
<link wikidata="Q57489" start="10328" end="10342" title="Benno Ohnesorg" label="Benno Ohnesorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76543" start="10402" end="10416" title="Ulrike Meinhof" label="Ulrike Meinhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q164199" start="10450" end="10457" title="konkret" label="konkret"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="10518" end="10530" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Shah of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q57535" start="10624" end="10641" title="Sebastian Haffner" label="Sebastian Haffner"/>
<link wikidata="Q216183" start="10908" end="10921" title="Axel Springer" label="Axel Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156203" start="11126" end="11138" title="Bild" label="Bild Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="11400" end="11407" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="11441" end="11456" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="11947" end="11958" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="12214" end="12221" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="12256" end="12263" title="Chile" label="Chilean"/>
<link wikidata="Q77528" start="12264" end="12280" title="Gaston Salvatore" label="Gaston Salvatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="12460" end="12468" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnams"/>
<link wikidata="Q820216" start="12911" end="12934" title="University of Frankfurt Institute for Social Research" label="University of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="12941" end="12956" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Herbert Marcuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140514" start="13073" end="13087" title="Provo (movement)" label="Provo movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q160272" start="13161" end="13175" title="Kurfürstendamm" label="Kurfürstendamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285897" start="13512" end="13544" title="March on the Pentagon" label="protesters besieged the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="13548" end="13558" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="13563" end="13576" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q153951" start="13604" end="13634" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="14108" end="14116" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q540130" start="14338" end="14351" title="Senate of Berlin" label="Berlin Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51985" start="14357" end="14386" title="Technische Universität Berlin" label="Technische Universität Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12938" start="14628" end="14641" title="Alain Krivine" label="Alain Krivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q432730" start="14646" end="14660" title="Daniel Bensaïd" label="Daniel Bensaïd"/>
<link wikidata="Q76837" start="14732" end="14750" title="Daniel Cohn-Bendit" label="Daniel Cohn-Bendit"/>
<link wikidata="Q314787" start="14815" end="14824" title="Tariq Ali" label="Tariq Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742180" start="14829" end="14844" title="Robin Blackburn" label="Robin Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q206249" start="14846" end="14861" title="New Left Review" label="New Left Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928548" start="14866" end="14893" title="Vietnam Solidarity Campaign" label="Vietnam Solidarity Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="14900" end="14913" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q77999" start="14915" end="14930" title="Bahman Nirumand" label="Bahman Nirumand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14953" end="14986" title="Parviz Nikkhah#Die Konf.C3.B6deration Iranischer Studenten" label="Confederation of Iranian Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893826" start="14992" end="15008" title="Bernardine Dohrn" label="Bernardine Dohrn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="15010" end="15043" title="Students for a Democratic Society" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="15131" end="15141" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q165121" start="15142" end="15155" title="Ernest Mandel" label="Ernest Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006311" start="15176" end="15204" title="national liberation struggle" label="national liberation struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="15460" end="15464" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="15725" end="15739" title="Rosa Luxemburg" label="Rosa Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q75886" start="15741" end="15756" title="Karl Liebknecht" label="Karl Liebknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="15758" end="15769" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="15775" end="15786" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Ho Chi Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q155211" start="15841" end="15860" title="Berlin Lichterfelde" label="Berlin-Lichterfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538" start="15990" end="16002" title="Günter Grass" label="Günter Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q120385" start="16011" end="16022" title="Kurt Scharf" label="Kurt Scharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q705862" start="16056" end="16072" title="Heinrich Albertz" label="Heinrich Albertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q540130" start="16415" end="16428" title="Senate of Berlin" label="Berlin Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q695194" start="16451" end="16471" title="Schöneberg Town Hall" label="Schöneberg Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q165121" start="16792" end="16805" title="Ernest Mandel" label="Ernest Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q98114" start="17473" end="17485" title="Günter Gaus" label="Gunther Gaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902585" start="18759" end="18794" title="long march through the institutions" label="long march through the institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="20493" end="20531" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="the University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q546118" start="20540" end="20554" title="Paris-Sorbonne University" label="Paris Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="20782" end="20794" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="20885" end="20904" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="20914" end="20930" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q531996" start="21052" end="21102" title="Außerparlamentarische Opposition" label="&amp;quot;(Außerparlamentarische Opposition&amp;quot;, APO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595255" start="21238" end="21253" title="Grand coalition (Germany)" label="Grand Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21700" end="21706" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q853348" start="21775" end="21789" title="Czechoslovak Socialist Republic" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746846" start="21852" end="21878" title="Christian Peace Conference" label="Christian Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q623153" start="21928" end="21947" title="Theses on Feuerbach" label="Theses on Feuerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q317760" start="22111" end="22114" title="SWR Fernsehen" label="SWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994403" start="22580" end="22628" title="German workers&amp;#x27; and soldiers&amp;#x27; councils 1918–1919" label="German workers &amp;#x27;and soldiers&amp;#x27; councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q130386731" start="22644" end="22658" title="eight-hour day" label="eight-hour day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101571" start="23111" end="23134" title="political consciousness" label="political consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q163560" start="23207" end="23221" title="Axel Springer SE" label="Springer Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="23484" end="23500" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="23925" end="23942" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075404" start="25593" end="25609" title="council republic" label="council republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q70217" start="26473" end="26487" title="Josef Bachmann" label="Josef Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="26625" end="26633" title="Neo-Nazism" label="Neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850" start="26642" end="26647" title="Peine" label="Peine"/>
<link wikidata="Q757963" start="26750" end="26805" title="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr." label="assassination the week before of Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q160272" start="26859" end="26873" title="Kurfürstendamm" label="Kurfürstendamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512" start="27672" end="27686" title="Kurt Georg Kiesinger" label="Kurt Kiesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="27743" end="27747" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="28512" end="28519" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76915" start="28678" end="28695" title="Hans Werner Henze" label="Hans-Werner Henze"/>
<link wikidata="Q762068" start="28831" end="28841" title="Clare Hall, Cambridge" label="Clare Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="28849" end="28872" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="28968" end="28978" title="Communist International" label="Commintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709714" start="29378" end="29395" title="Labour government, 1964–1970" label="Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747574" start="29423" end="29437" title="Neal Ascherson" label="Neal Ascherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q735593" start="29549" end="29574" title="Conor Cruise O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Conor Cruise O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="29613" end="29615" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773926" start="29635" end="29647" title="Congo Crisis" label="Congo Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="29733" end="29747" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q76528" start="29824" end="29836" title="Horst Mahler" label="Horst Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q102734" start="29954" end="30008" title="Red Army Faction" label="Red Army Faction (the &amp;quot;Baader Meinhof Gang&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="30138" end="30140" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="30284" end="30298" title="Home Office" label="UK Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="30482" end="30498" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="30546" end="30552" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="30620" end="30632" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="30793" end="30813" title="University of Aarhus" label="University of Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573" start="31115" end="31131" title="Gustav Heinemann" label="Gustav Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q323063" start="31267" end="31280" title="Wolf Biermann" label="Wolf Biermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76625" start="31340" end="31355" title="Robert Havemann" label="Robert Havemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q66288" start="31360" end="31372" title="Rudolf Bahro" label="Rudolf Bahro"/>
<link wikidata="Q69778" start="31406" end="31419" title="Milan Horáček" label="Milan Horáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q163714" start="31424" end="31436" title="Adam Michnik" label="Adam Michnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="31940" end="31951" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q448364" start="32036" end="32048" title="Berufsverbot" label="Berufsverbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q66288" start="32149" end="32161" title="Rudolf Bahro" label="Rudolf Bahro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516" start="32353" end="32367" title="Helmut Schmidt" label="Helmut Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="32442" end="32465" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="32466" end="32477" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q161423" start="32528" end="32531" title="Die Tageszeitung" label="taz"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="32625" end="32635" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q102734" start="32949" end="32965" title="Red Army Faction" label="Red Army Faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745" start="33179" end="33191" title="Holger Meins" label="Holger Meins"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="34621" end="34626" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346201" start="34637" end="34660" title="Giangiacomo Feltrinelli" label="Giangiacomo Feltrinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718043" start="38436" end="38445" title="K-gruppen" label="K-gruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q679563" start="38716" end="38747" title="Brokdorf Nuclear Power Plant" label="nuclear power construction site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="38797" end="38817" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Hollstein."/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="38955" end="38967" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="39402" end="39413" title="Green Party (Germany)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q708363" start="39885" end="39904" title="right to resist" label="right of resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="40242" end="40259" title="epileptic seizure" label="epileptic seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q104647" start="40348" end="40371" title="Gretchen Dutschke-Klotz" label="Gretchen Dutschke-Klotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="40463" end="40476" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q245248" start="40477" end="40490" title="minor prophet" label="minor prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q665541" start="40491" end="40496" title="Hosea" label="Hosea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="40501" end="40512" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079189" start="40627" end="40636" title="Stanke Dimitrov" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q700541" start="40912" end="40926" title="Dahlem (Berlin)" label="Dahlem, Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q71358" start="40962" end="40979" title="Helmut Gollwitzer" label="Helmut Gollwitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="41037" end="41042" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161362" start="41061" end="41078" title="Confessing Church" label="Confessing Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="41330" end="41346" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q62414" start="41586" end="41601" title="Rudolf Augstein" label="Rudolf Augstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="41622" end="41633" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="41768" end="41780" title="Deutsche Mark" label="German Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q308928" start="42316" end="42325" title="Kreuzberg" label="Kreuzberg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42337" end="42358" title=":de:Rudi-Dutschke-Straße" label="Rudi-Dutschke-Straße."/>
<link wikidata="Q161423" start="42701" end="42735" title="Die Tageszeitung" label="&amp;quot;Die Tageszeitung (taz)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="42997" end="43000" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q97758" start="43017" end="43030" title="Gerd Langguth" label="Gerd Langguth"/>
<link wikidata="Q104647" start="43502" end="43525" title="Gretchen Dutschke-Klotz" label="Gretchen Dutschke-Klotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21040614" start="44313" end="44326" title="The III. Path" label="The Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q76528" start="44570" end="44582" title="Horst Mahler" label="Horst Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779527" start="44691" end="44710" title="Studentenverbindung" label="Studentenverbindung"/>
<link wikidata="Q104715" start="45092" end="45107" title="Johannes Agnoli" label="Johannes Agnoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q76959" start="45848" end="45863" title="Ralf Dahrendorf" label="Ralf Dahrendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780493" start="47297" end="47306" title="Kommune 1" label="Kommune 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q558439" start="47309" end="47348" title="Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund" label="Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47351" end="47383" title=":de:Rudi Dutschke" label="Rudi Dutschke – German Wikipedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306346" wikidata="Q777062" url="?curid=306346" title="Ariadne Oliver">
<text>Ariadne Oliver is a fictional character in the novels of Agatha Christie. She (like Christie) is a crime fiction novelist, the creator of the fictional Finnish detective Sven Hjerson, and a friend of Hercule Poirot.

==Profile==
Mrs Oliver often assists Poirot in his cases through her knowledge of the criminal mind. She often claims to be endowed with particular &quot;feminine intuition&quot;, but it usually leads her astray. She is particularly fond of apples, which becomes a plot point in the novel &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot;.

In the books, Oliver&#x27;s most famous works are those featuring her Finnish detective Sven Hjerson. Since she knows nothing of Finland, Oliver frequently laments Hjerson&#x27;s existence. In many of her appearances, Oliver – and her feelings toward Hjerson – reflect Agatha Christie&#x27;s own frustrations as an author, particularly with the Belgian Hercule Poirot (an example of self-insertion). The self-caricature has also been used to discuss Christie&#x27;s own follies in her earlier novels. For instance, in &quot;Mrs McGinty&#x27;s Dead&quot;, Mrs Oliver talks of having made the blowpipe a foot long (30 cm) in one of her novels, whereas the actual length is something like four-and-a-half feet () – the same mistake Christie made in &quot;Death in the Clouds&quot;.

In &quot;The Pale Horse&quot;, Mrs Oliver becomes acquainted with the Rev. and Mrs Dane Calthrop, who are friends of Miss Marple (&quot;The Moving Finger&quot;), thus establishing that Miss Marple and Hercule Poirot exist in the same world. In &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;, there is a reference to Mrs Oliver&#x27;s book &quot;The Body in the Library&quot;; this title was used by Christie six years later, for a novel featuring Miss Marple. Books by Ariadne Oliver and by a number of other fictitious mystery writers are discussed by characters in &quot;The Clocks&quot; (1963). Like Christie, she is a member of the Detection Club. Christie even thought of setting a murder at the Club with Oliver being one of the suspects as well as the detective, but it came to nothing, although in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;, Mrs Oliver plays detective in a Poirot mystery involving a murder during a bridge game. A family crisis for Oliver&#x27;s goddaughter Celia provides the plot in &quot;Elephants Can Remember&quot;.

Although Ariadne Oliver is consistently referred to as &quot;Mrs Oliver&quot;, nothing is known about her husband. An offhand reference to her marriage is made in &quot;Elephants Can Remember&quot;.

In a short piece in &quot;John Bull&quot; magazine in 1956, Christie was quoted as saying, &quot;I never take my stories from real life, but the character of Ariadne Oliver does have a strong dash of myself.&quot; The author of the article went on to state, &quot;It is perfectly true that sometimes she works at her stories in a large old-fashioned bath, eating apples and depositing the cores on the wide mahogany surround.&quot;

==Literary function==
Ariadne Oliver does not function as a detective, even in the novel in which she appears without Poirot (&quot;The Pale Horse&quot;). In &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;, she does interview some of the suspects, which in turn allows her to discover a hidden motive that even the police were unable to find; in &quot;Elephants Can Remember&quot;, she again interviews witnesses, but none of the essential ones. On the surface, Christie appears to use Oliver mainly for comic relief or to provide a &quot;deus ex machina&quot; through her intuitive or sudden insights, as in &quot;Third Girl&quot;, in which she furnishes Poirot with virtually every important clue, or in &quot;The Pale Horse&quot;, where she inadvertently tips the investigators off about the type of poison used to kill the murder victims.

However, beneath the surface of the stories, Ariadne Oliver is in fact Christie&#x27;s tool for getting hints and clues to the reader. In &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Folly&quot;, Oliver creates a murder hunt and specifically tells Poirot that she has hidden &quot;six clues&quot; to the solution in the game. In fact, Christie inserts six clues for savvy readers throughout the novel. In &quot;The Pale Horse&quot;, Oliver states that she only writes about very &quot;plain&quot; murders, not anything supernatural -- &quot;&#x27;just about people who want other people out of the way and try to be clever about it&#x27;.&quot; Of course, the solution to the murders is exactly that and not supernatural at all.

Further functions of Ariadne Oliver are to enable Christie to discuss overtly the techniques of detective fiction, to contrast the more fanciful apparatus employed by mystery authors with the apparent realism of her own plots, and to satirize Christie&#x27;s own experiences and instincts as a writer. Interestingly, Oliver also periodically functions as a kind of publicist for Christie. For example, Ariadne Oliver discusses her book &quot;Body in the Library&quot; in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;, published in 1936. Christie did not publish her version of &quot;The Body in the Library&quot; until 1942.

==Literary appearances==
The true first appearance of Mrs Oliver was a brief appearance in the short story &quot;The Case of the Discontented Soldier&quot; which was first published, along with four other stories, in the August 1932 issue of the U.S. version of &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot; magazine (issue number 554) under the sub-heading of &quot;Are You Happy? If Not Consult Mr. Parker Pyne&quot;. The story first appeared in the UK in issue 614 of &quot;Woman&#x27;s Pictorial&quot; on 15 October 1932, and was later published in book form in 1934 as &quot;Parker Pyne Investigates&quot; (titled &quot;Mr. Parker Pyne, Detective&quot; in the USA). Within this story she appeared as part of Pyne&#x27;s unorthodox team of freelance assistants. Within the same book, she also briefly appears in &quot;The Case of the Rich Woman&quot;.

All her subsequent appearances (save &quot;The Pale Horse&quot;) were in Poirot novels:

* &quot;Cards on the Table&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Mrs McGinty&#x27;s Dead&quot; (1952)
* &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Folly&quot; (1956)
* &quot;The Pale Horse&quot; (1961) – Oliver&#x27;s only appearance in a Christie novel without Poirot
* &quot;Third Girl&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Elephants Can Remember&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Hercule Poirot and the Greenshore Folly&quot; (2014) – a novella that was later expanded and published as &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Folly&quot;.

An advert for Ariadne Oliver&#x27;s &quot;With Vinegar and Brown Paper&quot; (as with Agatha Christie using nursery rhyme references) appears in the Frontispiece of Mark Gatiss&#x27;s book &quot;The Devil in Amber&quot; along with other adverts for made-up books.

In &quot;And Then There Were None&quot;, a character, Emily Brent, mistakes the name Mrs. Owen for a Mrs. Oliver, perhaps an in-joke that Emily Brent and Ariadne Oliver may have encountered each other at one point.

==Portrayals==
===Ariadne Oliver===
The first television appearance of Oliver was an episode of &quot;The Agatha Christie Hour&quot; (1982). In an adaptation of the Parker Pyne story &quot;The Case of the Discontented Soldier&quot;, she was portrayed by Lally Bowers.

A 1986 television film adaptation of &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Folly&quot; starred Jean Stapleton as Ariadne Oliver, opposite Peter Ustinov as Poirot. This iteration of Oliver is American.

Zoë Wanamaker played Oliver in six episodes of the series &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Poirot&quot;, starring David Suchet as Hercule Poirot. In the last shot episode of the series (but not the finale), Oliver is helpful to Poirot in an adaptation of &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Folly&quot;, filmed on the Christie Estate.

In the BBC Radio 4 plays, Oliver has been played by Stephanie Cole (&quot;The Pale Horse&quot; (1993), &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot; (1993), and &quot;Cards on the Table&quot; (2002)), and by Julia McKenzie (&quot;Elephants Can Remember&quot; (2006), &quot;Mrs McGinty&#x27;s Dead&quot; (2006), and &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Folly&quot; (2007)).

Tina Fey portrays Oliver in the 2023 film &quot;A Haunting in Venice&quot;, based on &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot;, opposite Kenneth Branagh&#x27;s Poirot. Here, Oliver is an American looking for a new idea for her next book.

===Sven Hjerson===
In &quot;The Clocks&quot;, an episode of &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Poirot&quot;, Poirot sees a play by Ariadne Oliver which features Hjerson, who is played by Andrew Havill.

The Swedish-German television series &quot;&quot; features the character of Sven Hjerson, Oliver&#x27;s Finland Swedish detective. In the eight-part series, combining Christie&#x27;s stories with &quot;Nordic noir&quot;, the characters speak Swedish, and is set in contemporary time, with partial filming in Åland. Produced by TV4, ZDF, Agatha Christie Ltd. and the Government of Åland, among others, Swedish actor Johan Rheborg plays Hjerson.

==Fictional bibliography==
Books:
* &quot;The Lotus Murder&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;)
* &quot;The Clue of the Candle Wax&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;)
* &quot;The Body in the Library&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;)
* &quot;The Death in the Drain Pipe&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;)
* &quot;The Affair of the Second Goldfish&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot; and &quot;Mrs McGinty&#x27;s Dead&quot;)
* &quot;The Cat It Was Who Died&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Mrs McGinty&#x27;s Dead&quot;)
* &quot;Death of a Debutante&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Mrs McGinty&#x27;s Dead&quot;)
* &quot;The Woman in the Wood&quot; (mentioned in and based on her experiences from &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Folly&quot;)
* &quot;The Dying Goldfish&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en Party&quot;)

Published articles:
* &quot;The Tendency of the Criminal&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;)
* &quot;Famous Crimes Passionnels&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;)
* &quot;Murder for Love vs. Murder for Gain&quot; (mentioned in &quot;Cards on the Table&quot;)

==References==
==External links==
*Ariadne Oliver at the official Agatha Christie website
*Biography of Ariadne Oliver
*Ariadne Oliver at Hercule Poirot Central</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q777062" start="0" end="14" title="Ariadne Oliver" label="Ariadne Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="57" end="72" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="200" end="214" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q251076" start="512" end="533" title="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party" label="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448119" start="925" end="939" title="self-insertion" label="self-insertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q845106" start="1066" end="1089" title="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead" label="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q373543" start="1133" end="1141" title="Blowgun" label="blowpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q604922" start="1294" end="1313" title="Death in the Clouds" label="Death in the Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165508" start="1331" end="1345" title="The Pale Horse (novel)" label="The Pale Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q193531" start="1439" end="1450" title="Miss Marple" label="Miss Marple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215982" start="1458" end="1475" title="The Moving Finger" label="The Moving Finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q733639" start="1572" end="1590" title="Cards on the Table" label="Cards on the Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q741407" start="1651" end="1674" title="The Body in the Library" label="The Body in the Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q759467" start="1879" end="1889" title="The Clocks (novel)" label="The Clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624064" start="1942" end="1956" title="Detection Club" label="Detection Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q629438" start="2311" end="2333" title="Elephants Can Remember" label="Elephants Can Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699452" start="2562" end="2592" title="John Bull (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;John Bull&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114403" start="3462" end="3474" title="comic relief" label="comic relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="3497" end="3512" title="deus ex machina" label="deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q654170" start="3573" end="3583" title="Third Girl" label="Third Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="4710" end="4717" title="Literary realism" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="4743" end="4751" title="satirize" label="satirize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5233" end="5269" title="Parker Pyne Investigates#The Case of the Discontented Soldier" label="The Case of the Discontented Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="5388" end="5400" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532676" start="5679" end="5703" title="Parker Pyne Investigates" label="Parker Pyne Investigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q733639" start="6053" end="6071" title="Cards on the Table" label="Cards on the Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q845106" start="6093" end="6116" title="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead" label="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130299" start="6138" end="6159" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165508" start="6181" end="6195" title="The Pale Horse (novel)" label="The Pale Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q654170" start="6284" end="6294" title="Third Girl" label="Third Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q251076" start="6316" end="6337" title="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party" label="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q629438" start="6359" end="6381" title="Elephants Can Remember" label="Elephants Can Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q583866" start="6694" end="6706" title="Book frontispiece" label="Frontispiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q560286" start="6710" end="6721" title="Mark Gatiss" label="Mark Gatiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730004" start="6740" end="6758" title="The Devil in Amber" label="The Devil in Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q214132" start="6819" end="6843" title="And Then There Were None" label="And Then There Were None"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480500" start="7280" end="7292" title="Lally Bowers" label="Lally Bowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245275" start="7338" end="7359" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly (film)" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly"/>
<link wikidata="Q271856" start="7374" end="7388" title="Jean Stapleton" label="Jean Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="7417" end="7430" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q227142" start="7481" end="7494" title="Zoë Wanamaker" label="Zoë Wanamaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q391101" start="7545" end="7574" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q211831" start="7591" end="7603" title="David Suchet" label="David Suchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="7607" end="7621" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130299" start="7738" end="7759" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="7806" end="7817" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831958" start="7851" end="7865" title="Stephanie Cole" label="Stephanie Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q251076" start="7908" end="7929" title="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party" label="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q635154" start="7995" end="8009" title="Julia McKenzie" label="Julia McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q845106" start="8060" end="8083" title="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead" label="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q14540" start="8146" end="8154" title="Tina Fey" label="Tina Fey"/>
<link wikidata="Q114589148" start="8194" end="8214" title="A Haunting in Venice" label="A Haunting in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="8275" end="8290" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q759467" start="8405" end="8415" title="The Clocks" label="The Clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q391101" start="8443" end="8472" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757263" start="8558" end="8571" title="Andrew Havill" label="Andrew Havill"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="8678" end="8693" title="Swedish-speaking population of Finland" label="Finland Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429985" start="8776" end="8787" title="Nordic noir" label="Nordic noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="8882" end="8887" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466723" start="8901" end="8904" title="TV4 (Sweden)" label="TV4"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="8906" end="8909" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="8911" end="8931" title="Agatha Christie Ltd." label="Agatha Christie Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q2625260" start="8940" end="8959" title="Government of Åland" label="Government of Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83848" start="8989" end="9002" title="Johan Rheborg" label="Johan Rheborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q733639" start="9104" end="9122" title="Cards on the Table" label="Cards on the Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q845106" start="9492" end="9515" title="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead" label="Mrs McGinty&amp;#x27;s Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130299" start="9788" end="9809" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Folly"/>
<link wikidata="Q251076" start="9870" end="9891" title="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party" label="Hallowe&amp;#x27;en Party"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306348" wikidata="Q364769" url="?curid=306348" title="John Pope (Kentucky politician)">
<text>John Pope (February 1770 – July 12, 1845) was a United States Senator from Kentucky. He was a member of the United States House of Representatives from Kentucky, Secretary of State of Kentucky, and the third Governor of Arkansas Territory.

==Early life and education==
Pope was born near Bristow in Prince William County, Virginia in 1770, the first son of the former Penelope Sanford Edwards (1757–) and her husband Col. William H. Pope (1740–1825). He had younger brothers William H. Pope Jr (1775–1844) who was born as the family continued moving westward into Fauquier County, Virginia, as well as Alexander Pope (1781–1826) and Nathaniel Pope (1784–1850), both of whom were born as the family moved to Louisville in what was then Kentucky County, Virginia. His youngest brother Nathaniel would also become a lawyer, but continued the family&#x27;s westward migration by first establishing a legal practice in the Missouri Territory before moving slightly east and holding various positions in the Illinois Territory and ultimately becoming U.S. District Judge for District of Illinois. His birth family included several sisters who survived to adulthood and married, including Penelope Edwards Oldham (1769–1821), Jane Pope Field (1772–1852; also born in Fauquier County) and Hester Pope Edwards (1788–1868; born in Louisville). Both his parents had been born in Westmoreland County, Virginia, as had his grandfather Worden Pope (1705–1748) and great-grandfather Nathaniel &quot;Bridges Pope III (1660–1719), although his grandmother Hester Netherton Pope was born in what was then Stafford County, Virginia.

John lost his arm during his youth and became known as &quot;One-Arm Pope&quot;. He received a private education appropriate to his class, including at Salem Academy in Bardstown, Kentucky. He returned to Virginia and graduated from the College of William &amp; Mary before returning to Kentucky and studying law in Lexington under George Nicholas, who had graduated from the same college before crossing the Appalachian mountains to Kentucky, where he not only practiced law but became the primary drafter of the 1792 Kentucky constitution. Pope moved to Springfield, Kentucky where he was admitted to the bar. He practiced law in Washington, Shelby, and Fayette County, Kentucky.

==Political career==
Pope served as the presidential elector from Kentucky in 1801, and was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1802. He served in the House again from 1806 to 1807.

Pope was elected as a Jeffersonian Republican to the United States Senate, serving from 1807 to 1813, and served as President &quot;pro tempore&quot; of the Senate during the Eleventh Congress in 1810 and 1811. His vote against the War of 1812 made since he leaned toward the Federalist Party at that time, but political gossip attributed this unpopular political stance to his wife&#x27;s influence (Eliza Johnson Pope was daughter of an Englishwoman, Catherine Nuth, wife of Joshua Johnson, and she had spent much of her youth in England). The political fall-out led to his not running for re-election at the end of his term in 1813. He and his wife returned to live in Lexington, Kentucky where he practiced law and taught at Transylvania University.

Pope was appointed Secretary of State of Kentucky from 1816 to 1819, under Governor Gabriel Slaughter. 

He served as a member of the Kentucky Senate from 1825 to 1829, and was also elected three times to the United States House of Representatives, initially as an Independent and then as a Whig, serving Kentucky&#x27;s District 7 between 1837 and 1843.

From 1829 to 1835, he served as the governor of Arkansas Territory. During his term as governor he arranged for the construction of the Old State House by the Kentucky architect Gideon Shryock. It remains the oldest surviving state capitol west of the Mississippi River.

==Personal life==
Pope was married to three socially well-connected women over his lifetime - outliving them all. In 1795 he married Anne Henry Christian (d. 1806), daughter of one of the first settlers of Louisville, Kentucky and niece of Patrick Henry. After Anne died, and while a U.S. Senator, serving as president &quot;pro tem&quot;, he remarried in 1810. He married well again this time to Elizabeth Janet Dorcas Johnson (1786–1818), daughter of Joshua Johnson, the first American Consul-General to England. Her sister, Louisa, was the wife of John Quincy Adams, who was at that time the U.S. Minister to Prussia and later, with John Pope&#x27;s support, president of the United States. During this time, and primarily under the advisement of his wife Eliza, Pope built the avant-garde mansion in what was then on the edges of the &quot;Athens of the West&quot; Lexington, Kentucky. It was designed by the noted American architect, Benjamin Henry Latrobe.

After the death of Eliza, Pope resigned from his position as secretary of state of Kentucky (under Governor Gabriel Slaughter) and law professor at Transylvania University, and in 1820 he moved to Springfield, Kentucky. Mrs. Frances Watkins Walton of Washington County (1772–1843), widow of General Matthew Walton, founder of Springfield and state politician. At the time of her marriage to John Pope, Mrs. Walton was one of the wealthiest people in the state. After his marriage, Pope lived in his wife&#x27;s home, Walton Manor, and practiced law from the older brick cottage in front of the mansion. When his daughter married in 1829, he sold the Pope Villa which he had been leasing out, and he sold the Walton Manor to her husband John Watkins Cocke. Pope and his wife then moved to Arkansas where he served as Territorial Governor until 1835. He returned to Springfield with his wife, and they built a new house for themselves. This smaller house is also on the National Register of Historic Places. He served as a Kentucky representative to Congress from 1837 to 1843; but, soon before his third wife died, he was an unsuccessful candidate for reelection in 1842 to the Twenty-eighth Congress.

He was also the brother of Nathaniel Pope, a prominent figure in early Illinois Territory, and the uncle to both John Pope, Union General in the Civil War and Daniel Pope Cook, another prominent politician in the early history of the state of Illinois.

==Death==
John Pope died in Springfield, Kentucky on July 12, 1845, and is buried in Springfield Cemetery.

==Legacy==
Pope Villa of Lexington, Kentucky was built by Benjamin Latrobe for him and his wife Eliza. It is only one of three extant Latrobe buildings in the U.S.

Pope County, Arkansas is named for him.

==See also==
* Thomas S. Hinde, close friend and adviser.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* Encyclopedia of Arkansas Profile
* Kentucky Secretary of State</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q364769" start="0" end="9" title="John Pope (Kentucky politician)" label="John Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="48" end="69" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="75" end="83" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="108" end="146" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091482" start="162" end="192" title="Secretary of State of Kentucky" label="Secretary of State of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="208" end="216" title="List of Governors of Arkansas" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="220" end="238" title="Arkansas Territory" label="Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969135" start="289" end="296" title="Bristow, Virginia" label="Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q183263" start="300" end="331" title="Prince William County, Virginia" label="Prince William County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="565" end="590" title="Fauquier County, Virginia" label="Fauquier County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098442" start="634" end="648" title="Nathaniel Pope" label="Nathaniel Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="708" end="718" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882150" start="736" end="761" title="Kentucky County, Virginia" label="Kentucky County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515638" start="919" end="937" title="Missouri Territory" label="Missouri Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658828" start="1003" end="1021" title="Illinois Territory" label="Illinois Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q494413" start="1369" end="1398" title="Westmoreland County, Virginia" label="Westmoreland County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q341755" start="1588" end="1613" title="Stafford County, Virginia" label="Stafford County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063053" start="1785" end="1804" title="Bardstown, Kentucky" label="Bardstown, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="1853" end="1882" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="1932" end="1941" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542868" start="1948" end="1963" title="George Nicholas (politician)" label="George Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q986180" start="2172" end="2193" title="Springfield, Kentucky" label="Springfield, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683819" start="2207" end="2226" title="Admission to the bar in the United States" label="admitted to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q502929" start="2248" end="2258" title="Washington County, Kentucky" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q506315" start="2260" end="2266" title="Shelby County, Kentucky" label="Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q491931" start="2272" end="2296" title="Fayette County, Kentucky" label="Fayette County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494716" start="2406" end="2439" title="Kentucky House of Representatives" label="Kentucky House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="2520" end="2543" title="Jeffersonian Republican" label="Jeffersonian Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2551" end="2571" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140848" start="2614" end="2661" title="President pro tempore of the United States Senate" label="President &amp;quot;pro tempore&amp;quot; of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547997" start="2673" end="2690" title="Eleventh United States Congress" label="Eleventh Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="2730" end="2741" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="3170" end="3189" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q956056" start="3227" end="3250" title="Transylvania University" label="Transylvania University"/>
<link wikidata="Q359455" start="3337" end="3354" title="Gabriel Slaughter" label="Gabriel Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494879" start="3387" end="3402" title="Kentucky Senate" label="Kentucky Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3462" end="3500" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="3518" end="3529" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="3544" end="3548" title="United States Whig Party" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392151" start="3558" end="3584" title="United States House of Representatives, Kentucky District 7" label="Kentucky&amp;#x27;s District 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085085" start="3745" end="3760" title="Old State House (Little Rock)" label="Old State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559661" start="3787" end="3801" title="Gideon Shryock" label="Gideon Shryock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3861" end="3878" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="4121" end="4134" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="4432" end="4449" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="4750" end="4769" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q726082" start="4820" end="4842" title="Benjamin Henry Latrobe" label="Benjamin Henry Latrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q359455" start="4953" end="4970" title="Gabriel Slaughter" label="Gabriel Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q956056" start="4993" end="5016" title="Transylvania University" label="Transylvania University"/>
<link wikidata="Q986180" start="5042" end="5063" title="Springfield, Kentucky" label="Springfield, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909622" start="5144" end="5158" title="Matthew Walton" label="Matthew Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229257" start="5495" end="5505" title="Pope Villa" label="Pope Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098442" start="6074" end="6088" title="Nathaniel Pope" label="Nathaniel Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658828" start="6118" end="6136" title="Illinois Territory" label="Illinois Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q465291" start="6160" end="6169" title="John Pope (military officer)" label="John Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120844" start="6206" end="6222" title="Daniel Pope Cook" label="Daniel Pope Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q986180" start="6329" end="6350" title="Springfield, Kentucky" label="Springfield, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229257" start="6420" end="6430" title="Pope Villa" label="Pope Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="6434" end="6453" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q726082" start="6467" end="6483" title="Benjamin Latrobe" label="Benjamin Latrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q61315" start="6574" end="6595" title="Pope County, Arkansas" label="Pope County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793727" start="6630" end="6645" title="Thomas S. Hinde" label="Thomas S. Hinde"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306355" wikidata="Q255070" url="?curid=306355" title="Diane Lane">
<text>Diane Lane (born January 22, 1965) is an American actress. She made her motion picture debut in George Roy Hill&#x27;s 1979 film &quot;A Little Romance&quot;. She had already been professionally acting on stage since the age of 6. Later she acted in the movies &quot;Streets of Fire&quot; (1984) and &quot;The Cotton Club&quot; (1984). Lane returned to acting to appear in &quot;The Big Town&quot;, &quot;Lady Beware&quot; (both 1987) and western miniseries &quot;Lonesome Dove&quot; (1989), for which she was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie. Lane earned further recognition for her role in &quot;A Walk on the Moon&quot; (1999), for which she was nominated for the Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead. This was followed by several film roles of varying degrees of success such as &quot;My Dog Skip&quot;, &quot;The Perfect Storm&quot; (both 2000), &quot;The Glass House&quot;, and &quot;Hardball&quot; (both 2001).

Lane received critical acclaim for her performance as an adulterous wife in the erotic thriller &quot;Unfaithful&quot; (2002), which earned her Satellite, New York Film Critics Circle, and National Society of Film Critics awards for Best Actress. Her performance in the film garnered her Academy Award, Critics&#x27; Choice, Golden Globe, and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for Best Actress. She acted in the romantic comedy-drama &quot;Under the Tuscan Sun&quot; (2003) which earned her a second Golden Globe Award nomination. For much of the rest of the decade, she alternately appeared in romances such as &quot;Must Love Dogs&quot; (2005) and &quot;Nights in Rodanthe&quot; (2008), and thrillers such as &quot;Fierce People&quot; (2005), &quot;Hollywoodland&quot; (2006), and &quot;Untraceable&quot; (2008).

She has appeared in four films directed by Francis Ford Coppola: &quot;The Outsiders&quot;, &quot;Rumble Fish&quot; (both 1983), &quot;The Cotton Club&quot; (1984), and &quot;Jack&quot; (1996), and appeared in one film directed by his wife Eleanor Coppola: &quot;Paris Can Wait&quot; (2016). Lane had a recurring role as Martha Kent, the adoptive mother of Superman, in &quot;Man of Steel&quot; (2013), and subsequent films of the DC Extended Universe.

Lane&#x27;s later roles have included lead roles in the thriller &quot;Let Him Go&quot; (2020), the Ryan Murphy series &quot;&quot; (for which she won a further Primetime Emmy nomination), the Scott Z. Burns anthology series &quot;Extrapolations&quot; for Apple TV+, the animated Pixar sequel &quot;Inside Out 2&quot; (reprising her role as Riley&#x27;s mother), the Netflix series &quot;A Man in Full&quot;, based on the Tom Wolfe novel of the same name, and most recently, the thriller film &quot;Anniversary&quot; set to be released in 2025.

==Early life==
Lane was born January 22, 1965, in New York City. Her mother, Colleen Leigh Farrington, was a nightclub singer and &quot;Playboy&quot; centerfold (Miss October 1957), who was also known as Colleen Price. Her father, Burton Eugene Lane, was a Manhattan drama coach who ran an acting workshop with John Cassavetes, worked as a cab driver, and later taught humanities at City College. When Lane was 13 days old, her parents separated. Lane&#x27;s mother went to Mexico and obtained a divorce while retaining custody of Lane until she was six years old. Lane&#x27;s father received custody of her after Lane&#x27;s mother moved to Georgia. Lane and her father lived in a number of residential hotels in New York City and she rode with him in his taxi.

When Lane was 15, she declared her independence from her father and flew to Los Angeles for a week with actor and friend Christopher Atkins with whom she starred in the 1981 film &quot;Child Bride of Short Creek&quot;. Lane later remarked, &quot;It was reckless behavior that comes from having too much independence too young.&quot; She returned to New York and moved in with a friend&#x27;s family, paying them rent. In 1981, she enrolled in high school after taking correspondence courses. However, Lane&#x27;s mother kidnapped her and took her back to Georgia. Lane and her father challenged her mother in court, and six weeks later, she was back in New York. Lane did not speak to her mother for the next three years, but they eventually reconciled.

==Career==
===1979–1999: Career beginnings and breakthrough===
Lane&#x27;s grandmother, Eleanor Scott, was a Pentecostal preacher of the Apostolic denomination, and Lane was influenced theatrically by the demonstrative quality of her grandmother&#x27;s sermons. Lane began acting professionally at the age of six at the La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club in New York, where she appeared in a production of &quot;Medea&quot;. When Lane was 12 years old, she had a role in Joseph Papp&#x27;s production of &quot;The Cherry Orchard&quot; with Meryl Streep and Irene Worth. At this time, Lane was enrolled in an accelerated program at Hunter College High School; however, her grades suffered from her busy schedule. When Lane was 13, she turned down a role in &quot;Runaways&quot; on Broadway to make her feature-film debut opposite Laurence Olivier in &quot;A Little Romance&quot;. Lane won high praise from Olivier, who declared her &quot;the new Grace Kelly&quot;. At the same time, Lane was featured on the cover of &quot;Time&quot;, which declared her one of Hollywood&#x27;s &quot;Whiz Kids&quot;.

In the early 1980s, Lane made a successful transition from inexperienced actress to confirmed roles. She appeared as the teen-age lead in the tear-jerker &quot;Touched by Love&quot;, was cast as the young female outlaw Little Britches in the 1981 Lamont Johnson film, &quot;Cattle Annie and Little Britches&quot;, with Amanda Plummer in her own debut role as Cattle Annie. She played the role of Heather (Breezy) in &quot;Six Pack&quot; (1982) with Kenny Rogers. Lane starred as Corinne Burns, leader of a punk rock band in 1982&#x27;s &quot;Ladies and Gentlemen, The Fabulous Stains&quot;, with Laura Dern and punk musicians Steve Jones and Paul Cook of the Sex Pistols, and Paul Simonon from the Clash. The film has become a cult classic.

Lane&#x27;s breakout performances came with back-to-back adaptations of novels by S. E. Hinton, adapted and directed by Francis Ford Coppola: &quot;The Outsiders&quot; and &quot;Rumble Fish&quot;, both in 1983. Both films featured memorable performances from a number of young male actors who later became leading men in the next decade (as well as members of the so-called &quot;Brat Pack&quot;), including Tom Cruise, Rob Lowe, C. Thomas Howell, Emilio Estevez, Patrick Swayze, Mickey Rourke, Nicolas Cage, and Matt Dillon. Lane&#x27;s distinction among these heavily male casts advanced her career while affiliating her with young male actors. Andy Warhol proclaimed her, &quot;the undisputed female lead of Hollywood&#x27;s new rat pack&quot;.

However, &quot;Streets of Fire&quot; (she turned down &quot;Splash&quot; and &quot;Risky Business&quot; for this film) and &quot;The Cotton Club&quot;, were both commercial and critical failures, and her career languished as a result. After &quot;The Cotton Club&quot;, Lane dropped out of the movie business and lived with her mother in Georgia. According to the actress, &quot;I hadn&#x27;t been close to my mom for a long time, so we had a lot of homework to do. We had to repair our relationship because I wanted my mother back.&quot;

Lane returned to acting to appear in &quot;The Big Town&quot; and &quot;Lady Beware&quot;, but didn&#x27;t make another big impression on a sizable audience until 1989&#x27;s popular and critically acclaimed TV miniseries &quot;Lonesome Dove&quot;, and was nominated for an Emmy Award for her role. She came very close to being cast as Vivian Ward in 1990&#x27;s blockbuster hit &quot;Pretty Woman&quot; (which had a much darker script at the time), but due to scheduling conflicts, was unable to take the role. Apparently, costume fittings were made for Lane before the role fell to Julia Roberts. She was given positive reviews for her performance in the independent film &quot;My New Gun&quot;, which was well received at the Cannes Film Festival. She went on to appear as actress Paulette Goddard in Sir Richard Attenborough&#x27;s big-budget biopic of Charles Chaplin, 1992&#x27;s &quot;Chaplin&quot;. Over the next seven years Lane would star in ten movies, including &quot;Jack&quot; and &quot;Judge Dredd&quot;. It wasn&#x27;t until 1999 that Lane earned further recognition for her role in &quot;A Walk on the Moon&quot;. The film also stars Liev Schreiber, Viggo Mortensen, and Anna Paquin. One reviewer wrote, &quot;Lane, after years in post-young-career limbo, is meltingly effective.&quot; The film&#x27;s director, Tony Goldwyn, described Lane as having &quot;this potentially volcanic sexuality that is in no way self-conscious or opportunistic.&quot; Lane earned an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Female Lead. At this time, she was interested in making a film about actress Jean Seberg in which she would play Seberg.

===2000–2011: &quot;Unfaithful&quot; and further acclaim===
In 2000, Lane had supporting roles as Mark Wahlberg&#x27;s love interest in &quot;The Perfect Storm&quot; and Frankie Muniz&#x27;s talkative mother in &quot;My Dog Skip&quot;. In 2001, she starred in the psychological thriller &quot;The Glass House&quot; and the baseball movie &quot;Hardball&quot;. In 2002, she starred in &quot;Unfaithful&quot;, an erotic thriller directed by Adrian Lyne and adapted from the French film &quot;The Unfaithful Wife&quot;. Lane played a housewife who indulges in an affair with a mysterious book dealer. The film featured several sex scenes, and Lane&#x27;s repeated takes for these scenes were very demanding for the actors involved, especially for Lane, who had to be emotionally and physically fit for the duration. &quot;Unfaithful&quot; received mixed reviews, though Lane earned high praise for her performance. Besides winning Best Actress at the National Society of Film Critics and the New York Film Critics Circle, she also received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actress, the Critics&#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Actress, the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; critic Owen Gleiberman stated that &quot;Lane, in the most urgent performance of her career, is a revelation. The play of lust, romance, degradation, and guilt on her face is the film&#x27;s real story.&quot; Following &quot;Unfaithful&quot;, Lane starred in &quot;Under the Tuscan Sun&quot;, a romantic comedy-drama based on the best-selling book by Frances Mayes for which Lane won a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. This was followed by lead roles in &quot;Fierce People&quot;, &quot;Must Love Dogs&quot;, and &quot;Hollywoodland&quot;.

In 2008, Lane reunited with Richard Gere for the romantic drama &quot;Nights in Rodanthe&quot;. It is the third film Gere and Lane filmed together, and is based on the novel of the same title by Nicholas Sparks. Lane also co-starred in &quot;Jumper&quot; and &quot;Untraceable&quot; in the same year. She then appeared in &quot;Killshot&quot; with Mickey Rourke, which was given a limited theatrical release before being released on DVD in 2009. While promoting &quot;Nights in Rodanthe&quot;, she expressed frustration with being typecast and stated that she was &quot;gunning for something that&#x27;s not so sympathetic. I need to be a bitch, and I need to be in a comedy. I&#x27;ve decided. No more Miss Nice Guy.&quot; Lane had even contemplated quitting acting and spending more time with her family if she is unable to get these kinds of roles. She said in an interview, &quot;I can&#x27;t do anything official. My agents won&#x27;t let me. Between you and me, I don&#x27;t have anything else coming out.&quot; Despite her concerns with being typecast, Lane signed on to &quot;Secretariat&quot; (2010), a Disney film about the relationship between the 1973 Triple Crown-winning racehorse and his owner, Penny Chenery, whom Lane portrayed.

Lane then starred in &quot;Cinema Verite&quot; (2011), an HBO movie about the making of the first reality television show, &quot;An American Family&quot;. Lane earned Emmy, Screen Actors Guild, Satellite, and Golden Globe award nominations for her portrayal of Pat Loud. In 2012, Lane was featured in the PBS documentary &quot;Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide&quot; (produced by Show of Force along with Fugitive Films), which showcased women and girls living under very difficult circumstances and bravely fighting to challenge them.

===2013–present: Later career and return to theater===
Following the success of &quot;Cinema Verite&quot;, Lane starred in Zack Snyder&#x27;s Superman film &quot;Man of Steel&quot;, playing Martha Kent. Snyder said of her casting, &quot;We are thrilled to have Diane in the role because she can convey the wisdom and the wonder of a woman whose son has powers beyond her imagination.&quot; Lane reprised her role as Martha Kent in &quot;Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice&quot; (2016) and &quot;Justice League&quot; (2017).

Shortly after the release of &quot;Man of Steel&quot;, Lane was tapped to play Hillary Clinton in an NBC miniseries, &quot;Hillary&quot;, which was supposed to &quot;start with the Monica Lewinsky morning-after ... And then continue on until she was embarking on her [2008] presidential bid.&quot; Intense media backlash ultimately caused NBC to cancel the series. In 2015, Lane appeared in the drama &quot;Every Secret Thing&quot; (alongside Dakota Fanning and Elizabeth Banks), had a voice role in the Pixar animated feature &quot;Inside Out&quot;, and co-starred in the biopic &quot;Trumbo&quot; (opposite Bryan Cranston and Helen Mirren), which received a Screen Actors Guild nomination for Best Ensemble Cast. Besides &quot;Justice League&quot;, Lane appeared in two other films in 2017: Eleanor Coppola&#x27;s &quot;Paris Can Wait&quot; and &quot;Mark Felt: The Man Who Brought Down the White House&quot;.

In the end of 2012, and before her divorce from Josh Brolin in early 2013, Lane returned to her theater roots and headlined a production of the David Cromer directed &quot;Sweet Bird of Youth&quot; (by Tennessee Williams) at the Goodman Theatre in Chicago. Lane played Princess Kosmonopolis, a fading Hollywood movie star, opposite Finn Wittrock, who portrayed Chance, her attractive gigolo. This was the first time she had done a stage play since 1989, when she played Olivia in William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Twelfth Night&quot; at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Lane returned to theatre in the winter of 2015, starring with Tony Shalhoub in the off-Broadway original production of Bathsheba Doran&#x27;s &quot;The Mystery of Love and Sex&quot;. In 2016, nearly four decades after she first appeared on Broadway, Lane starred in a play in which she previously performed: Chekhov&#x27;s &quot;The Cherry Orchard&quot; (1977). While Lane played a child peasant (with no lines) in Broadway&#x27;s 1977 run of the play, this time she played the lead role of Madame Lyubov Andreyevna Ranevskaya.

In 2018, Lane starred in the Amazon original miniseries &quot;The Romanoffs&quot;, which premiered in October, and as Annette Shepherd in the final season of Netflix&#x27;s hit series &quot;House of Cards&quot;, which was released on the streaming service on November 2. These roles &quot;seemingly &quot;mark[ed] rare TV appearance[s] for Lane, who has primarily worked in film throughout her career.&quot;

In 2019, she played one of Matthew McConaughey&#x27;s character&#x27;s love interests in the thriller &quot;Serenity&quot;. She will also star in an untitled Reed Morano-directed film with Jeff Bridges (whom she previously worked with in &quot;Wild Bill&quot;), in addition to starring in the on FX based on the post-apocalyptic science fiction comic book series &quot;&quot;. Lane also co-starred with Kevin Costner in the 2020 thriller &quot;Let Him Go&quot; (a No.1 box office hit during the COVID pandemic) and with Meryl Streep in the 2023 Apple TV anthology series &quot;Extrapolations&quot;. In 2024, she played Slim Keith in Ryan Murphy&#x27;s on FX (for which she won a further Primetime Emmy nomination), played the female lead in the Netflix show &quot;A Man in Full&quot;, and also reprised her voice role as Riley&#x27;s Mom in the sequel &quot;Inside Out 2&quot; (which has become the most successful animated film in history).

==Personal life==

===Family===

Lane met actor Christopher Lambert in Paris while promoting &quot;The Cotton Club&quot; in 1984. They had a brief affair and split up. They met again two years later in Rome to make a film together, entitled &quot;Priceless Beauty&quot;, and in two weeks they were a couple again. Lane and Lambert married in October 1988 in Santa Fe, New Mexico. They have a daughter. They divorced in March 1994.

Lane became engaged to actor Josh Brolin in July 2003 and they were married on August 15, 2004. On December 20 of that year, she called police after an altercation with him, and he was arrested on a misdemeanor charge of domestic battery. Lane declined to press charges, however, and the couple&#x27;s spokesperson described the incident as a &quot;misunderstanding&quot;. Lane and Brolin filed for divorce in February 2013. Their divorce was finalized on November 27, 2013.

===Charity work===
Lane is also involved in several charities, including Heifer International, which focuses on world hunger, Artists for Peace and Justice, a Hollywood organization that supports Haiti relief, and the BrandAID Project. However, she tries not to draw attention to her humanitarian efforts: &quot;Sometimes I give with my heart. Sometimes I give financially, but there&#x27;s something about [helping others] that I think ought to be anonymous. I don&#x27;t want it to be a boastful thing.&quot;

Lane was featured heavily in the documentary &quot;Half the Sky&quot;, based on the book &quot;Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide&quot;. The documentary had Lane and several other A-list actresses/celebrities visit Africa and other areas where women are oppressed. Lane has become an ambassador for this kind of work and charity work in general.

On August 22, 2014, Lane was honored for her work with Heifer International at its third annual Beyond Hunger: A Place at the Table gala at the Montage Beverly Hills. Lane says working with Heifer International has affected her life and nurtured the relationship she has with her daughter.

== Theater ==
At age six, Lane landed her first acting role in La Mama Experimental Theatre Company&#x27;s 1971 production of &quot;Medea&quot; in which she played Medea&#x27;s daughter. From then until 1976, she performed with La MaMa, E.T.C. in New York and toured with them abroad. Some of the plays she performed in include &quot;The Trojan Women&quot;, &quot;Electra&quot;, Bertolt Brecht&#x27;s &quot;The Good Woman of Szechuan&quot;, Federico García Lorca&#x27;s &quot;Blood Wedding&quot;, Paul Foster&#x27;s &quot;The Silver Queen&quot;, and Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;As You Like It&quot;. Most of these plays were directed and/or adapted by Andrei Șerban and Elizabeth Swados.

From 1976 to 1977, Lane appeared in &quot;The Cherry Orchard&quot; and &quot;Agamemnon&quot; at New York&#x27;s Vivian Beaumont Theater. After participating in the first production of &quot;Runaways&quot; when it was off-Broadway, Lane took a decade-long hiatus from theatre. In 1989, Lane returned to the stage to play Olivia in &quot;Twelfth Night&quot; at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Lane took another hiatus from theatre until 2012, when she starred opposite Finn Wittrock in &quot;Sweet Bird of Youth&quot; at the Goodman Theatre in Chicago (directed by David Cromer). Lane then returned to New York theatre and starred off-Broadway in Bathsheba Doran&#x27;s &quot;The Mystery of Love and Sex&quot; in 2015 (alongside Tony Shalhoub) and in Broadway&#x27;s revival of Chekhov&#x27;s &quot;The Cherry Orchard&quot; in 2016 (alongside Joel Grey and Harold Perrineau).

==Awards and nominations==

Four days before the New York Film Critics Circle&#x27;s vote in 2002, Lane was given a career tribute by the Film Society of Lincoln Center. A day before that, Lyne held a dinner for the actress at the Four Seasons Hotel. Critics and award voters were invited to both. She went on to win the National Society of Film Critics, the New York Film Critics Circle awards and was nominated for a Golden Globe and an Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in &quot;Unfaithful&quot;. In 2003, she was named ShoWest&#x27;s 2003 Female Star of the Year, and was a co-recipient of the Women in Film Crystal Award honoring outstanding women in entertainment.

Lane ranked at No. 79 on VH1&#x27;s 100 Greatest Kid Stars. She was ranked No. 45 on AskMen.com&#x27;s Top 99 Most Desirable Women in 2005, No. 85 in 2006, and No. 98 in 2007.

===Honors===
* 2003: Honored as the Female Star of the Year by the ShoWest Convention.
* 2004: Received the American Riviera Award during the Santa Barbara International Film Festival.
* 2012: Received the Outstanding Achievement in Cinema Award during the Savannah Film Festival.
* 2017: Received the Career Achievement Award during the Sarasota Film Festival.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q255070" start="0" end="10" title="Diane Lane" label="Diane Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456779" start="135" end="151" title="A Little Romance" label="A Little Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275068" start="267" end="282" title="Streets of Fire" label="Streets of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q639387" start="306" end="321" title="The Cotton Club (film)" label="The Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q377939" start="379" end="391" title="The Big Town (1987 film)" label="The Big Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4084222" start="405" end="416" title="Lady Beware" label="Lady Beware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547946" start="464" end="477" title="Lonesome Dove (miniseries)" label="Lonesome Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="528" end="619" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604363" start="675" end="693" title="A Walk on the Moon" label="A Walk on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544851" start="744" end="789" title="Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead" label="Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917925" start="875" end="886" title="My Dog Skip (film)" label="My Dog Skip"/>
<link wikidata="Q508349" start="900" end="917" title="The Perfect Storm (film)" label="The Perfect Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346982" start="943" end="958" title="The Glass House (2001 film)" label="The Glass House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585062" start="976" end="984" title="Hardball (film)" label="Hardball"/>
<link wikidata="Q970089" start="1107" end="1117" title="Unfaithful (2002 film)" label="Unfaithful"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="1149" end="1158" title="Satellite Awards" label="Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q226003" start="1160" end="1188" title="New York Film Critics Circle" label="New York Film Critics Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206671" start="1194" end="1226" title="National Society of Film Critics" label="National Society of Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1293" end="1306" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q922226" start="1308" end="1328" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Actress" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="1330" end="1342" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q268200" start="1348" end="1373" title="Screen Actors Guild Award" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41315" start="1449" end="1469" title="Under the Tuscan Sun (film)" label="Under the Tuscan Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="1509" end="1527" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q151811" start="1627" end="1641" title="Must Love Dogs" label="Must Love Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q287385" start="1665" end="1683" title="Nights in Rodanthe" label="Nights in Rodanthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754202" start="1726" end="1739" title="Fierce People (film)" label="Fierce People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138011" start="1760" end="1773" title="Hollywoodland" label="Hollywoodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q947355" start="1798" end="1809" title="Untraceable" label="Untraceable"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="1868" end="1888" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055332" start="1896" end="1909" title="The Outsiders (film)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q845102" start="1923" end="1934" title="Rumble Fish" label="Rumble Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q639387" start="1960" end="1975" title="The Cotton Club (film)" label="The Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471358" start="2000" end="2004" title="Jack (1996 film)" label="Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943414" start="2065" end="2080" title="Eleanor Coppola" label="Eleanor Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q26720647" start="2088" end="2102" title="Paris Can Wait" label="Paris Can Wait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521223" start="2146" end="2157" title="Jonathan and Martha Kent" label="Martha Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="2182" end="2190" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q622769" start="2201" end="2213" title="Man of Steel (film)" label="Man of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281265" start="2256" end="2276" title="DC Extended Universe" label="DC Extended Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q63434250" start="2350" end="2360" title="Let Him Go" label="Let Him Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q316844" start="2379" end="2390" title="Ryan Murphy (producer)" label="Ryan Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481763" start="2472" end="2486" title="Scott Z. Burns" label="Scott Z. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q109285270" start="2510" end="2524" title="Extrapolations (TV series)" label="Extrapolations"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="2535" end="2544" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q113877606" start="2578" end="2590" title="Inside Out 2" label="Inside Out 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q113518736" start="2667" end="2680" title="A Man in Full (TV series)" label="A Man in Full"/>
<link wikidata="Q216195" start="2701" end="2710" title="Tom Wolfe" label="Tom Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658094" start="2717" end="2733" title="A Man in Full" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q120758667" start="2778" end="2789" title="Anniversary (upcoming film)" label="Anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493829" start="2902" end="2926" title="Colleen Farrington" label="Colleen Leigh Farrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="2961" end="2968" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="3136" end="3151" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="3194" end="3204" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="3208" end="3220" title="City College of New York" label="City College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557696" start="3310" end="3328" title="Mexican divorce" label="obtained a divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q532098" start="3710" end="3728" title="Christopher Atkins" label="Christopher Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097712" start="3774" end="3800" title="Child Bride of Short Creek" label="Child Bride of Short Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="4453" end="4464" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q432386" start="4465" end="4473" title="preacher" label="preacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780620" start="4481" end="4490" title="Apostolic Church (disambiguation)" label="Apostolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119375" start="4664" end="4697" title="La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club" label="La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="4755" end="4760" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480583" start="4814" end="4825" title="Joseph Papp" label="Joseph Papp"/>
<link wikidata="Q478381" start="4853" end="4871" title="The Cherry Orchard" label="The Cherry Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="4883" end="4895" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q188389" start="4900" end="4911" title="Irene Worth" label="Irene Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944289" start="4974" end="5000" title="Hunter College High School" label="Hunter College High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379684" start="5105" end="5113" title="Runaways (musical)" label="Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="5123" end="5131" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="5172" end="5188" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456779" start="5198" end="5214" title="A Little Romance" label="A Little Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="5288" end="5299" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="5365" end="5369" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996044" start="5604" end="5619" title="Touched by Love" label="Touched by Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q254508" start="5656" end="5662" title="outlaw" label="outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066946" start="5663" end="5678" title="Little Britches (outlaw)" label="Little Britches"/>
<link wikidata="Q489540" start="5691" end="5705" title="Lamont Johnson" label="Lamont Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q540142" start="5718" end="5750" title="Cattle Annie and Little Britches" label="Cattle Annie and Little Britches"/>
<link wikidata="Q238483" start="5763" end="5777" title="Amanda Plummer" label="Amanda Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008344" start="5803" end="5815" title="Cattle Annie" label="Cattle Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491502" start="5866" end="5874" title="Six Pack (film)" label="Six Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="5893" end="5905" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215935" start="5986" end="6027" title="Ladies and Gentlemen, The Fabulous Stains" label="Ladies and Gentlemen, The Fabulous Stains"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="6040" end="6050" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="6070" end="6081" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q363260" start="6086" end="6095" title="Paul Cook" label="Paul Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="6103" end="6114" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q449804" start="6120" end="6132" title="Paul Simonon" label="Paul Simonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="6138" end="6147" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q117425" start="6268" end="6280" title="S. E. Hinton" label="S. E. Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="6306" end="6326" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055332" start="6334" end="6347" title="The Outsiders (film)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q845102" start="6364" end="6375" title="Rumble Fish" label="Rumble Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q639239" start="6566" end="6575" title="Brat Pack (actors)" label="Brat Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="6594" end="6604" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q296505" start="6606" end="6614" title="Rob Lowe" label="Rob Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q464522" start="6616" end="6632" title="C. Thomas Howell" label="C. Thomas Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220918" start="6634" end="6648" title="Emilio Estevez" label="Emilio Estevez"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="6650" end="6664" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q178552" start="6666" end="6679" title="Mickey Rourke" label="Mickey Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="6681" end="6693" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193070" start="6699" end="6710" title="Matt Dillon" label="Matt Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="6833" end="6844" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275068" start="6950" end="6965" title="Streets of Fire" label="Streets of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127184" start="6995" end="7001" title="Splash (film)" label="Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325589" start="7018" end="7032" title="Risky Business" label="Risky Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q639387" start="7064" end="7079" title="The Cotton Club (film)" label="The Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q377939" start="7518" end="7530" title="The Big Town (1987 film)" label="The Big Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4084222" start="7547" end="7558" title="Lady Beware" label="Lady Beware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="7683" end="7696" title="miniseries" label="TV miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547946" start="7703" end="7716" title="Lonesome Dove (miniseries)" label="Lonesome Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="7749" end="7759" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q207954" start="7860" end="7872" title="Pretty Woman" label="Pretty Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="8059" end="8072" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299861" start="8155" end="8165" title="My New Gun" label="My New Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="8204" end="8224" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q95050" start="8259" end="8275" title="Paulette Goddard" label="Paulette Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q51506" start="8283" end="8303" title="Richard Attenborough" label="Richard Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="8332" end="8347" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charles Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q556967" start="8367" end="8374" title="Chaplin (film)" label="Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471358" start="8455" end="8459" title="Jack (1996 film)" label="Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q645597" start="8476" end="8487" title="Judge Dredd (film)" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604363" start="8580" end="8598" title="A Walk on the Moon" label="A Walk on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q298368" start="8626" end="8640" title="Liev Schreiber" label="Liev Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q171363" start="8642" end="8657" title="Viggo Mortensen" label="Viggo Mortensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q199884" start="8663" end="8674" title="Anna Paquin" label="Anna Paquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q224754" start="8804" end="8816" title="Tony Goldwyn" label="Tony Goldwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q311836" start="8957" end="8981" title="Independent Spirit Award" label="Independent Spirit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q230681" start="9079" end="9090" title="Jean Seberg" label="Jean Seberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="9222" end="9235" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q508349" start="9266" end="9283" title="The Perfect Storm (film)" label="The Perfect Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q310275" start="9294" end="9307" title="Frankie Muniz" label="Frankie Muniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917925" start="9341" end="9352" title="My Dog Skip (film)" label="My Dog Skip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346982" start="9417" end="9432" title="The Glass House (2001 film)" label="The Glass House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585062" start="9468" end="9476" title="Hardball (film)" label="Hardball"/>
<link wikidata="Q970089" start="9514" end="9524" title="Unfaithful (2002 film)" label="Unfaithful"/>
<link wikidata="Q373474" start="9563" end="9574" title="Adrian Lyne" label="Adrian Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q242080" start="9596" end="9602" title="Cinema of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q594469" start="9614" end="9633" title="The Unfaithful Wife" label="The Unfaithful Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="10181" end="10211" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q922226" start="10217" end="10266" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Actress" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="10272" end="10335" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129487" start="10344" end="10433" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="10441" end="10461" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114488" start="10475" end="10490" title="Owen Gleiberman" label="Owen Gleiberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41315" start="10733" end="10753" title="Under the Tuscan Sun (film)" label="Under the Tuscan Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774177" start="10819" end="10832" title="Frances Mayes" label="Frances Mayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="10873" end="10943" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754202" start="10986" end="10999" title="Fierce People (film)" label="Fierce People"/>
<link wikidata="Q151811" start="11013" end="11027" title="Must Love Dogs" label="Must Love Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138011" start="11045" end="11058" title="Hollywoodland" label="Hollywoodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48410" start="11095" end="11107" title="Richard Gere" label="Richard Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q287385" start="11137" end="11155" title="Nights in Rodanthe" label="Nights in Rodanthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219377" start="11262" end="11277" title="Nicholas Sparks" label="Nicholas Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q541079" start="11309" end="11315" title="Jumper (2008 film)" label="Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q947355" start="11332" end="11343" title="Untraceable" label="Untraceable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699480" start="11395" end="11403" title="Killshot (film)" label="Killshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q470665" start="12151" end="12162" title="Secretariat (film)" label="Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="12179" end="12185" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892243" start="12231" end="12243" title="United States Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151926" start="12252" end="12261" title="Secretariat (horse)" label="racehorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164356" start="12277" end="12290" title="Penny Chenery" label="Penny Chenery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281735" start="12341" end="12354" title="Cinema Verite (2011 film)" label="Cinema Verite"/>
<link wikidata="Q482366" start="12443" end="12461" title="An American Family" label="An American Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q482366" start="12575" end="12583" title="Pat Loud" label="Pat Loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q139890" start="13010" end="13021" title="Zack Snyder" label="Zack Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="13029" end="13037" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q622769" start="13049" end="13061" title="Man of Steel (film)" label="Man of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521223" start="13077" end="13088" title="Martha Kent" label="Martha Kent"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13324" end="13358" title="Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice" label="Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q20501835" start="13382" end="13396" title="Justice League (film)" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q622769" start="13447" end="13459" title="Man of Steel (film)" label="Man of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="13491" end="13506" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14833925" start="13819" end="13837" title="Every Secret Thing (film)" label="Every Secret Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q115541" start="13855" end="13869" title="Dakota Fanning" label="Dakota Fanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q219373" start="13874" end="13889" title="Elizabeth Banks" label="Elizabeth Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144664" start="13945" end="13955" title="Inside Out (2015 film)" label="Inside Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q18692630" start="13998" end="14004" title="Trumbo (2015 film)" label="Trumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23547" start="14021" end="14035" title="Bryan Cranston" label="Bryan Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q349391" start="14040" end="14052" title="Helen Mirren" label="Helen Mirren"/>
<link wikidata="Q20501835" start="14141" end="14155" title="Justice League (film)" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943414" start="14205" end="14220" title="Eleanor Coppola" label="Eleanor Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q26720647" start="14234" end="14248" title="Paris Can Wait" label="Paris Can Wait"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14265" end="14316" title="Mark Felt: The Man Who Brought Down the White House" label="Mark Felt: The Man Who Brought Down the White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511153" start="14497" end="14516" title="Sweet Bird of Youth" label="Sweet Bird of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="14527" end="14545" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583472" start="14554" end="14569" title="Goodman Theatre" label="Goodman Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450687" start="14657" end="14670" title="Finn Wittrock" label="Finn Wittrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="14805" end="14824" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="14838" end="14851" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113755" start="14865" end="14891" title="American Repertory Theater" label="American Repertory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q107249" start="14983" end="14996" title="Tony Shalhoub" label="Tony Shalhoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="15004" end="15016" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q478381" start="15250" end="15268" title="The Cherry Orchard" label="The Cherry Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q46031730" start="15512" end="15525" title="The Romanoffs" label="The Romanoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="15608" end="15615" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330940" start="15640" end="15654" title="House of Cards (American TV series)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q188955" start="15886" end="15905" title="Matthew McConaughey" label="Matthew McConaughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34779365" start="15967" end="15975" title="Serenity (2019 film)" label="Serenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q20651410" start="16017" end="16028" title="Reed Morano" label="Reed Morano"/>
<link wikidata="Q174843" start="16048" end="16060" title="Jeff Bridges" label="Jeff Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="16155" end="16157" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="16171" end="16187" title="apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="post-apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="16188" end="16203" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="16204" end="16214" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q11930" start="16262" end="16275" title="Kevin Costner" label="Kevin Costner"/>
<link wikidata="Q63434250" start="16303" end="16313" title="Let Him Go" label="Let Him Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="16379" end="16391" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q109285270" start="16436" end="16450" title="Extrapolations (TV series)" label="Extrapolations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540593" start="16478" end="16488" title="Slim Keith" label="Slim Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q113518736" start="16623" end="16636" title="A Man in Full (TV series)" label="A Man in Full"/>
<link wikidata="Q113877606" start="16717" end="16729" title="Inside Out 2" label="Inside Out 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q105158" start="16850" end="16869" title="Christopher Lambert" label="Christopher Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="17160" end="17180" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q41396" start="17263" end="17274" title="Josh Brolin" label="Josh Brolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="17433" end="17444" title="misdemeanor" label="misdemeanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="17455" end="17463" title="domestic violence" label="domestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462543" start="17783" end="17803" title="Heifer International" label="Heifer International"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001321" start="17836" end="17865" title="Artists for Peace and Justice" label="Artists for Peace and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="17906" end="17911" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956593" start="17928" end="17944" title="BrandAID Project" label="BrandAID Project"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18317" end="18386" title="Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide" label="Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18748" end="18769" title="Montage Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts#Montage Beverly Hills" label="Montage Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119375" start="18958" end="18994" title="La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club" label="La Mama Experimental Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="19027" end="19032" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216943" start="19229" end="19245" title="The Trojan Women" label="The Trojan Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q733444" start="19259" end="19266" title="Electra (Sophocles play)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="19274" end="19288" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q555959" start="19302" end="19328" title="The Good Woman of Szechuan" label="The Good Woman of Szechuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="19336" end="19357" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q886624" start="19371" end="19384" title="Blood Wedding" label="Blood Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150703" start="19392" end="19403" title="Paul Foster (playwright)" label="Paul Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="19470" end="19484" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q4528871" start="19544" end="19557" title="Andrei Șerban" label="Andrei Șerban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363595" start="19562" end="19578" title="Elizabeth Swados" label="Elizabeth Swados"/>
<link wikidata="Q478381" start="19623" end="19641" title="The Cherry Orchard" label="The Cherry Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="19658" end="19667" title="Agamemnon (play)" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q176205" start="19693" end="19716" title="Vivian Beaumont Theater" label="Vivian Beaumont Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379684" start="19771" end="19779" title="Runaways (musical)" label="Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="19798" end="19810" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088017" start="19901" end="19907" title="Olivia (Twelfth Night)" label="Olivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="19917" end="19930" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113755" start="19944" end="19970" title="American Repertory Theater" label="American Repertory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450687" start="20076" end="20089" title="Finn Wittrock" label="Finn Wittrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511153" start="20099" end="20118" title="Sweet Bird of Youth" label="Sweet Bird of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583472" start="20132" end="20147" title="Goodman Theatre" label="Goodman Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869083" start="20254" end="20269" title="Bathsheba Doran" label="Bathsheba Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q107249" start="20336" end="20349" title="Tony Shalhoub" label="Tony Shalhoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="20358" end="20366" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q478381" start="20406" end="20424" title="The Cherry Orchard" label="The Cherry Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q316641" start="20450" end="20459" title="Joel Grey" label="Joel Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q310551" start="20464" end="20480" title="Harold Perrineau" label="Harold Perrineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q226003" start="20533" end="20561" title="New York Film Critics Circle" label="New York Film Critics Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="20638" end="20652" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424786" start="20715" end="20733" title="Four Seasons Hotel" label="Four Seasons Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206671" start="20805" end="20837" title="National Society of Film Critics" label="National Society of Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="20903" end="20915" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="20923" end="20953" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q970089" start="20976" end="20986" title="Unfaithful (2002 film)" label="Unfaithful"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031439" start="21092" end="21105" title="Women in Film Los Angeles" label="Women in Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031439" start="21106" end="21119" title="Crystal Award" label="Crystal Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="21191" end="21194" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076915" start="21410" end="21428" title="ShoWest Convention" label="ShoWest Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070716" start="21485" end="21526" title="Santa Barbara International Film Festival" label="Santa Barbara International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q11305286" start="21681" end="21703" title="Sarasota Film Festival" label="Sarasota Film Festival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306357" wikidata="Q47491786" url="?curid=306357" title="Bluebeat">
<text>Bluebeat may refer to:

*Ska music
*Blue Beat Records
*BlueBeat Music

==See also==

* List of plants known as bluebead
* Bluebeard (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47491786" start="0" end="8" title="Bluebeat" label="Bluebeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="25" end="34" title="Ska music" label="Ska music"/>
<link wikidata="Q885951" start="36" end="53" title="Blue Beat Records" label="Blue Beat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971657" start="55" end="69" title="BlueBeat Music" label="BlueBeat Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860958" start="87" end="119" title="List of plants known as bluebead" label="List of plants known as bluebead"/>
<link wikidata="Q882387" start="122" end="148" title="Bluebeard (disambiguation)" label="Bluebeard (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306358" wikidata="Q645026" url="?curid=306358" title="Plymouth Road Runner">
<text>The Plymouth Road Runner (or Roadrunner) is a mid-size car with a focus on performance built by Plymouth in the United States between 1968 and 1980. By 1968, some of the original muscle cars were moving away from their roots as relatively cheap, fast cars as they gained features and increased in price. Plymouth developed the Road Runner to market a lower-priced, basic trim model to its upscale GTX.

==Origin==
Plymouth paid $50,000 to Warner Bros.-Seven Arts to use the Road Runner name and likeness from their Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner cartoons (as well as a &quot;beep, beep&quot; horn, which Plymouth paid $10,000 to develop). The Road Runner was based on the Chrysler B platform (the same as the Belvedere and Satellite), as a back-to-basics mid-size performance car.
== First generation (1968 to 1970) ==
===1968===
The earliest of the 1968 models were available only as 2-door pillared coupes (with a B-pillar or &quot;post&quot; between the front and rear windows), but later in the model year, a 2-door &quot;hardtop&quot; model (sans pillar) was offered. The Road Runner of 1968-1970 was based on the Belvedere, while the GTX was based on the Sport Satellite, a car with higher-level trim and slight differences in the grilles and taillights.

The interior was spartan with a basic vinyl bench seat, lacking even carpets in early models, and few options were available — such as power steering and front disc brakes, AM radio, air conditioning (except with the 426 Hemi) and automatic transmission. A floor-mounted shifter (for the four-speed) featured only a rubber boot and no console so that a bench seat could be used.

The standard engine was an exclusive &quot;Roadrunner&quot; B-series V8 engine with a 4-barrel Carter Carburetor rated at at 5200 rpm and at 3400 rpm of torque. Its extra rating was the result of using the radical cam from the 440 Super Commando and a .25 raise in compression to 10.5:1 (vs. 10.25:1 with the 383). When air conditioning was ordered, the cars received the version, as the radical cam specs of the version did not create enough vacuum to accommodate air conditioning. A $714 option was the Hemi with 2X4 Carter AFB carburetors rated at at 5000 rpm and at 4000 rpm of torque.

The standard equipment transmission was a 4-speed manual transmission with floor shifter, and the three-speed TorqueFlite automatic transmission was optional. Early four-speed 1968 Road Runners featured Inland shifters, which were replaced by Hurst shifters during the course of the model year.

Plymouth expected to sell about 20,000 units in 1968; actual sales numbered around 45,000. This placed the Road Runner third in sales among muscle cars, with only the Pontiac GTO and Chevy&#x27;s SS-396 Chevelle outselling it. Dodge debuted the Road Runner&#x27;s cousin, the Super Bee, as a mid-1968 offering after seeing Plymouth&#x27;s success with the Road Runner.

===1969===

The 1969 model kept the same basic look, but with slight changes to the taillights and grille, side marker lights, optional bucket seats, and new Road Runner decals. The Road Runner added a convertible option for 1969 with 2,128 such models produced that year. All were engine cars, except for ten which were equipped with a Hemi.

An &quot;Air Grabber&quot; option (N96 code) was introduced this year; it consisted of a fiberglass air duct assembly bolted to the underside of the hood that connected to twin rectangular upward-facing vents in the hood with Rallye red vent screens. The fiberglass hood box had an &quot;Air Grabber&quot; sticker on the front. When the hood was closed, a rubber seal fitted over the large-oval unsilenced air cleaner. A decal with Wile E. Coyote saying &quot;Coyote Duster&quot; was on the air cleaner lid. The assembly ducted air directly into the engine. The vents in the hood could be opened and closed via a lever under the dashboard labeled &quot;Carb Air.&quot;

The (A12) 440 engine option with 3X2 barrel Holley carburetors was added to the lineup at mid-year. The &quot;440 Six BBL&quot; had no wheel covers or hubcaps, only the 15x6&quot; &quot;H&quot; stamped steel black wheels with chrome lug nuts. It featured a black fiberglass lift-off hood with 4 hood pins and a large functional hood scoop with a red sticker on each side saying &quot;440 6BBL&quot;. The scoop sealed to the large air breather. All cars had a Dana 60 rear axle with a 4.10 gear ratio. Production of the 440 6-BBL A12 option Road Runner was approximately 1,432. The A12 option had an &quot;M&quot; as the fifth character in the VIN, rated at at 4,700 rpm and of torque at 3200 rpm, the same torque as the Hemi but at a lower engine speed. The Plymouth Road Runner was named Motor Trend Car of the Year for 1969. Domestic production for the three body styles was 81,125 with an additional 3,295 deliveries in Canada and other countries.

===1970===

The 1970 model year brought new front, and rear end looks to the basic 1968 body, and it would prove to be another success. Updates included a new grille, cloth &amp; vinyl bench seat, hood, front fenders, quarter panels, single-piston Kelsey-Hayes disc brakes (improved from the rather small-rotor Bendix 4 piston calipers of &#x27;68 - &#x27;69 ), and even non-functional scoops in the rear quarters. The design and functionality of the Air Grabber option was changed. A switch below the dash actuated a vacuum servo to slowly raise the forward-facing scoop, exposing shark teeth decals on either side. &quot;High Impact&quot; colors, with names like In-Violet, Moulin Rouge, and Vitamin C, were available for that year. Although a heavy-duty three-speed manual became the standard transmission, the engine lineup was left unchanged, relegating the four-speed to the options list along with the TorqueFlite automatic. This was the second and last year of the Road Runner convertible, with only 834 made. The new high-back bucket seats were shared with other Chrysler products, which featured built-in headrests.

The 440 Six Barrel remained an option for 1970. A factory-produced cast iron piece replaced the 1969 &quot;M&quot; Code Edelbrock aluminum intake; however, some early cars built before January 1, 1970, were equipped with the left over aluminum Edelbrock intake from the year prior.

Sales of the 1970 Road Runner dropped by more than 50 percent over the previous year to around 41,000 units (about 1,000 ahead of Pontiac&#x27;s GTO but still about 13,000 units behind Chevy&#x27;s Chevelle SS-396/454). This would also be the last year of the Road Runner convertible with 834 total productions. Only 3 Hemi (R) code Road Runner convertibles were built (plus 1 to Canada). The declining sales of Road Runner and other muscle cars were the results of a move by insurance companies to add surcharges for muscle car policies - making insurance premiums for high-performance vehicles a costly proposition. Also, Plymouth introduced another bargain-basement muscle car for 1970, the compact Duster 340 which was powered by a 340 4-BBL V8 which in the lighter-weight compact A-body could perform as well if not better than a 383 Road Runner. Furthermore, the Duster 340 was priced even lower than the Road Runner, and its smaller engine qualified it for much lower insurance rates.

===Plymouth Duster I===
The Plymouth Duster I was a high-performance concept car version of the Road Runner produced in the late 1960s. It featured the usual low-curved racing-type of the windshield and had airplane-type flaps on the top and sides. A set of adjustable spoilers on the rear fender&#x27;s side (near the gas tank filler cap) helped prevent side-to-side yaw when slipstreaming in a race, with two more of them on top behind the driver, plus spoilers in the front as rock shields to reduce frontal lift. It was powered by a 383 4-BBL V-8. Plymouth never built any for commercial sale. However, a version of Duster was introduced in 1970, with a scaled-down version powertrain, including a 340 ci engine. The Dodge Division produced a sister car, which was the Dodge Demon, and it, too, included a smaller powerful 340 ci V8. However, it was only on the market for two years before a name and body style change.

== 1970 Superbird ==

During the 1969 NASCAR &quot;aero wars,&quot; Chrysler first fielded the Dodge Charger 500 that featured aerodynamic improvements to a standard 1969 Charger. Later in the season, Chrysler and Dodge debuted the Dodge Charger Daytona. The Daytona featured an elevated spoiler raised 23 inches off the trunk deck by upright pylons and an aerodynamic nose cone. The Charger 500, especially, and the Daytona to a lesser degree struggled to equal the fastback Ford Torino Talladega and Mercury Cyclone Spoiler II in 1969. Dissatisfied with the 1968 Road Runner, Petty Engineering had asked the Chrysler managers for 1969 Dodge Charger 500s and Charger Daytonas for the 1969 season. The Chrysler managers told the Pettys that they were &quot;a Plymouth team.&quot; The Pettys signed with Ford in days, and Richard Petty and Petty Engineering won 10 races in 1969 and finished second in the NASCAR points championship.

To meet NASCAR homologation rules and also to bring Petty Engineering back to Chrysler, it was decided that Plymouth would get its own version of Dodge&#x27;s winged wonder for the 1970 NASCAR season. While spectacular on the track, consumer response was lukewarm, leading a few dealers to remove the wing and nose, making them appear more like normal Road Runners. Significantly, all public sold Superbirds had vinyl tops, while the Charger Daytonas did not. NASCAR only required 500 copies to be built in 1969, but in 1970, NASCAR required a manufacturer to build one unit per dealer. Production was 1,935 for the US market. Superbirds were available with three different engines. The most popular was the basic Super Commando 440 V8 with a single four-barrel carburetor rated at . Next up was the 440 Six Barrel rated at . At the top, and ordered by just 135 buyers, was the 426 Hemi, rated at ; 135 Hemis (58 4-Spd and 77 Automatics), 1,084 - 440 4-BBL Super Commandos (458 4-Spd and 626 Automatics), and 716 - 440 Six Barrels (308 4-Spd and 408 Automatics).

According to &quot;Road Test&quot; magazine, performance was around 0 to in 5.5 seconds, 1/4 mile in 14.3 seconds at 104 mph with the Hemi. Although similar in appearance, the Superbird was actually quite different from the Daytona. The Superbird was based on the Plymouth Road Runner, and the nose, airfoil, and basic sheet metal were different between the Daytona and Superbird. The Superbird actually used the front fenders and a modified hood from the &#x27;70 Dodge Coronet that lent themselves better to the nose design. It was an easy fix since the mounting points for fenders on both cars were identical. The special nose added 19 inches (483 mm) to the overall length (the Daytona&#x27;s was 18 inches or 457 mm), and the trunk spoiler was more angled and higher than the Daytona&#x27;s. On both models, the spoiler was two feet high. Although it created quite an impression on the street, the wing was not needed at normal highway speeds; it was designed for speedways to keep the rear wheels to the ground at and higher speeds. The reason for using such a tall spoiler was to access &#x27;clean air&#x27; according to the engineers who designed the spoiler. In the test, the spoiler did not need to be so tall. The spoiler was this tall to clear the trunk lid. The tallest the spoiler had to be was the same height as the roof.

Despite the success of the Superbird on the track, 1970 would be the only year it was made.

== Second generation (1971–1974) ==
===1971===

In 1971, the coupe bodywork was completely changed to a more rounded &quot;fuselage&quot; design in keeping with then-current Chrysler styling trends, including a steeply raked windshield, hidden cowl, and deeply inset grille and headlights. In a departure from previous thinking, the B-Body two-door bodies shared little sheet metal, glass, or trim with the four-door bodies. The convertible was canceled. The interiors could be ordered with 6-way power leather seats, thick deep-pile carpeting, and additional sound-proofing was installed. A/C and power steering could be had, except on the Hemi. 1971 was a high-water year for the ride and handling for the Road Runner. The overall length was increased, but the wheelbase was shortened an inch. It also saw the introduction of the 340 4-BBL option and a detuned 383 &quot;Road Runner&quot; engine with 8.7:1 compression and power dropping to . In return, Road Runners with the 340 and 383 engines received a standard insurance rating without the costly premiums normally tacked onto muscle cars. The 383 would now run on regular gas. The 440+6 and 426 Hemi were available, though this would be the last year for them. The tall axle ratios with the 8 3/4-inch Chrysler and Dana 60 rear ends, as well as the wide and close-ratio 4-speed transmissions, could be had with any of the engine choices, though few cars were built with the &quot;six-pack&quot; or &quot;Hemi&quot; engines. Aerodynamics were much improved over the first-generation Road Runners, resulting in much-improved high-speed handling.

===1972===

1972 saw new emission regulations drive power down and 1/4 mile times up. The 1972 model was nearly identical to 1971 with a few minor changes. The grille design was cleaned up, and the taillights were changed to match the grille&#x27;s new aerodynamic look. Side marker lights changed from the flush-mounted side markers to the surface-mounted units adopted across the entire Chrysler line-up for the 1972 model year. The optional bumper guards for 1972 included a rubber strip surrounding the taillights and a rubber strip below the grille. The big differences came in the cutting back of performance options for the car. The suspension, rear axle ratios (a 3:55 ratio was the tallest available), and most noticeably, the engines changed. The big-block 383 was replaced by a larger-bore (and lower performance) 400 CID version as the standard engine. The small-block 340 CID and the performance version of the 440 CID engine (with a 4-barrel carburetor, performance camshaft, and dual exhausts) were also available, and for the last time, a 4-speed manual transmission could be paired with any of the three engines. All of the engines suffered a drop in compression ratios to allow the use of low-lead/no-lead gas and to meet the first round of emissions regulations. The 440 engine was the basis for the Road Runner GTX (the GTX was no longer a separate model) and was available on Road Runners from 1972 to 1974.

For 1972 power ratings on all engines looked much lower on paper due to the new SAE net measurement system. The famed 426 Hemi was discontinued for 1972, and only five 440 Six Barrel equipped cars were produced before this engine option was dropped (it was determined the 440 six-packs could not meet the stricter 1972 emissions regulations) in the fall of 1971. The 1971-72 Road Runner sheet metal was used by several NASCAR racing teams for their racecars and ran well on the circuit during the 1971-74 seasons. Richard Petty won the championship both in 1971 and 1972 using the Road Runner-based cars, winning 30 races over the two seasons.

===1973–74===
The 1973-74 models received completely new sheet metal and had more conventional squared-up front-end styling and changes to the rear that closely resembled the four-door models than the 71-72s. The interior options included retaining power seats and windows and offering plusher carpeting and seat covers, moving the car to a slightly higher level of luxury. The restyling helped sales, which were up 40% over the 1972 models. In testing, 1/4 mile times were getting close to the 16s, top speeds had dropped to barely over , and the car moved further away from &quot;muscle car&quot; status. The base engine for the 1973-74 models had dropped down to Chrysler&#x27;s workaday 318 CID V8 but equipped with dual exhausts which bumped the power up to . After 1972, no 440 with four-speed manual cars were built. The code E68 400 cu in 260 hp engine was the biggest Plymouth offered with the 4-speed, which could also be had with the 340 (1973), and 360 (1974) engines. The 318 was equipped with a 3-speed manual transmission as standard (though very few were built), and the TorqueFlite as an option, though at least one 318 engine 1974 car was built with the 4-speed manual transmission equipped with a Hurst shifter. The 440 cu in engine, boasting 280 hp was still available for 1973 and 1974, but only mated to the 727 TorqueFlite automatic, with 3.55 &quot;sure-grip&quot; 8 3/4 rear axle gearing available. (Some info from the &quot;Dodge and Plymouth Muscle Car Red Book&quot;, by &quot;Motorbooks International.&quot;).


== Third generation (1975) ==
=== 1975 ===

The 1975 model was based on the newly restyled, more formal-looking B-body, which was now called the Fury (the former full-sized Fury being called &quot;Gran Fury&quot;). Like Fury, the Road Runner could be ordered with plush interiors, a rally instrument cluster in the dashboard, power seats as well as windows. The Road Runner came with a blacked-out grille and a special stripe treatment to distinguish it from the Fury, as well as a heavy-duty suspension with front and rear sway bars and Rallye 14-inch or 15-inch wheels. As before, the 318 was the standard engine, but it was now just with a single exhaust and . The engine options were however extensive; with a two-barrel/single-exhaust 360, a high-performance four-barrel/dual-exhaust (Code E58) 360, and three 400 CID offerings; a two-barrel/single-exhaust , a four-barrel/single-exhaust , and a high-performance (Code E68) four-barrel/dual-exhaust/moderate cam were also available. In &quot;Car and Driver&quot; magazine testing of a 1975 car with the Code E68 400 engine; 0-60 happened in 8.1 seconds, the quarter-mile times were solidly in the 16-second range, and the top observed speed was . While just a shadow of the 1970 figures, this performance was at least respectable for the times. All engine choices were limited to the 3-speed &quot;Torqueflite&quot; automatic, with the E58 360 and the 400 engines being available with the 3.21 axle ratio gearing. Plymouth&#x27;s most powerful engine; the 440, was restricted to police models, though it has been rumored that a few 1975 Road Runners were built (via special factory order by checking off the A38 Police Pkge option) with the police spec 440, along with the police spec suspension and wider (7&quot;) rims. Only 7,183 Road Runners were built in 1975, and most (just over 50%) had the 318 engine.

Although the name of the Road Runner model was based on changed from Belvedere to Satellite to Fury, the Road Runner remained a B-body through 1975. While the Road Runner name was planned to be on a B-body in Plymouth&#x27;s published literature for the 1976 model year, the name was transferred to an optional appearance package for the all-new Volare.

==1976–1980: F-body trim package==

In 1976 the Road Runner name was switched to the 2-door model of the replacement for the compact A-body Valiant/Duster series. The new F platform was marketed as the Plymouth Volaré, and the new Road Runner became a trim and graphics package primarily. The standard engine was the 318 V8 with the 360 CID V8 offered as an option (with a two-barrel carb for 1976-&#x27;77 and single exhaust) producing and only paired with the three-speed automatic transmission. Suspension parts were borrowed from the police packages.

In 1978 and 1979, the 360 was offered with a four-barrel carb and, for 1979, dual exhaust, bringing power up to . The standard engine for the 1979 model year was the 225 CID &quot;Slant 6&quot; six-cylinder. For 1980, the 360 was no longer offered, and the 318 was the top engine.

The Road Runner continued as part of the Volaré line until its discontinuation in 1980.

==Awards==
In 1969, the Road Runner was named as &quot;Motor Trend&quot; Car of the Year.
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645026" start="4" end="24" title="Plymouth Road Runner" label="Plymouth Road Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q645026" start="29" end="39" title="Plymouth Road Runner" label="Roadrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010528" start="46" end="58" title="mid-size car" label="mid-size car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124857" start="96" end="104" title="Plymouth (automobile)" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072763" start="179" end="189" title="muscle car" label="muscle car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566552" start="397" end="400" title="Plymouth GTX" label="GTX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298971" start="439" end="462" title="Warner Bros.-Seven Arts" label="Warner Bros.-Seven Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q822524" start="515" end="549" title="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner" label="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879919" start="579" end="589" title="beep, beep (sound)" label="beep, beep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114640" start="676" end="695" title="Chrysler B platform" label="Chrysler B platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930094" start="920" end="948" title="Pillar (car)" label="B-pillar or &amp;quot;post&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336161" start="1030" end="1037" title="hardtop" label="hardtop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566552" start="1144" end="1147" title="Plymouth GTX" label="GTX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1706" end="1714" title="Chrysler B engine#383" label="B-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="1715" end="1724" title="V8 engine" label="V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890124" start="1741" end="1758" title="Carter Carburetor" label="Carter Carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1799" end="1805" title="Torque#Machine torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2151" end="2155" title="Chrysler Hemi engine#Second Generation: 426" label="Hemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890124" start="2165" end="2186" title="Carter Carburetor" label="Carter AFB carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2228" end="2234" title="Torque#Machine torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="2287" end="2306" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="2359" end="2381" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q663946" start="2809" end="2818" title="Dodge Super Bee" label="Super Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q964912" start="2987" end="2996" title="taillight" label="taillight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796937" start="3002" end="3008" title="Grille (car)" label="grille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430939" start="3039" end="3050" title="bucket seat" label="bucket seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q336665" start="3073" end="3078" title="decal" label="decal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="3105" end="3116" title="convertible" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3185" end="3191" title="Chrysler B engine#383" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q834730" start="3240" end="3244" title="Chrysler Hemi engine" label="Hemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="3336" end="3346" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q27206" start="3396" end="3400" title="Hood (car)" label="hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q583488" start="3738" end="3749" title="air cleaner" label="air cleaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417134" start="3876" end="3885" title="dashboard" label="dashboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881323" start="3961" end="3967" title="Holley Performance Products" label="Holley"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="3968" end="3978" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q579705" start="4068" end="4074" title="hubcap" label="hubcap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875684" start="4245" end="4255" title="hood scoop" label="hood scoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214657" start="4376" end="4383" title="Dana 60" label="Dana 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="4384" end="4393" title="rear axle" label="rear axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644088" start="4406" end="4416" title="Gear train" label="gear ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q304948" start="4560" end="4563" title="VIN" label="VIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918171" start="4706" end="4733" title="Motor Trend Car of the Year" label="Motor Trend Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072763" start="6713" end="6724" title="Muscle car" label="muscle cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q670301" start="6981" end="6991" title="Plymouth Duster" label="Duster 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468221" start="8045" end="8056" title="Dart Demon" label="Dodge Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234165" start="8429" end="8450" title="Dodge Charger Daytona" label="Dodge Charger Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467973" start="8673" end="8694" title="Ford Torino Talladega" label="Ford Torino Talladega"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988988" start="8699" end="8725" title="Mercury Cyclone Spoiler II" label="Mercury Cyclone Spoiler II"/>
<link wikidata="Q752090" start="8775" end="8792" title="Petty Enterprises" label="Petty Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="9018" end="9031" title="Richard Petty" label="Richard Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="9102" end="9108" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377204" start="9146" end="9158" title="homologation" label="homologation"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="9591" end="9597" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="9893" end="9903" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="14490" end="14511" title="emissions regulations" label="emissions regulations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14741" end="14748" title="Horsepower#SAE net power" label="SAE net"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="15080" end="15086" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="15175" end="15188" title="Richard Petty" label="Richard Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="16005" end="16007" title="V8 engine" label="V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="16095" end="16112" title="Manual transmission" label="four-speed manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996177" start="16522" end="16535" title="Hurst shifter" label="Hurst shifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826788" start="16640" end="16651" title="TorqueFlite" label="TorqueFlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="16652" end="16661" title="Automatic transmission" label="automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q765277" start="16992" end="16996" title="Plymouth Fury" label="Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002227" start="17044" end="17053" title="Plymouth Gran Fury" label="Gran Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q858319" start="17844" end="17858" title="Car and Driver" label="Car and Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q766692" start="19060" end="19066" title="Plymouth Volare" label="Volare"/>
<link wikidata="Q946808" start="19194" end="19201" title="compact car" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114630" start="19202" end="19208" title="Chrysler A platform" label="A-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q525947" start="19209" end="19216" title="Plymouth Valiant" label="Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q670301" start="19217" end="19223" title="Plymouth Duster" label="Duster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114653" start="19240" end="19250" title="Chrysler F platform" label="F platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q766692" start="19271" end="19286" title="Plymouth Volaré" label="Plymouth Volaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114690" start="19805" end="19812" title="Chrysler Slant 6 engine" label="Slant 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148385" start="19819" end="19831" title="Straight-6" label="six-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918171" start="20045" end="20084" title="Motor Trend Car of the Year" label="&amp;quot;Motor Trend&amp;quot; Car of the Year"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306361" wikidata="Q5297893" url="?curid=306361" title="Killing of Doris Angleton">
<text>Doris Elizabeth Angleton (&quot;née&quot; McGown; (also Beck) April 11, 1951 – April 16, 1997) was an American socialite and murder victim. Her husband, Robert Angleton, had been accused of planning the crime. His brother, Roger Nicholas Angleton, was arrested in possession of a contract for a murder in exchange for $100,000 per year for ten years, in addition to cassettes containing audio recordings purportedly of conversations between himself and Robert planning the murder of a woman named Doris in exchange for money. Roger killed himself in custody, after writing a suicide note in which he admitted to killing his sister-in-law and claimed his brother had no involvement.

==Early life==
Doris Elizabeth McGown was the first child born to Alfred Randolph McGown, a Dow Chemical engineer, and his wife, Ann McGown (née Bain). She grew up in Lake Jackson, Texas, and had one sibling, Steven Randolph McGown. She graduated from the University of Texas at Austin with a degree in speech pathology. After graduation, she began a career as a schoolteacher, and later became a sales representative for a pharmaceutical firm.

==Marriages==
In 1976, McGown met William Beck, a representative for an office products company. They married and moved to Clear Lake City, a suburb of Houston. She met Robert Angleton, a successful bookmaker, at a bar on Houston&#x27;s West Loop when she was 28 years old. According to Robert, he and Doris met because Beck, her husband, was a client of his bookmaking business. Both Robert and Doris, although already married, were attracted to each other, and eventually divorced their spouses; they married in 1982. On August 1, 1984, Doris gave birth to twins, Nicole and Alessandra.

Robert earned an estimated $2 million a year by running a sports betting scheme. He managed to do this by becoming a police informant and reporting his rivals to the Houston Police Department. Robert later moved his family to the wealthy River Oaks area of Houston.

Although her friends believed that she was happy, Doris had reportedly told others that she wanted out of her marriage when she started talking to others in online chat rooms. She began an online and then in-person affair with a man from New Jersey. In February 1997, Doris initiated divorce proceedings, seeking fifty percent of the assets she shared with Robert. Robert had offered her half of his purported estate or $1.5 million. Doris suspected more wealth existed and threatened to turn him in to the Internal Revenue Service in an attempt to gain more of his estate during the divorce.

==Murder==
On April 16, 1997, Robert expressed concern when Doris failed to show up for their twin daughters&#x27; softball game. After the game, he drove the girls home and found the front door ajar, at which point he called the police. An officer discovered Doris&#x27;s body. She had sustained multiple gunshot wounds to the face and chest.

Around the time of the murder, Doris&#x27;s brother-in-law, Roger Angleton, had been arrested in California on unrelated charges. He missed his April 16 court date in that case. On April 21, he was stopped at the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport with two guns in his luggage, and fled before being arrested. Police searched Roger&#x27;s abandoned suitcase, which revealed him to be Doris&#x27;s killer. Roger was eventually found by police in the Las Vegas city jail, having been arrested for providing false identification to police. He died after cutting himself in a Houston prison cell more than fifty times with a disposable razor. He left behind a suicide note clearing his brother of the murder. Robert was later found not guilty in his wife&#x27;s death.

Robert&#x27;s income was investigated. As it was earned via an illegal sports betting operation, the U.S. Department of Justice indicted and jailed him. While awaiting trial, Robert fled to the Netherlands, where the Dutch government apprehended him. A Dutch court ruled that he could not be extradited on a charge related to the murder of his wife because he had already been found not guilty. However, they ruled that he could be extradited on the tax evasion charges.

He was subsequently convicted of tax evasion and passport fraud and was sentenced to twelve years in prison. He was incarcerated in the Federal Correctional Institution, Terminal Island in San Pedro, Los Angeles. He was released on January 27, 2012, whereupon he was indicted for his wife&#x27;s murder a second time, this time in federal court. Shortly thereafter he went on the run.

==References==
==External links==

* U.S. Department of Justice announcement on the arrest of Robert Angleton, usdoj.gov; accessed December 6, 2014.
*Hollandsworth, Skip. &quot;The Bookmaker&#x27;s Wife&quot; (Archive). &quot;Texas Monthly&quot;. November 1997.
* Hollandsworth, Skip. &quot;Doris Angleton (Archive), &quot;Texas Monthly&quot;; accessed December 6, 2014.
* Kohn, David. &quot;Bookie&#x27;s Wife: Another Indictment&quot; (Archive). CBS News. 
* Rice, Harvey. &quot;Tax evasion gets Robert Angleton over 7 years&quot; (Archive). &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot;. Monday June 13, 2005.
* &quot;Accepting the Dual Sovereignty Exception to Double Jeopardy: A Hard Case Study&quot;, 81 Wash. U. L.Q. 765 (2003), law.wustl.edu; accessed December 6, 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5297893" start="0" end="24" title="Killing of Doris Angleton" label="Doris Elizabeth Angleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="32" end="35" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297893" start="42" end="48" title="Killing of Doris Angleton" label="McGown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297893" start="56" end="60" title="Killing of Doris Angleton" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="111" end="120" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="280" end="301" title="contract killing" label="contract for a murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963679" start="575" end="587" title="suicide note" label="suicide note"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="775" end="787" title="Dow Chemical" label="Dow Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q970581" start="850" end="862" title="Lake Jackson, Texas" label="Lake Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="864" end="869" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="939" end="968" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="986" end="1002" title="speech pathology" label="speech pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130741" start="1252" end="1267" title="Clear Lake City, Houston" label="Clear Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="1281" end="1288" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q664702" start="1328" end="1337" title="bookmaker" label="bookmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453529" start="1366" end="1375" title="Interstate 610 (Texas)" label="West Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506462" start="1777" end="1791" title="sports betting" label="sports betting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916689" start="1885" end="1910" title="Houston Police Department" label="Houston Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337661" start="1957" end="1967" title="River Oaks, Houston, Texas" label="River Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="2143" end="2159" title="online chat room" label="online chat room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="2224" end="2234" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="2493" end="2517" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3022" end="3032" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q459096" start="3138" end="3177" title="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport" label="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="3379" end="3388" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963679" start="3586" end="3598" title="suicide note" label="suicide note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="3797" end="3823" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3890" end="3901" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440156" start="4304" end="4353" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Terminal Island" label="Federal Correctional Institution, Terminal Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="4357" end="4379" title="San Pedro, Los Angeles" label="San Pedro, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707865" start="4780" end="4793" title="Texas Monthly" label="Texas Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707865" start="4877" end="4890" title="Texas Monthly" label="Texas Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="5002" end="5010" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="5104" end="5121" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306364" wikidata="Q1139370" url="?curid=306364" title="Liquid nitrogen">
<text>Liquid nitrogen (LN2) is nitrogen in a liquid state at low temperature. Liquid nitrogen has a boiling point of about . It is produced industrially by fractional distillation of liquid air. It is a colorless, mobile liquid whose viscosity is about one-tenth that of acetone (i.e. roughly one-thirtieth that of water at room temperature). Liquid nitrogen is widely used as a coolant.

== Physical properties == 
The diatomic character of the N2 molecule is retained after liquefaction. The weak van der Waals interaction between the N2 molecules results in little interatomic attraction. This is the cause of nitrogen&#x27;s unusually low boiling point.

The temperature of liquid nitrogen can readily be reduced to its freezing point by placing it in a vacuum chamber pumped by a vacuum pump. Liquid nitrogen&#x27;s efficiency as a coolant is limited by the fact that it boils immediately on contact with a warmer object, enveloping the object in an insulating layer of nitrogen gas bubbles. This effect, known as the Leidenfrost effect, occurs when any liquid comes in contact with a surface which is significantly hotter than its boiling point. Faster cooling may be obtained by plunging an object into a slush of liquid and solid nitrogen rather than liquid nitrogen alone.

==Handling==
As a cryogenic fluid that rapidly freezes living tissue, its handling and storage require thermal insulation. It can be stored and transported in vacuum flasks, the temperature being held constant at 77 K by slow boiling of the liquid. Depending on the size and design, the holding time of vacuum flasks ranges from a few hours to a few weeks. The development of pressurised super-insulated vacuum vessels has enabled liquid nitrogen to be stored and transported over longer time periods with losses reduced to 2 percent per day or less.

==Uses==
Liquid nitrogen is a compact and readily transported source of dry nitrogen gas, as it does not require pressurization. Further, its ability to maintain temperatures far below the freezing point of water, specific heat of 1040 J⋅kg−1⋅K−1 and heat of vaporization of 200 kJ⋅kg−1 makes it extremely useful in a wide range of applications, primarily as an open-cycle refrigerant, including:
*in cryotherapy for removing unsightly or potentially malignant skin lesions such as warts and actinic keratosis
*to store cells at low temperature for laboratory work
*in cryogenics
*as a backup nitrogen source in hypoxic air fire prevention systems
*as a source of very dry nitrogen gas
*for the immersion, freezing, and transportation of food products
*for the cryopreservation of blood, reproductive cells (sperm and egg), and other biological samples and materials
**to preserve tissue samples from surgical excisions for future studies
**to facilitate cryoconservation of animal genetic resources
*to freeze water and oil pipes in order to work on them in situations where a valve is not available to block fluid flow to the work area; this method is known as a cryogenic isolation
*for cryonic preservation in hopes of future reanimation
*for shrink-fitting machinery parts together
*as a coolant
**for charge-coupled cameras in astronomy
**for a high-temperature superconductor to a temperature sufficient to achieve superconductivity
**to maintain a low temperature around the primary liquid helium cooling system of high-field superconducting magnets used in e.g. nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometers and magnetic resonance imaging systems
**for vacuum pump traps and in controlled-evaporation processes in chemistry
**as a component of cooling baths used for very low temperature reactions in chemistry
**to increase the sensitivity of infrared homing seeker heads of missiles such as the Strela 3
**to temporarily shrink mechanical components during machine assembly and allow improved interference fits
**for computers and extreme overclocking
**for simulation of space background in vacuum chamber during spacecraft thermal testing
**to control the temperature of mass concrete, injected to precool concrete mixes during delivery 
*in food preparation, such as for making ultra-smooth ice cream. See also molecular gastronomy.
*in container inerting and pressurisation by injecting a controlled amount of liquid nitrogen just prior to sealing or capping
*as a cosmetic novelty giving a smoky, bubbling &quot;cauldron effect&quot; to drinks. See liquid nitrogen cocktail.
*as an energy storage medium
*in freeze branding cattle
* In tunnel construction to stabilize unstable and loose terrains, liquid nitrogen injected into soil to freeze the water present in the soil. With increased bearing capacity and impermeability, the improved ground will not collapse during excavation and subsequent works.

===Culinary===

The culinary use of liquid nitrogen is mentioned in an 1890 recipe book titled &quot;Fancy Ices&quot; authored by Agnes Marshall, but has been employed in more recent times by restaurants in the preparation of frozen desserts, such as ice cream, which can be created within moments at the table because of the speed at which it cools food. The rapidity of chilling also leads to the formation of smaller ice crystals, which provides the dessert with a smoother texture. The technique is employed by chef Heston Blumenthal who has used it at his restaurant, The Fat Duck, to create frozen dishes such as egg and bacon ice cream. Liquid nitrogen has also become popular in the preparation of cocktails because it can be used to quickly chill glasses or freeze ingredients. It is also added to drinks to create a smoky effect, which occurs as tiny droplets of the liquid nitrogen come into contact with the surrounding air, condensing the vapour that is naturally present.

==History==
Nitrogen was first liquefied at the Jagiellonian University on 15 April 1883 by Polish physicists Zygmunt Wróblewski and Karol Olszewski.

==Safety==

Because the liquid-to-gas expansion ratio of nitrogen is 1:694 at , a tremendous amount of force can be generated if liquid nitrogen is vaporized in an enclosed space. In an incident on January 12, 2006 at Texas A&amp;M University, the pressure-relief devices of a tank of liquid nitrogen were malfunctioning and later sealed. As a result of the subsequent pressure buildup, the tank failed catastrophically. The force of the explosion was sufficient to propel the tank through the ceiling immediately above it, shatter a reinforced concrete beam immediately below it, and blow the walls of the laboratory 0.1–0.2 m off their foundations. In January 2021, a line carrying liquid nitrogen ruptured at a poultry processing plant in the U.S. state of Georgia, killing six people and injuring 11 others.

Because of its extremely low temperature, careless handling of liquid nitrogen and any objects cooled by it may result in cold burns. In that case, special gloves should be used while handling. However, a small splash or even pouring down skin will not burn immediately because of the Leidenfrost effect, the evaporating gas thermally insulates to some extent, like touching a hot element very briefly with a wet finger. If the liquid nitrogen manages to pool anywhere, it will burn severely.

As liquid nitrogen evaporates it reduces the oxygen concentration in the air and can act as an asphyxiant, especially in confined spaces. Nitrogen is odorless, colorless, and tasteless and may produce asphyxia without any sensation or prior warning.

Oxygen sensors are sometimes used as a safety precaution when working with liquid nitrogen to alert workers of gas spills into a confined space.

Vessels containing liquid nitrogen can condense oxygen from air. The liquid in such a vessel becomes increasingly enriched in oxygen (boiling point ) as the nitrogen evaporates, and can cause violent oxidation of organic material.

Ingestion of liquid nitrogen can cause severe internal damage, due to freezing of the tissues which come in contact with it and to the volume of gaseous nitrogen evolved as the liquid is warmed by body heat. In 1997, a physics student demonstrating the Leidenfrost effect by holding liquid nitrogen in his mouth accidentally swallowed the substance, resulting in near-fatal injuries. This was apparently the first case in medical literature of liquid nitrogen ingestion. In 2012, a young woman in England had her stomach removed after ingesting a cocktail made with liquid nitrogen.

==Production==

Liquid nitrogen is produced commercially from the cryogenic distillation of liquified air or from the liquefaction of pure nitrogen derived from air using pressure swing adsorption. An air compressor is used to compress filtered air to high pressure; the high-pressure gas is cooled back to ambient temperature, and allowed to expand to a low pressure. The expanding air cools greatly (the Joule–Thomson effect), and oxygen, nitrogen, and argon are separated by further stages of expansion and distillation. Small-scale production of liquid nitrogen is easily achieved using this principle. Liquid nitrogen may be produced for direct sale, or as a byproduct of manufacture of liquid oxygen used for industrial processes such as steelmaking. Liquid-air plants producing on the order of tons per day of product started to be built in the 1930s but became very common after the Second World War; a large modern plant may produce 3000 tons/day of liquid air products.

==See also==

*Liquefaction of gases
*Industrial gas
*Computer cooling
*Cryogenic gas plant
*Liquid nitrogen engine

==External links==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="0" end="15" title="Liquid nitrogen" label="Liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="17" end="20" title="Liquid nitrogen" label="LN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="25" end="33" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="39" end="45" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="55" end="70" title="cryogenics" label="low temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="94" end="107" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q840492" start="150" end="173" title="fractional distillation" label="fractional distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466790" start="177" end="187" title="liquid air" label="liquid air"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="215" end="221" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="228" end="237" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="265" end="272" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="309" end="314" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="318" end="334" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056832" start="373" end="380" title="coolant" label="coolant"/>
<link wikidata="Q180208" start="470" end="482" title="liquefaction" label="liquefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="493" end="518" title="van der Waals interaction" label="van der Waals interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="637" end="650" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q745837" start="779" end="790" title="vacuum pump" label="vacuum pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q654136" start="1017" end="1035" title="Leidenfrost effect" label="Leidenfrost effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q24734742" start="1226" end="1240" title="solid nitrogen" label="solid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="1295" end="1304" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108000" start="1324" end="1331" title="freezing" label="freezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="1380" end="1398" title="thermal insulation" label="thermal insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q912050" start="1436" end="1449" title="Cryogenic storage dewar" label="vacuum flasks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="2018" end="2032" title="freezing point" label="freezing point"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="2043" end="2056" title="specific heat" label="specific heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="2065" end="2066" title="joule" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="2071" end="2073" title="kelvin" label="⋅K"/>
<link wikidata="Q483538" start="2080" end="2100" title="heat of vaporization" label="heat of vaporization"/>
<link wikidata="Q266790" start="2202" end="2213" title="refrigerant" label="refrigerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q863803" start="2230" end="2241" title="cryotherapy" label="cryotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="2280" end="2289" title="skin cancer" label="malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q101971" start="2311" end="2315" title="wart" label="wart"/>
<link wikidata="Q422225" start="2321" end="2338" title="actinic keratosis" label="actinic keratosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="2398" end="2408" title="cryogenics" label="cryogenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961532" start="2441" end="2475" title="hypoxic air fire prevention system" label="hypoxic air fire prevention system"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="2502" end="2510" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144664" start="2590" end="2606" title="cryopreservation" label="cryopreservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="2610" end="2615" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="2637" end="2642" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="2647" end="2650" title="ovum" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="2663" end="2673" title="biology" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965835" start="2784" end="2828" title="cryoconservation of animal genetic resources" label="cryoconservation of animal genetic resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q633581" start="3019" end="3039" title="cryonics" label="cryonic preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504129" start="3076" end="3090" title="shrink-fitting" label="shrink-fitting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3136" end="3150" title="Charge-coupled device#Use in astronomy" label="charge-coupled"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3162" end="3171" title="astronomy#Optical astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="3180" end="3211" title="high-temperature superconductor" label="high-temperature superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="3251" end="3268" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203476" start="3320" end="3333" title="liquid helium" label="liquid helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q120120" start="3363" end="3385" title="superconducting magnet" label="superconducting magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="3400" end="3440" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy" label="nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="3445" end="3471" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q745837" start="3486" end="3497" title="vacuum pump" label="vacuum pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q899083" start="3511" end="3543" title="rotovap" label="controlled-evaporation processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q379251" start="3577" end="3589" title="cooling bath" label="cooling bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366032" start="3677" end="3692" title="infrared homing" label="infrared homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051186" start="3730" end="3738" title="Strela 3" label="Strela 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463151" start="3828" end="3844" title="interference fit" label="interference fit"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="3852" end="3861" title="computers" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215969" start="3874" end="3886" title="overclocking" label="overclocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="3949" end="3959" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12595052" start="4008" end="4021" title="mass concrete" label="mass concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="4043" end="4051" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="4129" end="4138" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q733573" start="4149" end="4169" title="molecular gastronomy" label="molecular gastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516723" start="4389" end="4413" title="liquid nitrogen cocktail" label="liquid nitrogen cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048719" start="4448" end="4470" title="Freeze brand" label="freeze branding cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460103" start="4476" end="4495" title="tunnel construction" label="tunnel construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319673" start="4629" end="4645" title="bearing capacity" label="bearing capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q256699" start="4650" end="4664" title="Permeability (Earth sciences)" label="impermeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693082" start="4875" end="4889" title="Agnes Marshall" label="Agnes Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616078" start="5265" end="5282" title="Heston Blumenthal" label="Heston Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300919" start="5318" end="5330" title="The Fat Duck" label="The Fat Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516723" start="5451" end="5459" title="Liquid nitrogen cocktail" label="cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="5780" end="5803" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q245402" start="5842" end="5860" title="Zygmunt Wróblewski" label="Zygmunt Wróblewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q909150" start="5865" end="5880" title="Karol Olszewski" label="Karol Olszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420789" start="5921" end="5936" title="expansion ratio" label="expansion ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="6101" end="6125" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350326" start="6818" end="6827" title="cold burn" label="cold burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q654136" start="6981" end="6999" title="Leidenfrost effect" label="Leidenfrost effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="7235" end="7241" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="7263" end="7266" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807985" start="7285" end="7295" title="asphyxiant gas" label="asphyxiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498879" start="7311" end="7325" title="confined space" label="confined space"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="7391" end="7399" title="asphyxia" label="asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q286588" start="7441" end="7454" title="Oxygen sensor" label="Oxygen sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q618153" start="7626" end="7641" title="liquid oxygen" label="condense oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="8479" end="8491" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466790" start="8495" end="8508" title="liquid air" label="liquified air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109526" start="8574" end="8599" title="pressure swing adsorption" label="pressure swing adsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q978234" start="8604" end="8618" title="air compressor" label="air compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q724510" start="8809" end="8829" title="Joule–Thomson effect" label="Joule–Thomson effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q482090" start="9147" end="9158" title="steelmaking" label="steelmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q951166" start="9399" end="9420" title="Liquefaction of gases" label="Liquefaction of gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456821" start="9422" end="9436" title="Industrial gas" label="Industrial gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q840551" start="9438" end="9454" title="Computer cooling" label="Computer cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190522" start="9456" end="9475" title="Cryogenic gas plant" label="Cryogenic gas plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718671" start="9477" end="9499" title="Liquid nitrogen engine" label="Liquid nitrogen engine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306365" wikidata="Q6376579" url="?curid=306365" title="Katherine Young">
<text>Katherine Young (鄭珣; Pinyin: Zhèng Xún) (May 10, 1901 – October 24, 2005) was an American centenarian who, at the age of 102 in 2003, gained publicity when she was described as the oldest known living user of the Internet.

== Biography ==
Born in a small Hakka village in the Fujian province during the final years of Late Imperial China, she attended Yenching University in the capital, then referenced as Peking. Raising four daughters with her husband, Paul T. J. Young, she lived through the tumultuous 1920s, along with the death and destruction of the Sino-Japanese War and World War II during the 1930s and 1940s. At war&#x27;s end, with Mao Zedong&#x27;s Communist armies poised to take over, the family escaped to Hong Kong, then Taiwan, and, in 1958, when Katherine Young was 57 years old, immigrated to the United States, settling in the California charter city of Palo Alto, along the San Francisco Bay Area.

In 1998, aged 97, and having served as president of the Rose Club in Palo Alto&#x27;s Lytton Gardens Senior Communities, she decided to try something new and signed up for the retirement community&#x27;s 12-week computer class which aimed to teach seniors how to use WebTV. By the conclusion of these sessions, she was logging on and became an activist for the cause of encouraging elders to use the Internet. A Pew Internet and American Life Project study showed that only 18% of Americans 65 and older get online, as opposed to 58% of the American population as a whole.

Five years later, on her 102nd birthday, she became a celebrity for being the oldest person to surf the Internet. She was feted with numerous birthday emails and an emailed sonogram of her great-grandson, who was born in August 2003. She studied Chinese genealogy on Google and, having been Rose Club president for 16 years, researched roses. She used email to communicate with her ten grandchildren and told reporters she checks for new messages as many as six times a day. From her apartment, she accessed the Internet via MSN TV (formerly WebTV) Internet service provider. Microsoft recognized her achievement and gave her a golden lifetime subscription.

Katherine Young died in Palo Alto almost six months past her 104th birthday. It has been noted that although she was considered the oldest known living user of the Internet, Audrey Stubbart who, until very shortly before her death five years earlier, in 2000, at age 105, was a columnist, copyeditor and proofreader for the Missouri newspaper &quot;Independence Examiner&quot;, used the then-early Internet at a slightly more-advanced age.

==References==
==External links==
*人生新鲜事学不完 美华裔102岁老人天天上网</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6376579" start="0" end="15" title="Katherine Young" label="Katherine Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="21" end="27" title="Pinyin" label="Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376579" start="29" end="38" title="Katherine Young" label="Zhèng Xún"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944360" start="90" end="101" title="centenarian" label="centenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="256" end="261" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="277" end="283" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="319" end="338" title="Late Imperial China" label="Late Imperial China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760244" start="353" end="372" title="Yenching University" label="Yenching University"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="408" end="414" title="Peking" label="Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="559" end="576" title="Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945)" label="Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="646" end="656" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="664" end="680" title="Chinese Revolution (1949)" label="Communist armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="740" end="746" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888675" start="861" end="873" title="charter city" label="charter city"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="877" end="886" title="Palo Alto" label="Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="898" end="920" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891637" start="1190" end="1195" title="WebTV" label="WebTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="1335" end="1373" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Internet and American Life Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402036" start="1670" end="1678" title="obstetric ultrasonography" label="sonogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="1751" end="1760" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="1764" end="1770" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820186" start="2330" end="2345" title="Audrey Stubbart" label="Audrey Stubbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="2480" end="2488" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732736" start="2505" end="2526" title="Independence Examiner" label="Independence Examiner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306366" wikidata="Q3591972" url="?curid=306366" title="Descriptive ethics">
<text>Descriptive ethics, also known as comparative ethics, is the study of people&#x27;s beliefs about morality. It contrasts with prescriptive or normative ethics, which is the study of ethical theories that prescribe how people ought to act, and with meta-ethics, which is the study of what ethical terms and theories actually refer to. The following examples of questions that might be considered in each field illustrate the differences between the fields:
*Descriptive ethics: What do people think is right?
*Meta-ethics: What does &quot;right&quot; even mean?
*Normative (prescriptive) ethics: How should people act?
*Applied ethics: How do we take moral knowledge and put it into practice?

==Description==
Descriptive ethics is a form of empirical research into the attitudes of individuals or groups of people. In other words, this is the division of philosophical or general ethics that involves the observation of the moral decision-making process with the goal of describing the phenomenon. Those working on descriptive ethics aim to uncover people&#x27;s beliefs about such things as values, which actions are right and wrong, and which characteristics of moral agents are virtuous. Research into descriptive ethics may also investigate people&#x27;s ethical ideals or what actions societies reward or punish in law or politics. What ought to be noted is that culture is generational and not static. Therefore, a new generation will come with its own set of morals and that qualifies to be their ethics. Descriptive ethics will hence try to oversee whether ethics still holds its place.

Because descriptive ethics involves empirical investigation, it is a field that is usually investigated by those working in the fields of evolutionary biology, psychology, sociology or anthropology. Information that comes from descriptive ethics is, however, also used in philosophical arguments.

Value theory can be either normative or descriptive but is usually descriptive.

==Lawrence Kohlberg: An example of descriptive ethics==
Lawrence Kohlberg is one example of a psychologist working on descriptive ethics. In one study, for example, Kohlberg questioned a group of boys about what would be a right or wrong action for a man facing a moral dilemma (specifically, the Heinz dilemma): should he steal a drug to save his wife, or refrain from theft even though that would lead to his wife&#x27;s death?
Kohlberg&#x27;s concern was not which choice the boys made, but the moral reasoning that lay behind their decisions. After carrying out a number of related studies, Kohlberg devised a theory about the development of human moral reasoning that was intended to reflect the moral reasoning actually carried out by the participants in his research. Kohlberg&#x27;s research can be classed as descriptive ethics to the extent that he describes human beings&#x27; actual moral development. If, in contrast, he had aimed to describe how humans ought to develop morally, his theory would have involved prescriptive ethics.

==See also==
* Experimental philosophy
* List of ethics topics
* Moral reasoning
* Moral psychology

==References==
==Further reading==
* Coleman, Stephen Edwin, &quot;DIGITAL PHOTO MANIPULATION: A DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS OF CODES OF ETHICS AND ETHICAL DECISIONS OF PHOTO EDITORS&quot; (2007). Dissertations. 1304. https://aquila.usm.edu/dissertations/1304</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3591972" start="0" end="18" title="Descriptive ethics" label="Descriptive ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591972" start="34" end="52" title="Descriptive ethics" label="comparative ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="98" end="106" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321845" start="142" end="158" title="normative ethics" label="normative ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56003" start="248" end="259" title="meta-ethics" label="meta-ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q538733" start="619" end="633" title="Applied ethics" label="Applied ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="741" end="750" title="empirical" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q840396" start="1259" end="1272" title="ideal (ethics)" label="ethical ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="1320" end="1323" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="1327" end="1335" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="1734" end="1754" title="evolutionary biology" label="evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1756" end="1766" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="1768" end="1777" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="1781" end="1793" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187415" start="1894" end="1906" title="Value theory" label="Value theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q311745" start="2031" end="2048" title="Lawrence Kohlberg" label="Lawrence Kohlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700912" start="2272" end="2285" title="Heinz dilemma" label="Heinz dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384451" start="3036" end="3059" title="Experimental philosophy" label="Experimental philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112626" start="3062" end="3083" title="List of ethics topics" label="List of ethics topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909140" start="3086" end="3101" title="Moral reasoning" label="Moral reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355306" start="3104" end="3120" title="Moral psychology" label="Moral psychology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306367" wikidata="Q14713887" url="?curid=306367" title="School of Visual Concepts">
<text>The School of Visual Concepts in Seattle, Washington, is a vocational school training students and working professionals in the fields of user experience, content strategy/design, writing for user experience, graphic design, web design, and marketing communications.

Founded in 1971 by the husband-and-wife team of illustrators, Dick and Cherry Brown, the school&#x27;s teaching philosophy is based on the premise that working professionals, not career teachers or full-time faculty, can provide the most current, relevant instruction. As such, SVC does not offer degrees, but does provide students with the ability to earn a certificate in their program of study.

In addition to evening courses and daytime workshops in the marketing communications field, SVC also had one of the largest public letterpress printing teaching shops in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States. As of 2020, letterpress classes are offered by Partners in Print.

The school closed their building during the COVID 19 pandemic and currently only offers online classes and workshops.

Notable alums include best-selling children&#x27;s author, Leslie Patricelli.

==External links==

*School of Visual Concepts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14713887" start="4" end="29" title="School of Visual Concepts" label="School of Visual Concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="33" end="40" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="42" end="52" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047808" start="138" end="153" title="user experience" label="user experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353935" start="155" end="171" title="content strategy" label="content strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="209" end="223" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q190637" start="225" end="235" title="web design" label="web design"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="841" end="858" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531062" start="1133" end="1150" title="Leslie Patricelli" label="Leslie Patricelli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306377" wikidata="Q2156794" url="?curid=306377" title="Robert Crittenden">
<text>Robert Crittenden (January 1, 1797 – December 18, 1834) was an American lawyer who served as the first secretary of the Arkansas Territory from 1819 to 1829. He also served as the acting governor of Arkansas Territory from July to December 1819. Crittenden co-founded the Rose Law Firm.

== Early life, education, and military service ==
Robert Crittenden was born in Woodford County, Kentucky, the son of John and Judith (née Harris) Crittenden. His father was a Kentucky pioneer from Virginia, who had been a major in the Continental Army. Crittenden had a brother, John, who later served as a U.S. senator. His great-nephew was politician Thomas T. Crittenden, Jr. Robert Crittenden was educated privately and read the law as a legal apprentice to prepare for passing the bar.

== Secretary of the Arkansas Territory ==
President James Monroe appointed Crittenden secretary of the Arkansas Territory in 1819. Crittenden served in this role through 1829. From July to December 1819, he served as acting governor while James Miller was delayed for an extended period en route to Arkansas Territory. Crittenden called the first territorial legislature into session and took responsibility for organizing the new territory. He amassed considerable political power. Crittenden was a primary leader in preparing the territory for statehood. He was appointed as United States Commissioner for negotiating the 1824 Treaty with the Quapaw Indians.

== Conway–Crittenden duel ==
By 1827, he and his former friend, Henry Conway, a territorial representative, had come into conflict on political issues and finally had a duel. He mortally wounded Conway near Napoleon, Arkansas, on October 29, 1827, who died several days later. Crittenden lived at the end of his life in Vicksburg, Mississippi.

== Legacy ==
Crittenden County, Arkansas, and the Robert Crittenden Chapter (established January 15, 1951) of the Daughters of the American Revolution in West Memphis, Arkansas, are named after him.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Robert Crittenden at The Political Graveyard
* The American Era at Historical Marker Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2156794" start="0" end="17" title="Robert Crittenden" label="Robert Crittenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="120" end="138" title="Arkansas Territory" label="Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676846" start="180" end="186" title="Acting (law)" label="acting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="187" end="195" title="List_of_governors_of_Arkansas#Governors_of_the_Territory_of_Arkansas" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="199" end="217" title="Arkansas Territory" label="Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367828" start="272" end="285" title="Rose Law Firm" label="Rose Law Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q503442" start="368" end="393" title="Woodford County, Kentucky" label="Woodford County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q24236" start="406" end="410" title="John Crittenden Sr." label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="423" end="426" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="473" end="480" title="American pioneer" label="pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="486" end="494" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="524" end="540" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q880239" start="568" end="572" title="John Jordan Crittenden" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="596" end="608" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794319" start="642" end="667" title="Thomas T. Crittenden Jr." label="Thomas T. Crittenden, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q17015569" start="775" end="778" title="Bar (law)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="823" end="832" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="833" end="845" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680827" start="1020" end="1032" title="James Miller (general)" label="James Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q65054556" start="1128" end="1151" title="General Assembly of Arkansas Territory" label="territorial legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268882" start="1426" end="1432" title="Quapaw" label="Quapaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607403" start="1507" end="1519" title="Henry Wharton Conway" label="Henry Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964999" start="1650" end="1668" title="Napoleon, Arkansas" label="Napoleon, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q493787" start="1763" end="1785" title="Vicksburg, Mississippi" label="Vicksburg, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61346" start="1801" end="1828" title="Crittenden County, Arkansas" label="Crittenden County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541947" start="1902" end="1938" title="Daughters of the American Revolution" label="Daughters of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q80050" start="1942" end="1964" title="West Memphis, Arkansas" label="West Memphis, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757656" start="2050" end="2073" title="The Political Graveyard" label="The Political Graveyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q21815238" start="2096" end="2122" title="Historical Marker Database" label="Historical Marker Database"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306379" wikidata="Q285135" url="?curid=306379" title="List of Brooklyn neighborhoods">
<text>This is a list of neighborhoods in Brooklyn, one of the five boroughs of New York City, United States.

==By geographical region==
===Central Brooklyn===
*Crown Heights 
**Weeksville 
*Flatbush 
**Beverley Squares: Beverley Square East, Beverley Square West
**Ditmas Park 
**East Flatbush 
***Farragut 
***Remsen Village
**Fiske Terrace 
**Pigtown 
**Wingate
*Prospect Park area
**Prospect Lefferts Gardens 
**Prospect Park South 
**Windsor Terrace
*Kensington
**Ocean Parkway
**Parkville

===Eastern Brooklyn===
*Brownsville 
*Canarsie
*East New York 
**City Line
**Cypress Hills
**New Lots
**Spring Creek
**Starrett City
* Highland Park

===Northern Brooklyn===
*Bedford–Stuyvesant
**Bedford
**Ocean Hill 
**Stuyvesant Heights
*Bushwick
**Wyckoff Heights
*Greenpoint
**Little Poland
*Williamsburg
**East Williamsburg
**Southside
**South Williamsburg

===Northwestern Brooklyn===
*Brooklyn Heights
*Brooklyn Navy Yard
**Admiral&#x27;s Row
*Cadman Plaza
*Clinton Hill
*Downtown Brooklyn
**Bridge Plaza/RAMBO
*DUMBO
**Fulton Ferry
*Fort Greene
*Prospect Heights
**Pacific Park/Atlantic Yards
*Vinegar Hill
*South Brooklyn – takes its name from the geographical position of the original town of Brooklyn, which today includes the neighborhoods listed above under the heading &quot;northwestern Brooklyn.&quot; It is not located in the southern part of the modern borough. 
**Boerum Hill
**Carroll Gardens
***Columbia Street Waterfront District
**Cobble Hill
**Gowanus
**Park Slope
***South Park Slope
***Greenwood Heights
***Park Slope Village
**Red Hook

===Southern Brooklyn===
*Barren Island 
*Bergen Beach and Georgetown
*Coney Island
**Brighton Beach, also known as &quot;Little Odessa&quot; or &quot;Little Russia&quot;
***West Brighton
**Manhattan Beach
**Sea Gate
*Sheepshead Bay and Madison
**Homecrest 
*Midwood
*Flatlands
*Gerritsen Beach 
*Gravesend
**White Sands
*Marine Park
*Mill Basin 
*Plumb Beach

===Southwestern Brooklyn===
The southwestern portion of Brooklyn shares numbered streets and avenues starting from 36th Street to 101st Street and from 1st Avenue to 25th Avenue, passing through the neighborhoods listed below:
*Bay Ridge
**Fort Hamilton
*Bensonhurst
**Bath Beach 
**New Utrecht
*Borough Park
**Mapleton lies mostly in Borough Park but its southern reaches are within Bensonhurst
*Dyker Heights
*Sunset Park
**Chinatown

==By historical town==

The original Dutch settlement of what is now Brooklyn consisted of six towns with clearly defined borders. These later became English settlements, and were consolidated over time until the entirety of Kings County was the unified City of Brooklyn. The towns were, clockwise from the north: Bushwick, Brooklyn, Flatlands, Gravesend, New Utrecht, with Flatbush in the middle. The modern neighborhoods bearing these names are located roughly in the center of each of these original towns. Certain portions of the original six towns were also independent municipalities for a time, before being reabsorbed.

Following an 1894 referendum, the entire consolidated City of Brooklyn became a borough of New York City in 1898.

===Bushwick===
Annexed to Brooklyn in 1854.
*Bushwick
*Greenpoint
*Williamsburg (separated from Bushwick in 1840, annexed to Brooklyn in 1854)

===Brooklyn ===
*Bedford-Stuyvesant
*Boerum Hill
*Brooklyn Heights
*Brownsville
*Carroll Gardens
*City Line
*Clinton Hill
*Cobble Hill
*Crown Heights
*Cypress Hills
*Downtown Brooklyn
*DUMBO
*East New York
*Fort Greene
*Gowanus
*Greenwood Heights
*Highland Park
*New Lots (separated from Flatbush in 1852, annexed to Brooklyn in 1886)
*Ocean Hill
*Park Slope
*Prospect Heights
*RAMBO
*Spring Creek
*Starrett City
*Stuyvesant Heights
*Sunset Park
*Vinegar Hill
*Weeksville
*Windsor Terrace
*Wingate

===Flatlands===
Annexed to Brooklyn in 1896.

*Bergen Beach
*Canarsie
*Flatlands
*Georgetown
*Marine Park
*Mill Basin
*The southeastern quarter of Midwood

===Gravesend===

Annexed to Brooklyn in 1894.
*Brighton Beach
*Coney Island
*Gerritsen Beach
*Gravesend
*Homecrest
*Madison
*Midwood
*Manhattan Beach
*Plum Beach
*Seagate
*Sheepshead Bay

===New Utrecht===

Annexed to Brooklyn in 1894.
*Bay Ridge
*Borough Park
*Dyker Heights
*Mapleton
*New Utrecht
*Bath Beach
*Bensonhurst

===Flatbush ===

Annexed to Brooklyn in 1894.
*Ditmas Park
*East Flatbush
*Farragut
*Fiske Terrace
*Flatbush
*Kensington
*Prospect Lefferts Gardens
*Prospect Park South
==See also==

*List of Bronx neighborhoods
*List of Manhattan neighborhoods
*List of Queens neighborhoods
*List of Staten Island neighborhoods

==References==
==External links==
* Brooklyn - NYCHA
*Neighborhood Map from NYC Department of City Planning
*List of Brooklyn Neighborhood Associations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="18" end="31" title="neighbourhood" label="neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="35" end="43" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="61" end="68" title="boroughs of New York City" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="73" end="86" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354222" start="155" end="168" title="Crown Heights, Brooklyn" label="Crown Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163943" start="172" end="182" title="Weeksville, Brooklyn" label="Weeksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q840381" start="185" end="193" title="Flatbush" label="Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899443" start="197" end="213" title="Beverley Squares" label="Beverley Squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283687" start="260" end="271" title="Ditmas Park, Brooklyn" label="Ditmas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328357" start="275" end="288" title="East Flatbush, Brooklyn" label="East Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="293" end="301" title="East Flatbush, Brooklyn#Farragut" label="Farragut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="306" end="320" title="East Flatbush, Brooklyn#Remsen Village" label="Remsen Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455188" start="323" end="336" title="Fiske Terrace, Brooklyn" label="Fiske Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167977" start="340" end="347" title="Wingate, Brooklyn" label="Pigtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167977" start="351" end="358" title="Wingate, Brooklyn" label="Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049632" start="360" end="373" title="Prospect Park (Brooklyn)" label="Prospect Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063239" start="381" end="406" title="Prospect Lefferts Gardens" label="Prospect Lefferts Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250806" start="410" end="429" title="Prospect Park South" label="Prospect Park South"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024714" start="433" end="448" title="Windsor Terrace, Brooklyn" label="Windsor Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391396" start="450" end="460" title="Kensington, Brooklyn" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487858" start="463" end="476" title="Ocean Parkway (Brooklyn)" label="Ocean Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q991279" start="514" end="525" title="Brownsville, Brooklyn" label="Brownsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031191" start="528" end="536" title="Canarsie, Brooklyn" label="Canarsie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294366" start="538" end="551" title="East New York, Brooklyn" label="East New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="555" end="564" title="East New York, Brooklyn#City Line" label="City Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="567" end="580" title="East New York, Brooklyn#Cypress Hills" label="Cypress Hills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="591" title="East New York, Brooklyn#New Lots" label="New Lots"/>
<link wikidata="Q22713707" start="594" end="606" title="Spring Creek, Brooklyn" label="Spring Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036480" start="609" end="622" title="Starrett City" label="Starrett City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156982" start="665" end="683" title="Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn" label="Bedford–Stuyvesant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156982" start="686" end="693" title="Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076016" start="696" end="706" title="Ocean Hill, Brooklyn" label="Ocean Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156982" start="710" end="728" title="Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn" label="Stuyvesant Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288728" start="730" end="738" title="Bushwick, Brooklyn" label="Bushwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039596" start="741" end="756" title="Wyckoff Heights, New York City" label="Wyckoff Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544785" start="758" end="768" title="Greenpoint, Brooklyn" label="Greenpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q771572" start="786" end="798" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329683" start="801" end="818" title="East Williamsburg" label="East Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q828553" start="882" end="898" title="Brooklyn Heights" label="Brooklyn Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q524435" start="900" end="918" title="Brooklyn Navy Yard" label="Brooklyn Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057908" start="921" end="939" title="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Row" label="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251046" start="941" end="953" title="Cadman Plaza" label="Cadman Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680818" start="955" end="967" title="Clinton Hill, Brooklyn" label="Clinton Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900913" start="969" end="986" title="Downtown Brooklyn" label="Downtown Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q778934" start="989" end="1007" title="Bridge Plaza, Brooklyn" label="Bridge Plaza/RAMBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264951" start="1009" end="1014" title="Dumbo, Brooklyn" label="DUMBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473821" start="1017" end="1029" title="Fulton Ferry, Brooklyn" label="Fulton Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471250" start="1031" end="1042" title="Fort Greene, Brooklyn" label="Fort Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159619" start="1044" end="1060" title="Prospect Heights, Brooklyn" label="Prospect Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816597" start="1063" end="1075" title="Pacific Park, Brooklyn" label="Pacific Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630163" start="1092" end="1104" title="Vinegar Hill, Brooklyn" label="Vinegar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680753" start="1106" end="1120" title="South Brooklyn" label="South Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937230" start="1373" end="1384" title="Boerum Hill" label="Boerum Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046569" start="1387" end="1402" title="Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn" label="Carroll Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950150" start="1406" end="1441" title="Columbia Street Waterfront District, Brooklyn" label="Columbia Street Waterfront District"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977149" start="1444" end="1455" title="Cobble Hill, Brooklyn" label="Cobble Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589993" start="1458" end="1465" title="Gowanus, Brooklyn" label="Gowanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607610" start="1468" end="1478" title="Park Slope" label="Park Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607610" start="1482" end="1498" title="Park Slope" label="South Park Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605028" start="1502" end="1519" title="Greenwood Heights, Brooklyn" label="Greenwood Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q117336840" start="1523" end="1541" title="Park Slope Village" label="Park Slope Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781122" start="1544" end="1552" title="Red Hook, Brooklyn" label="Red Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863373" start="1579" end="1592" title="Barren Island, Brooklyn" label="Barren Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842591" start="1595" end="1607" title="Bergen Beach, Brooklyn" label="Bergen Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="1624" end="1636" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q915813" start="1639" end="1653" title="Brighton Beach" label="Brighton Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599635" start="1743" end="1758" title="Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn" label="Manhattan Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569695" start="1761" end="1769" title="Sea Gate, Brooklyn" label="Sea Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524180" start="1771" end="1797" title="Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn" label="Sheepshead Bay and Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706396" start="1800" end="1809" title="Homecrest, Brooklyn" label="Homecrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13856437" start="1812" end="1819" title="Midwood, Brooklyn" label="Midwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457933" start="1821" end="1830" title="Flatlands, Brooklyn" label="Flatlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137507" start="1832" end="1847" title="Gerritsen Beach, Brooklyn" label="Gerritsen Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238884" start="1850" end="1859" title="Gravesend, Brooklyn" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1862" end="1873" title="Gravesend, Brooklyn#White Sands" label="White Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120898" start="1875" end="1886" title="Marine Park, Brooklyn" label="Marine Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858171" start="1888" end="1898" title="Mill Basin, Brooklyn" label="Mill Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707194" start="1901" end="1912" title="Plumb Beach, Brooklyn" label="Plumb Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892166" start="2142" end="2151" title="Bay Ridge, Brooklyn" label="Bay Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471273" start="2154" end="2167" title="Fort Hamilton, Brooklyn" label="Fort Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q818193" start="2169" end="2180" title="Bensonhurst, Brooklyn" label="Bensonhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868889" start="2183" end="2193" title="Bath Beach, Brooklyn" label="Bath Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536676" start="2197" end="2208" title="New Utrecht, Brooklyn" label="New Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911280" start="2210" end="2222" title="Borough Park, Brooklyn" label="Borough Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754060" start="2225" end="2233" title="Mapleton, Brooklyn" label="Mapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318679" start="2311" end="2324" title="Dyker Heights, Brooklyn" label="Dyker Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270906" start="2326" end="2337" title="Sunset Park, Brooklyn" label="Sunset Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100132" start="2340" end="2349" title="Chinatowns in Brooklyn" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3070" end="3083" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288728" start="3139" end="3147" title="Bushwick, Brooklyn" label="Bushwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544785" start="3149" end="3159" title="Greenpoint, Brooklyn" label="Greenpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q771572" start="3161" end="3173" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156982" start="3255" end="3273" title="Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn" label="Bedford-Stuyvesant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937230" start="3275" end="3286" title="Boerum Hill" label="Boerum Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q828553" start="3288" end="3304" title="Brooklyn Heights" label="Brooklyn Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q991279" start="3306" end="3317" title="Brownsville, Brooklyn" label="Brownsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046569" start="3319" end="3334" title="Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn" label="Carroll Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3336" end="3345" title="East New York, Brooklyn#City Line" label="City Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680818" start="3347" end="3359" title="Clinton Hill, Brooklyn" label="Clinton Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977149" start="3361" end="3372" title="Cobble Hill, Brooklyn" label="Cobble Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354222" start="3374" end="3387" title="Crown Heights, Brooklyn" label="Crown Heights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3389" end="3402" title="East New York, Brooklyn#Cypress Hills" label="Cypress Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900913" start="3404" end="3421" title="Downtown Brooklyn" label="Downtown Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264951" start="3423" end="3428" title="Dumbo, Brooklyn" label="DUMBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294366" start="3430" end="3443" title="East New York, Brooklyn" label="East New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471250" start="3445" end="3456" title="Fort Greene, Brooklyn" label="Fort Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589993" start="3458" end="3465" title="Gowanus, Brooklyn" label="Gowanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605028" start="3467" end="3484" title="Greenwood Heights, Brooklyn" label="Greenwood Heights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3501" end="3509" title="East New York, Brooklyn#New Lots" label="New Lots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076016" start="3574" end="3584" title="Ocean Hill, Brooklyn" label="Ocean Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607610" start="3586" end="3596" title="Park Slope" label="Park Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159619" start="3598" end="3614" title="Prospect Heights, Brooklyn" label="Prospect Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q778934" start="3616" end="3621" title="Bridge Plaza, Brooklyn" label="RAMBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q22713707" start="3623" end="3635" title="Spring Creek, Brooklyn" label="Spring Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036480" start="3637" end="3650" title="Starrett City" label="Starrett City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156982" start="3652" end="3670" title="Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn" label="Stuyvesant Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270906" start="3672" end="3683" title="Sunset Park, Brooklyn" label="Sunset Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630163" start="3685" end="3697" title="Vinegar Hill, Brooklyn" label="Vinegar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163943" start="3699" end="3709" title="Weeksville, Brooklyn" label="Weeksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024714" start="3711" end="3726" title="Windsor Terrace, Brooklyn" label="Windsor Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167977" start="3728" end="3735" title="Wingate, Brooklyn" label="Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842591" start="3784" end="3796" title="Bergen Beach, Brooklyn" label="Bergen Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031191" start="3798" end="3806" title="Canarsie, Brooklyn" label="Canarsie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457933" start="3808" end="3817" title="Flatlands, Brooklyn" label="Flatlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842591" start="3819" end="3829" title="Georgetown, Brooklyn" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120898" start="3831" end="3842" title="Marine Park, Brooklyn" label="Marine Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858171" start="3844" end="3854" title="Mill Basin, Brooklyn" label="Mill Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13856437" start="3884" end="3891" title="Midwood, Brooklyn" label="Midwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q915813" start="3940" end="3954" title="Brighton Beach" label="Brighton Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="3956" end="3968" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137507" start="3970" end="3985" title="Gerritsen Beach, Brooklyn" label="Gerritsen Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238884" start="3987" end="3996" title="Gravesend, Brooklyn" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706396" start="3998" end="4007" title="Homecrest, Brooklyn" label="Homecrest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4009" end="4016" title="Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn#Madison subsection" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q13856437" start="4018" end="4025" title="Midwood, Brooklyn" label="Midwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599635" start="4027" end="4042" title="Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn" label="Manhattan Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707194" start="4044" end="4054" title="Plum Beach, Brooklyn" label="Plum Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569695" start="4056" end="4063" title="Sea Gate, Brooklyn" label="Seagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524180" start="4065" end="4079" title="Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn" label="Sheepshead Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892166" start="4130" end="4139" title="Bay Ridge, Brooklyn" label="Bay Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911280" start="4141" end="4153" title="Borough Park, Brooklyn" label="Borough Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318679" start="4155" end="4168" title="Dyker Heights, Brooklyn" label="Dyker Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754060" start="4170" end="4178" title="Mapleton, Brooklyn" label="Mapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536676" start="4180" end="4191" title="New Utrecht, Brooklyn" label="New Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868889" start="4193" end="4203" title="Bath Beach, Brooklyn" label="Bath Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q818193" start="4205" end="4216" title="Bensonhurst, Brooklyn" label="Bensonhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283687" start="4265" end="4276" title="Ditmas Park, Brooklyn" label="Ditmas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328357" start="4278" end="4291" title="East Flatbush, Brooklyn" label="East Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4293" end="4301" title="East Flatbush, Brooklyn#Farragut" label="Farragut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455188" start="4303" end="4316" title="Fiske Terrace, Brooklyn" label="Fiske Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q840381" start="4318" end="4326" title="Flatbush" label="Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391396" start="4328" end="4338" title="Kensington, Brooklyn" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063239" start="4340" end="4365" title="Prospect Lefferts Gardens" label="Prospect Lefferts Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250806" start="4367" end="4386" title="Prospect Park South" label="Prospect Park South"/>
<link wikidata="Q222379" start="4402" end="4429" title="List of Bronx neighborhoods" label="List of Bronx neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039777" start="4431" end="4462" title="List of Manhattan neighborhoods" label="List of Manhattan neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243678" start="4464" end="4492" title="List of Queens neighborhoods" label="List of Queens neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291357" start="4494" end="4529" title="List of Staten Island neighborhoods" label="List of Staten Island neighborhoods"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306380" wikidata="Q7337661" url="?curid=306380" title="River Oaks, Houston">
<text>River Oaks is a residential community located in the center of Houston, Texas, United States. Located within the 610 Loop and between Downtown and Uptown, the community spans . Established in the 1920s by brothers Will Hogg and Michael Hogg, the community became a well-publicized national model for community planning. Real estate values in the community range from $1 million to over $20 million. River Oaks was also named the most expensive neighborhood in Houston in 2013. The community is home to River Oaks Country Club, which includes a golf course designed by architect Donald Ross and redesigned in 2015 by Tom Fazio.

==History==

In 1923, Thomas William House, Jr., Thomas H. Ball, and Junius W. Reynolds founded the Country Club Estates Company. This firm acquired two large tracts west of Houston totalling 360 acres for the purpose of developing a subdivision. County Club Estates Company sold investors shares to fund the River Oaks Country Club, which they chartered on February 1, 1923. The club developed both recreational facilities for adults and children.

Country Club Estates Company planned a residential subdivision near the country club grounds. Kenneth E. Womack and Ball sold club memberships and also charter memberships which bundled a club membership with a share of stock in the residential investment. They raised a total of $249,750 for Country Club Estates Company. They hired Herbert A. Kipp for the design of the first subdivision, covering an area of about 178 acres. Keeping with the country club theme, Kipp laid out wide, curving roads for a non-gridded network and named some of them for well-known country clubs. Some of the larger lots ranged from one-quarter acre to four acres in size.

William and Michael Hogg, the sons of former Texas Governor Jim Hogg, and attorney Hugh Potter established River Oaks in the 1920s. Potter obtained an option to purchase around the River Oaks Country Club in 1923, and in the following year William Hogg established the Country Club Estates in order to support the development of the community. The two brothers promoted the sale of lots in the subdivision for apiece in 1928. The brothers, along with sister Ima Hogg, oversaw the construction of Bayou Bend, a stately southern-style home on the banks of Buffalo Bayou.

The first development of River Oaks was the summer house of William L. Clayton. Houston-architect Birdsall Briscoe completed this Colonial Revival home for the Clayton family in 1924. This property is a City of Houston Landmark and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

The development plans ensured that River Oaks&#x27;s parks and esplanades were planted with oaks, shrubs, azaleas and other flowers. Every detail of the development was planned to establish a well-integrated community. Advertised as a &quot;distinguished experiment in fine living,&quot; River Oaks became a national model for community planning. River Oaks&#x27; planning standards, residential architecture, and landscape design were publicized during the 1920s and 1930s in national newspapers, real estate media and design journals. Deed restrictions at the time restricted home prices to over $7,000 and specified architectural styles, with a gentlemen&#x27;s agreement excluding blacks, Jews, and other minorities. Homes along Kirby Drive were restricted to American Colonial or English Tudor style architecture.

During the 1920s, River Oaks was so effectively organized, planned and restricted that it became the most expensive neighborhood in Houston. The City of Houston annexed the community in 1927, adding of land to the city limits. Bus service to Downtown Houston opened during the same year. After World War II, as Houston experienced its greatest growth, River Oaks became a haven for the wealthy of the city.

River Oaks has been the subject matter of scholarly studies, primarily because its significant contributions to Houston&#x27;s history and development as an elite suburban community. The community was the site of the 1972 murder of Dr. John Hill (later described in Thomas Thompson&#x27;s novel, &quot;Blood and Money&quot;). River Oaks was the home of Jeff Skilling before he began serving a 25-year prison sentence for his involvement in the Enron scandal.

The River Oaks Garden Club Forum of Civics, located in Upper Kirby, is listed in the National Register of Historic Places as the &quot;Forum of Civics&quot; on October 13, 1988. Formerly a county schoolhouse, the building is currently the administrative center for the River Oaks Garden Club.

In 2011 &quot;Bloomberg Businessweek&quot; ranked River Oaks as the seventh most expensive housing blocks in the United States.

In 2017 Hurricane Harvey caused some flooding in River Oaks.

==Geography==

Located within the 610 Loop and between Downtown and Uptown, River Oaks spans . The community is located in a region bounded on the north by Buffalo Bayou, on the east by South Shepherd Drive, on the west by Willowick Road, and on the south by Westheimer Road. River Oaks is located northeast of Uptown, north of the Upper Kirby district, west of Neartown, and is near to the freeway system and many major thoroughfares such as Westheimer Road, Kirby Drive and San Felipe Street.

River Oaks Boulevard, a road that runs through the center of the community, is lined on both sides by mansions and estates located away from the street. The two square mile (5.2 m2) area of the subdivision comprises approximately 1,600 homes, mostly detached single family homes. In 1990, the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; said that &quot;[t]he grandest streets are probably River Oaks Boulevard and Lazy Lane. Some of the houses are monstrosities, but many show taste and grace and also have lovely gardens.&quot;

==Demographics==
River Oaks is within the Houston Super Neighborhood #23 Afton Oaks/River Oaks, a division of the City of Houston that includes River Oaks and some surrounding subdivisions, including Afton Oaks. In 2015 the super neighborhood had 14,518 residents; 77% were non-Hispanic White, 10% were Hispanic, 7% were non-Hispanic Asian, 4% were non-Hispanic black, and 2% were non-Hispanic other.

According to the 2000 U.S. Census, the super neighborhood had 14,313 residents; 12,273 of them (85.7%) were White, 1,160 (8.1%) were Hispanic, 390 (2.7%) were Asian, 247 (1.7%) were Black, 18 were Native American, 13 were Native Hawaiian, and 23 were Others. 189 people were of two or more races. Of the 12,088 residents over 18 years of age, 10,390 (86.0%) were White, 945 (7.8%) were Hispanic, 353 (2.9%) were Asian, 205 (1.7%) were Black, 17 were Native American, 8 were Native Hawaiian, and 22 were Other. 148 were of two or more races.

As of 2000 the neighborhood had 8,169 housing units. Of the 7,401 occupied units, 3,573 were rental units and 3,828 were owner units. The Super Neighborhood had 3,518 families with a total of 9,521 individuals. River Oaks Super Neighborhood had a lower average family size than the average City of Houston family size. The River Oaks average was 2.7, while the city average was 3.4.

River Oaks is one of the wealthiest communities in Texas and the United States. Real estate values range from $1 million to over $20 million.

==Architecture==
The community has multiple houses deemed historic by the city government&#x27;s planning commission. the law allows for demolition of city-designated landmarks after a 90-day waiting period, so by 2020 multiple property owners tore down their respective historic landmarks. 80 demolition permits of River Oaks permits residences were approved in 2018 and 2019.

==Culture, parks, and recreation==

Adjacent to the community is the River Oaks Shopping Center, Houston&#x27;s first shopping center. Constructed in 1927 and designed by architect Hugh Prather, the center, originally known as River Oaks Community Center, was one of the first automobile-oriented retail centers in the United States. Its design, with arcs of retail space on either side of West Gray Avenue, was considered a model for future development. Portions of the historic shopping center were demolished in September 2007 to redevelop the site for a bookstore and parking garage. As of 2008, Landmark Theatres operates the River Oaks Theatre, an &quot;arthouse&quot; theater, located in the center. The theater is the last historic movie theater in Houston that is still being used as it was originally designed.

River Oaks is home to the forty-member River Oaks Chamber Orchestra. The orchestra is composed of musicians from around the United States and guest conductors from around the world. 
River Oaks Country Club, located within the community on the northern end of River Oaks Boulevard, is a country club that includes a golf facility that was designed by architect Donald Ross. Ross is considered to be one of the most significant golf course designers in the history of golfing. Opening in 1923, the country club has hosted the River Oaks International Tennis Tournament since 1931. The Houston Intown Chamber of Commerce assists economic activity in River Oaks. The Houston Ballet headquarters, training facilities and pre-professional school, the Ben Stevenson Academy, were located on West Gray near the River Oaks Shopping Center until 2012.

===Parks===

Several municipal parks serve River Oaks. River Oaks Park and the River Oaks Community Center, operated by the City of Houston, is one block west of Lamar High School. River Oaks Park includes a off-road trail located within the park&#x27;s boundaries, tennis courts, a playground, and a lighted sports ground. River Oaks Park includes the Pumpkin Carriage, intended to evoke Cinderella&#x27;s carriage. Around 2003 Friends of River Oaks Parks had restored the carriage. The &quot;Houston Business Journal&quot; said &quot;Pumpkin Park provides outstanding resources for neighborhood children – a wonderful playground, community center and the Summer Enrichment Program offering youngsters sports activities and crafts classes.&quot;

On June 24, 1999, the River Oaks Property Owners, Inc. entered an agreement with the City of Houston; ROPO agreed to maintain and upgrade parks and esplanades in River Oaks. ROPO also has the right to spend its own funds to improve them. Municipal parks assisted by ROPO include Del Monte Park, Mary Elliot Park, Ella Lee Park, Homewood Park, Kirby Park, Rebecca Meyer Park, Olympia Park, Pine Valley Park, and Sleepy Hollow Park.

==Education==

===Primary and secondary schools===

The Houston Independent School District (HISD) operates the public schools serving River Oaks. The community is within Trustee District VII. As of 2000, almost 9% of HISD property taxes originated from River Oaks residents.

The attendance boundaries of River Oaks Elementary School, Lanier Middle School, and Lamar High School include River Oaks. Lanier opened in 1926, River Oaks Elementary opened in 1929, and Lamar opened in 1937. there were 517 students in grades Kindergarten through 5 that were zoned to River Oaks Elementary School; that year, according to HISD estimates, about 56% attended River Oaks Elementary, about 41% attended private schools or homeschooling programs, about 2% attended other HISD schools, and about 1% attended public schools in other school districts. Laura Nathan-Garner, author of the second edition of the &quot;Insiders&#x27; Guide to Houston&quot; (2012), wrote that &quot;Many children in [River Oaks] attend [Lamar]&quot;.

In 1974 most of River Oaks was assigned to River Oaks Elementary School. Prior to desegregation, it had around 800 children. After desegregation, many parents removed their children from River Oaks Elementary, and the school was far below capacity. In 1986 the neighborhood component of the school closed. At the time River Oaks had mainly older families. At the time the remaining families who did have children had the money to send their children to private school and preferred to do so.

Between 1986 and 1996, River Oaks Elementary School only admitted magnet school students from other areas of the city. The community was divided between the attendance zones of Woodrow Wilson Elementary School (opened in 1925, now Ella Baker Montessori School), the now closed Will Rogers Elementary School (opened in 1950, closed in summer 2006), and Poe Elementary School. By 1995 River Oaks Elementary became one of the most prestigious elementary schools in Houston and had a waiting list. By that year several new families had established themselves in River Oaks and many of them were interested in sending their children to public school. In 1995, several River Oaks parents petitioned HISD to re-establish the neighborhood program at River Oaks Elementary School which allows non-magnet students residing in the school&#x27;s boundaries to attend. Some magnet parents opposed, believing that the River Oaks program would reduce racial diversity at the school. In 1996, HISD added a neighborhood program to the school for grades Kindergarten through 2nd, with grades 3 through 5 phased in over a subsequent three-year period.

Crockett Early Childhood Center is the closest public early childhood center to River Oaks, while Wilson Elementary School&#x27;s preschool program is the closest tuition-based program. Only economically disadvantaged students, homeless students, students who are not proficient in English, or children of active-duty members of the U.S. military or whose parent has been killed, injured, or missing in action while on active duty may be enrolled in tuition-free HISD preschools. Students who are eligible for HISD&#x27;s preschools may attend any Early Childhood Center in Houston ISD for free. Students not eligible may enroll in tuition-based HISD preschool programs.

Several independent (private) schools serve the community. Since the 1970s and by 1995, most of the children in River Oaks were sent to private schools. Catholic schools, operated by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston, include St. Thomas High School (9–12, males only, north of River Oaks along the north edge of the Buffalo Bayou)
and St. Anne Catholic School (K-8, south of River Oaks at Shepherd and Westheimer). Other private schools in the area and private schools marketed to River Oaks families include St. John&#x27;s School (K–12, in Upper Kirby), Annunciation Orthodox School (K-8, in the Neartown area), River Oaks Baptist School (K-8, in River Oaks), Episcopal High School (9–12, Bellaire), The Kinkaid School in (Piney Point Village). In 2006 St. Anne Catholic School received the Blue Ribbon Award.

===Colleges and universities===
River Oaks is within the Houston Community College System boundaries. The closest campuses are the Central Campus in Midtown and the West Loop Center. Four-year universities and colleges in close proximity to River Oaks include University of St. Thomas in Montrose and Rice University in the Houston Museum District.

===Libraries===

The community is served by the Adele B. Looscan Branch of Houston Public Library. The current building opened in September 2007. The former library, established in 1956, closed on August 27, 2005, and was demolished in February 2006.

The previous Looscan branch had around 61,000 visitors in the fiscal year 2005. The original plans for Looscan called for the library to get a $5.4 million renovation. An Upper Kirby group proposed a new site near the Upper Kirby YMCA. Around that period the group Friends of Neighborhood Libraries began raising funds. The replacement library, costing $6.2 million, has twice the staff and two and one half times the size of the previous facility. Friends of Neighborhood Libraries raised one million dollars in four months, and around $2.5 million in total to help fund the new library. The library, designed by Jackson &amp; Ryan Architects, houses over 60,000 books and is the first city LEED-certified facility. It includes a 120-seat multipurpose meeting room and a 14-seat private conference room. The library has several reading areas, including the Marsha Moody Children&#x27;s Reading Room, a teenager reading area, and a periodical reading area. The exterior was designed to match visual cues of buildings in the surrounding area, such as the River Oaks Baptist Church and School. The Emily Scott and Joseph Wood Evans Clock Tower, a part of the library&#x27;s exterior, includes a garden book archive and works of art.
===Gallery of schools===
==Media==
The &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; is the area&#x27;s regional newspaper. On Thursdays, residents receive the Bellaire/West U/River Oaks/Meyerland section, which covers events specific to these neighborhoods. The &quot;River Oaks Examiner&quot; and &quot;Village News&quot; are local newspapers distributed in the community. &quot;The River Oaks Buzz&quot; is a monthly magazine mailed free of charge to all residents and focuses on the community.

==Government and infrastructure==

===Local government===

Houston Fire Department operates Station 3 at 3735 West Alabama at Cummins, near River Oaks. The fire station is in Fire District 28. Station 3 moved to its current location in 1958. The station underwent a renovation in 2003 and 2004 and re-opened in the northern hemisphere spring of 2004. The community is within the Houston Police Department&#x27;s Central Patrol Division, headquartered at 61 Riesner. River Oaks has one of the lowest crime rates in Houston.
The River Oaks Property Owners, Inc. offices are at 3923 San Felipe Road. The community operates its own private security force, River Oaks Patrol. The Texas Department of Public Safety classifies the force as a guard, alarm, and investigation company. The community is within Super Neighborhood #23 and its recognized council was established on October 15, 2001. Each super neighborhood represents a group of civic clubs, places of worship, businesses, and other institutions and community interests. River Oaks is a part of the Houston City Council District G.

===County, state, and federal government===

River Oaks is within Harris County Precinct 4. As of 2020, R. Jack Cagle is the precinct&#x27;s County Commissioner. River Oaks is in Justice of the Peace/Constable Precinct One. As of 2012 Alan Rosen is the constable.

River Oaks is located in District 134 of the Texas House of Representatives and represented by Ann Johnson, a Democrat. River Oaks is within District 17 of the Texas Senate and represented by Joan Huffman, a Republican.

The community is within Texas&#x27;s 7th congressional district. As of 2019, the representative is Lizzie Pannill Fletcher. The United States Post Office Service (USPS) operates the River Oaks Post Office at 1900 West Gray Street, supporting the zip codes 77027 and 77019. The post office sits on a property with a gross building area of . In addition the Julius Melcher Post Office is near River Oaks. In January 2009 the USPS announced that it will put the River Oaks Post Office property up for sale. In October of that year the USPS announced that it, for now, will not sell the River Oaks and Melcher post offices.

Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Texas (METRO) operates bus services in and around River Oaks. Lines serving River Oaks are the 27 Shepherd, 32 Renwick/San Felipe, 41 Kirby/Polk and 82 Westheimer.

Harris Health System (formerly Harris County Hospital District) designated Casa De Amigos Health Center in Northside for ZIP code 77019 and the Valbona Health Center (formerly People&#x27;s Health Center) in Greater Sharpstown for ZIP code 77027. The nearest public hospital is Ben Taub General Hospital in the Texas Medical Center.

===Politics===
Politicians and political parties conduct fundraising campaigns in River Oaks because it has &quot;six desired qualities&quot; including &quot;allure, location, preening, location, Secret Service familiarity and location.&quot; In both 2000 and 2004, River Oaks residents gave $3.9 million to political campaigns. In 2008, they gave $3.4 million to political campaigns through the middle of that year. In 1992 Cynthia Mayer of the &quot;Philadelphia Inquirer&quot; described River Oaks as one of Houston&#x27;s &quot;richest, most Republican neighborhoods&quot;, and Bennett Roth of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; also described the area as such in 2008.

==Notable residents==
*Jim Bath, businessman
*George R. Brown
*Tony Buzbee, attorney
* William Lockhart Clayton, co-founder of Anderson-Clayton Cotton Company 
*John Connally, Governor of Texas
*Ted Cruz, Senator for Texas
*Clyde Drexler, professional basketball player
*Dan Duncan, businessman
*Carolyn Farb, philanthropist
*Andrew Fastow and Lea Fastow, primary figure of the Enron scandal and his wife
*Tilman J. Fertitta, businessman and reality TV star
*Thomas Ginn, developer, owner of Ginn Racing and philanthropist.
*Ima Hogg, philanthropist and art collector
*Molly Ivins, journalist, author
*Bob Lanier, former Mayor of Houston
*Khalid bin Mahfouz, Saudi Arabian oil figure
*John W. Mecom Sr., independent oilman
*Robert Mosbacher, businessman and politician
*Carli Mosier, voice actress 
*Joel Osteen, pastor of Lakewood Church
*Fayez Sarofim, investor on the Forbes 500
*Jeffrey Skilling, primary figure of the Enron scandal
*Stephen Susman, plaintiffs attorney and founding partner of Susman Godfrey
*Lynn Wyatt, socialite and philanthropist
*Oscar Wyatt, oil baron

==Gallery==
==See also==

* History of Houston
* Geographic areas of Houston
* Bayou Bend Collection and Gardens
* &quot;Highland Park and River Oaks&quot;

==References==
* McAdams, Donald R. &quot;Fighting to Save Our Urban Schools-- and Winning!: Lessons from Houston&quot;. Teachers College Press, 2000. , 9780807770351.

==Notes==
==External links==

* River Oaks Property Owners, Inc.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7337661" start="0" end="10" title="River Oaks, Houston" label="River Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="63" end="77" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453529" start="113" end="121" title="610 Loop" label="610 Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="134" end="142" title="Downtown Houston" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899434" start="147" end="153" title="Uptown Houston" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q98456554" start="214" end="223" title="Will Hogg" label="Will Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337669" start="502" end="525" title="River Oaks Country Club" label="River Oaks Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q364653" start="578" end="589" title="Donald Ross (golfer)" label="Donald Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815761" start="616" end="625" title="Tom Fazio" label="Tom Fazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424685" start="677" end="691" title="Thomas H. Ball" label="Thomas H. Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="1778" end="1792" title="Governor of Texas" label="Texas Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q728530" start="1793" end="1801" title="Jim Hogg" label="Jim Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q459784" start="2191" end="2199" title="Ima Hogg" label="Ima Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892295" start="2229" end="2239" title="Bayou Bend Collection and Gardens" label="Bayou Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q751638" start="2287" end="2300" title="Buffalo Bayou" label="Buffalo Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q860257" start="2363" end="2381" title="William Lockhart Clayton" label="William L. Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42291643" start="2401" end="2417" title="Birdsall Briscoe" label="Birdsall Briscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2552" end="2588" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q705914" start="3128" end="3132" title="Deed" label="Deed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046626" start="3239" end="3265" title="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement" label="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="3276" end="3282" title="black people" label="blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q570074" start="3355" end="3372" title="American Colonial" label="American Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q509364" start="3376" end="3389" title="Tudor style architecture" label="English Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="3653" end="3669" title="Downtown Houston" label="Downtown Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353736" start="4172" end="4185" title="Jeff Skilling" label="Jeff Skilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723024" start="4263" end="4276" title="Enron scandal" label="Enron scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337670" start="4283" end="4321" title="River Oaks Garden Club Forum of Civics" label="River Oaks Garden Club Forum of Civics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898724" start="4334" end="4345" title="Upper Kirby" label="Upper Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4364" end="4400" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="4587" end="4609" title="Bloomberg Businessweek" label="Bloomberg Businessweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="4710" end="4726" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453529" start="4798" end="4806" title="610 Loop" label="610 Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="4819" end="4827" title="Downtown Houston" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899434" start="4832" end="4838" title="Uptown Houston" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q751638" start="4920" end="4933" title="Buffalo Bayou" label="Buffalo Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988883" start="5023" end="5038" title="Westheimer Road" label="Westheimer Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899434" start="5075" end="5081" title="Uptown Houston" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898724" start="5096" end="5107" title="Upper Kirby" label="Upper Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337596" start="5126" end="5134" title="Neartown Houston" label="Neartown"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="5559" end="5576" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690833" start="5976" end="5986" title="Afton Oaks, Houston" label="Afton Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="6195" end="6211" title="2000 U.S. Census" label="2000 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="6286" end="6291" title="White (people)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="6311" end="6319" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="6375" end="6390" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029610" start="7695" end="7721" title="River Oaks Shopping Center" label="River Oaks Shopping Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932372" start="7807" end="7819" title="Hugh Prather" label="Hugh Prather"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315" start="7923" end="7937" title="shopping center" label="retail centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484805" start="8226" end="8243" title="Landmark Theatres" label="Landmark Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337675" start="8257" end="8275" title="River Oaks Theatre" label="River Oaks Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="8286" end="8294" title="arthouse" label="arthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337666" start="8487" end="8515" title="River Oaks Chamber Orchestra" label="River Oaks Chamber Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337669" start="8631" end="8654" title="River Oaks Country Club" label="River Oaks Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q364653" start="8809" end="8820" title="Donald Ross (golfer)" label="Donald Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="8915" end="8922" title="golfing" label="golfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777029" start="8973" end="9015" title="River Oaks International Tennis Tournament" label="River Oaks International Tennis Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787020" start="9112" end="9126" title="Houston Ballet" label="Houston Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916388" start="9194" end="9215" title="Ben Stevenson Academy" label="Ben Stevenson Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480866" start="9454" end="9471" title="Lamar High School (Houston)" label="Lamar High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="9681" end="9691" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842874" start="9786" end="9810" title="Houston Business Journal" label="Houston Business Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029560" start="10528" end="10563" title="Houston Independent School District" label="Houston Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337668" start="10778" end="10806" title="River Oaks Elementary School (Houston)" label="River Oaks Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q21016026" start="10808" end="10828" title="Lanier Middle School (Houston)" label="Lanier Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480866" start="10834" end="10851" title="Lamar High School (Houston)" label="Lamar High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703577" start="12049" end="12062" title="magnet school" label="magnet school"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="12160" end="12174" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097719" start="12214" end="12242" title="Ella Baker Montessori School" label="Ella Baker Montessori School"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227618" start="12335" end="12356" title="Poe Elementary School (Houston)" label="Poe Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q130192" start="13381" end="13406" title="English as a foreign or second language" label="not proficient in English"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="13797" end="13826" title="independent school" label="independent (private) schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="13942" end="13958" title="Catholic schools" label="Catholic schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="13976" end="14023" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591962" start="14033" end="14055" title="St. Thomas High School (Houston, Texas)" label="St. Thomas High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587025" start="14142" end="14166" title="St. Anne Catholic School (Houston, Texas)" label="St. Anne Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588837" start="14316" end="14338" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s School (Texas)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769770" start="14363" end="14391" title="Annunciation Orthodox School" label="Annunciation Orthodox School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337664" start="14421" end="14446" title="River Oaks Baptist School" label="River Oaks Baptist School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383468" start="14469" end="14490" title="Episcopal High School (Bellaire, Texas)" label="Episcopal High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q773495" start="14498" end="14506" title="Bellaire, Texas" label="Bellaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744702" start="14509" end="14527" title="The Kinkaid School" label="The Kinkaid School"/>
<link wikidata="Q981724" start="14532" end="14551" title="Piney Point Village, Texas" label="Piney Point Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971043" start="14600" end="14617" title="Blue Ribbon Schools Program" label="Blue Ribbon Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="14677" end="14709" title="Houston Community College System" label="Houston Community College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843062" start="14769" end="14776" title="Midtown Houston" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495922" start="14880" end="14904" title="University of St. Thomas (Texas)" label="University of St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q581308" start="14908" end="14916" title="Montrose, Houston" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="14921" end="14936" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644021" start="14944" end="14967" title="Houston Museum District" label="Houston Museum District"/>
<link wikidata="Q55541648" start="15018" end="15034" title="Adele Briscoe Looscan" label="Adele B. Looscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647690" start="15045" end="15067" title="Houston Public Library" label="Houston Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898724" start="15393" end="15404" title="Upper Kirby, Houston" label="Upper Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="15452" end="15456" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337664" start="16276" end="16312" title="River Oaks Baptist School" label="River Oaks Baptist Church and School"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="16498" end="16515" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q773495" start="16597" end="16605" title="Bellaire, Texas" label="Bellaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q982459" start="16606" end="16612" title="West University Place, Texas" label="West U"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826462" start="16624" end="16633" title="Meyerland, Houston, Texas" label="Meyerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837706" start="16706" end="16725" title="River Oaks Examiner" label="River Oaks Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088755" start="16742" end="16754" title="Village News and Southwest News" label="Village News"/>
<link wikidata="Q8469753" start="16995" end="17018" title="Houston Fire Department" label="Houston Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916689" start="17315" end="17340" title="Houston Police Department" label="Houston Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985379" start="17611" end="17644" title="Texas Department of Public Safety" label="Texas Department of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="18333" end="18363" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="Texas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707966" start="18429" end="18440" title="Texas Senate, District 17" label="District 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="18448" end="18460" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205149" start="18480" end="18492" title="Joan Huffman" label="Joan Huffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707394" start="18533" end="18572" title="Texas&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q58324313" start="18608" end="18631" title="Lizzie Pannill Fletcher" label="Lizzie Pannill Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="18637" end="18662" title="United States Post Office" label="United States Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015387" start="19130" end="19184" title="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Texas" label="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q501738" start="19344" end="19364" title="Harris Health System" label="Harris Health System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059720" start="19451" end="19460" title="Northside, Houston" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600752" start="19552" end="19570" title="Greater Sharpstown" label="Greater Sharpstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886546" start="19622" end="19647" title="Ben Taub General Hospital" label="Ben Taub General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="19655" end="19675" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="19874" end="19888" title="United States Secret Service" label="Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q600111" start="20130" end="20151" title="Philadelphia Inquirer" label="Philadelphia Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="20224" end="20234" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="20286" end="20303" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q550718" start="20375" end="20383" title="Jim Bath" label="Jim Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543613" start="20398" end="20413" title="George R. Brown" label="George R. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822000" start="20415" end="20426" title="Tony Buzbee" label="Tony Buzbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q860257" start="20439" end="20463" title="William Lockhart Clayton" label="William Lockhart Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q311293" start="20513" end="20526" title="John Connally" label="John Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="20547" end="20555" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q295340" start="20576" end="20589" title="Clyde Drexler" label="Clyde Drexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385978" start="20623" end="20633" title="Dan Duncan" label="Dan Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045353" start="20648" end="20660" title="Carolyn Farb" label="Carolyn Farb"/>
<link wikidata="Q504625" start="20678" end="20691" title="Andrew Fastow" label="Andrew Fastow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508194" start="20696" end="20706" title="Lea Fastow" label="Lea Fastow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723024" start="20730" end="20743" title="Enron scandal" label="Enron scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802933" start="20758" end="20776" title="Tilman J. Fertitta" label="Tilman J. Fertitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563165" start="20811" end="20822" title="Thomas Ginn" label="Thomas Ginn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563165" start="20844" end="20855" title="Ginn Racing" label="Ginn Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q459784" start="20877" end="20885" title="Ima Hogg" label="Ima Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q768717" start="20906" end="20919" title="art collector" label="art collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q454110" start="20921" end="20932" title="Molly Ivins" label="Molly Ivins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933111" start="20954" end="20964" title="Bob Lanier (politician)" label="Bob Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131157" start="20973" end="20989" title="Mayor of Houston" label="Mayor of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q325458" start="20991" end="21009" title="Khalid bin Mahfouz" label="Khalid bin Mahfouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262412" start="21037" end="21054" title="John W. Mecom Sr." label="John W. Mecom Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q978918" start="21076" end="21092" title="Robert Mosbacher" label="Robert Mosbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041279" start="21122" end="21134" title="Carli Mosier" label="Carli Mosier"/>
<link wikidata="Q468048" start="21152" end="21163" title="Joel Osteen" label="Joel Osteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q72176" start="21175" end="21190" title="Lakewood Church" label="Lakewood Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439077" start="21192" end="21205" title="Fayez Sarofim" label="Fayez Sarofim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436624" start="21223" end="21233" title="Forbes 500" label="Forbes 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353736" start="21235" end="21251" title="Jeffrey Skilling" label="Jeffrey Skilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723024" start="21275" end="21288" title="Enron scandal" label="Enron scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105794" start="21290" end="21304" title="Stephen Susman" label="Stephen Susman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709305" start="21366" end="21376" title="Lynn Wyatt" label="Lynn Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106325" start="21408" end="21419" title="Oscar Wyatt" label="Oscar Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136718" start="21460" end="21478" title="History of Houston" label="History of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535051" start="21481" end="21508" title="Geographic areas of Houston" label="Geographic areas of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892295" start="21511" end="21544" title="Bayou Bend Collection and Gardens" label="Bayou Bend Collection and Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q26458498" start="21553" end="21581" title="Highland Park and River Oaks" label="Highland Park and River Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715091" start="21710" end="21732" title="Teachers College Press" label="Teachers College Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306384" wikidata="Q1760244" url="?curid=306384" title="Yenching University">
<text>Yenching University () was a private research university in Beijing, China, from 1919 to 1952.

The university was formed out of the merger of four Christian colleges between the years 1915 and 1920. The term &quot;Yenching&quot; comes from an alternative name for old Beijing, derived from its status as capital of the state of Yan, one of the seven Warring States that existed until the 3rd century BC.

==History==
Yenching University was formed through the merger of four Christian schools over the course of five years, from 1915 to 1920:
* Hweiwen University (), also known as the Methodist Peking University, founded in 1890 by the Methodist Episcopal Church. This should not be confused with the National Peking University founded eight years later in 1898. Huiwen&#x27;s precursor (崇內懷理書院) was founded in 1870. Hiram Harrison Lowry was its principal.
* North China Union College in Tongzhou (). Its precursor (公理會潞河書院) was founded by the Congregational Church. Devello Z. Sheffield was the school&#x27;s principal.
*North China Union Women&#x27;s College (). Its precursor, Bridgman Academy (), was founded in 1864 by Eliza J. Bridgman. It would be renamed the North China Union Women&#x27;s College in 1907, with Luella Miner as its first president. When it joined Yenching University in 1920, it bore the name College of Arts and Sciences for Women of Peking University.
*The school of theology was itself a union of the theological seminary of North China Education Union and two Methodist theological schools in Beijing.

John Leighton Stuart was appointed as the principal of the university in January 1919, prior to which he had been teaching Greek at the Jinling Theological Seminary (金陵神學院) in Nanjing. As the university was initially short on funds, he turned to fundraising worldwide and received support from the estate of Charles Martin Hall, an American executive of Alcoa Aluminum. The university bought the royal gardens of a Qing Dynasty prince to build a scenic campus and employed gardeners from the Imperial gardens. In 1926 the campus was completed. Theology, Law, and Medical were the main schools of the university, together with Arts and Science studies.

Stuart determined to create a university that served the Chinese nation. He attracted major Chinese and Western scholars to teach. Religion was not a qualification, although Stuart gave major support to the School of Theology. Among the first was William Hung, who became Chairman of the History Department and Dean. In 1928, the Harvard-Yenching Institute was jointly founded by Yenching University and Harvard University for the teaching of the humanities and social sciences in East Asia. Under Hung, the university&#x27;s reputation for Chinese studies rose steadily, especially with the publication of the &quot;Harvard-Yenching Sinological Index Series&quot;. By 1930, the school was among the top universities in China, its teaching distinguished itself by a considerable academic freedom.

During the Second Sino-Japanese War, the area was occupied by Japan and the university was moved to Chengdu, Sichuan. After the People&#x27;s Republic of China was established in 1949, Yenching University remained open. 

In response to the PRC&#x27;s entry into the Korean War, the US froze all Chinese assets in America. The United States also prohibited transfers funds from the United States to recipients within the PRC, which cut off funding for American-influenced institutions in the PRC. The PRC began efforts to remove American cultural influence from China, including by nationalizing cultural institutions affiliated with the United States. In early 1951, Yenching University was nationalized and became administered by the Ministry of Education. 

In 1952, Mao Zedong&#x27;s government re-grouped the country&#x27;s higher education institutions with individual institutions tending to specialize in a certain field of study after the Soviet model. As a result, Yenching University was closed up, and its arts and science faculties were merged into Peking University and other state-operated institutions, its politics and law faculties were merged into China University of Political Science and Law, its economics faculties were merged into Central University of Finance and Economics, its sociology faculties were merged into Minzu University of China, and other faculties merged into other institutions. At the same time, its engineering section was merged with Tsinghua University, and Peking University moved from central downtown Beijing to take over the former Yenching University campus in the city&#x27;s Haidian District.

==Scholars==
Among the scholars who taught at Yenching University were:
* Wu Leichuan (theology)
* William Hung (sinologist)
* Zhao Zichen (theology)
* Qian Mu (historian)
* John Stewart Burgess (sociologist)
* Kenneth K.S. Chen (historian of Buddhism)
* Lu Zhiwei (theologian)
* Edgar Snow (journalism)
* Louis Rhys Oxley Bevan (Law)
*Luella Miner (dean of the women&#x27;s college)
*Margaret Bailey Speer (dean of the women&#x27;s college)

==Alumni==
Prominent alumni include: 
* Fei Xiaotong (anthropologist)
* Han Suyin (author)
* C.K. Yang (anthropologist)
* Bing Xin (Xie Wanying) writer
* Teng Ssu-yu (historian)
* Gong Peng (diplomat)
* Huang Hua (diplomat)
* James Shen (diplomat)
* Larry Wu-tai Chin (double-agent)

==See also==

* History of Beijing
*Michael Lindsay, 2nd Baron Lindsay of Birker and Hsiao Li Lindsay, Baroness Lindsay of Birker

==Notes==
==References==
*West, Phillip &quot;Yenching University and Sino-Western Relations, 1916-1952&quot; (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1976).
* Arthur Lewis Rosenbaum. ed., &quot;New Perspectives on Yenching University, 1916-1952 : A Liberal Education for a New China.&quot; (Chicago: Imprint Publications, 2012). . Some of the essays were first published in &quot;Journal of American-East Asian Relations&quot; 14: 1-4 (2004-2006).

Further reading

* Edwards, Dwight Woodbridge. Yenching University. New York, United Board for Christian, Higher Education in Asia, 1959.

==External links==
*Internet Mission Photography Archive (enter &quot;Yenching University in Search Box)
*Photos at the International Mission Photography Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1760244" start="0" end="19" title="Yenching University" label="Yenching University"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="29" end="36" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="37" end="56" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="60" end="67" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055713" start="316" end="332" title="Yan (state)" label="the state of Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="351" end="365" title="Warring States" label="Warring States"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="639" end="665" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="704" end="730" title="Peking University" label="National Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769187" start="820" end="840" title="Hiram Harrison Lowry" label="Hiram Harrison Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q393836" start="891" end="899" title="Tongzhou District, Beijing" label="Tongzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="947" end="968" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q110914186" start="970" end="990" title="Devello Z. Sheffield" label="Devello Z. Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668027" start="1127" end="1144" title="Eliza Jane Gillett Bridgman" label="Eliza J. Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119997" start="1223" end="1235" title="Luella Miner" label="Luella Miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q836865" start="1535" end="1555" title="John Leighton Stuart" label="John Leighton Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1658" end="1663" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="1711" end="1718" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q443131" start="1843" end="1862" title="Charles Martin Hall" label="Charles Martin Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q135325" start="1889" end="1903" title="Alcoa" label="Alcoa Aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1950" end="1962" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147010" start="2435" end="2447" title="William Hung (sinologist)" label="William Hung"/>
<link wikidata="Q175863" start="2518" end="2544" title="Harvard-Yenching Institute" label="Harvard-Yenching Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2592" end="2610" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="2669" end="2678" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="2997" end="3021" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="3086" end="3093" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="3095" end="3102" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3114" end="3145" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="3253" end="3263" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042167" start="3722" end="3743" title="Ministry of Education (China)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="3756" end="3766" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="4048" end="4065" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q833961" start="4153" end="4198" title="China University of Political Science and Law" label="China University of Political Science and Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061957" start="4241" end="4284" title="Central University of Finance and Economics" label="Central University of Finance and Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190336" start="4327" end="4352" title="Minzu University of China" label="Minzu University of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="4428" end="4439" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="4464" end="4483" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q393454" start="4613" end="4629" title="Haidian District" label="Haidian District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038931" start="4706" end="4717" title="Wu Leichuan" label="Wu Leichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147010" start="4731" end="4756" title="William Hung (sinologist)" label="William Hung (sinologist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668170" start="4759" end="4770" title="Zhao Zichen" label="Zhao Zichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q707313" start="4784" end="4791" title="Qian Mu" label="Qian Mu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4806" end="4826" title="John Stewart Burgess" label="John Stewart Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4843" end="4860" title="Kenneth K.S. Chen" label="Kenneth K.S. Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694948" start="4887" end="4896" title="Lu Zhiwei" label="Lu Zhiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q557081" start="4912" end="4922" title="Edgar Snow" label="Edgar Snow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4938" end="4960" title="Louis Rhys Oxley Bevan" label="Louis Rhys Oxley Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119997" start="4968" end="4980" title="Luella Miner" label="Luella Miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q94649956" start="5017" end="5038" title="Margaret Bailey Speer" label="Margaret Bailey Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q982656" start="5115" end="5127" title="Fei Xiaotong" label="Fei Xiaotong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16400" start="5147" end="5156" title="Han Suyin" label="Han Suyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11118311" start="5168" end="5177" title="C.K. Yang (sociologist)" label="C.K. Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q374757" start="5197" end="5205" title="Bing Xin" label="Bing Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862237" start="5229" end="5240" title="Teng Ssu-yu" label="Teng Ssu-yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15907985" start="5255" end="5275" title="Gong Peng" label="Gong Peng (diplomat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q381220" start="5278" end="5287" title="Huang Hua (politician)" label="Huang Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143085" start="5301" end="5311" title="James Shen" label="James Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q701250" start="5325" end="5342" title="Larry Wu-tai Chin" label="Larry Wu-tai Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565847" start="5375" end="5393" title="History of Beijing" label="History of Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13648762" start="5395" end="5439" title="Michael Lindsay, 2nd Baron Lindsay of Birker" label="Michael Lindsay, 2nd Baron Lindsay of Birker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5924204" start="5444" end="5488" title="Hsiao Li Lindsay, Baroness Lindsay of Birker" label="Hsiao Li Lindsay, Baroness Lindsay of Birker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208366" start="5868" end="5908" title="Journal of American-East Asian Relations" label="Journal of American-East Asian Relations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306385" wikidata="Q7722725" url="?curid=306385" title="The Christian Science Journal">
<text>The Christian Science Journal is an official monthly publication of the Church of Christ, Scientist through the Christian Science Publishing Society, founded in 1883 by Mary Baker Eddy. The first edition appeared on April 14, 1883, bearing the subtitle, &quot;An Independent Family Paper to Promote Health and Morals&quot;. At that time, Eddy was the editor and main contributor to the &quot;Journal&quot;. The magazine is based in Boston.

The &quot;Journal&quot; is designed to demonstrate the practical applications of Christian Science healing practice. Instructive articles and verified reports of Christian healing give the reader a working understanding of the Principle and practice of Christian Science. Each issue also contains editorials, interviews, church news, poems, as well as a worldwide directory of Christian Science practitioners, teachers, churches, Reading Rooms, organizations at universities and colleges, and more. Two sister publications exist: the &quot;Christian Science Sentinel&quot;, a weekly magazine; and &quot;The Herald of Christian Science&quot;, which is published in a number of foreign languages.

== Notable editors and contributors ==
=== Editors ===
* Septimus J. Hanna
* Emma Curtis Hopkins
* Annie M. Knott
* William D. McCrackan

=== Contributors ===
* Neil Kensington Adam
* Alice Stone Blackwell
* Charles Lightoller
*Marietta T. Webb

==References==
==External links==
*Official web site of &quot;The Christian Science Journal&quot;
*Online directory of practitioners, churches, etc. (also printed at the back of each issue of the &quot;Journal&quot;)
*&quot;The Christian Science Journal&quot; archive at Hathitrust</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11682820" start="72" end="99" title="Church of Christ, Scientist" label="Church of Christ, Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110119" start="112" end="148" title="Christian Science Publishing Society" label="Christian Science Publishing Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q235069" start="169" end="184" title="Mary Baker Eddy" label="Mary Baker Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="432" end="438" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110129" start="818" end="848" title="Christian Science practitioner" label="Christian Science practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110122" start="871" end="884" title="Christian Science Reading Room" label="Reading Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110123" start="981" end="1007" title="Christian Science Sentinel" label="Christian Science Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739417" start="1044" end="1075" title="The Herald of Christian Science" label="The Herald of Christian Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452305" start="1194" end="1211" title="Septimus J. Hanna" label="Septimus J. Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424370" start="1214" end="1233" title="Emma Curtis Hopkins" label="Emma Curtis Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16989240" start="1236" end="1250" title="Annie M. Knott" label="Annie M. Knott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031587" start="1253" end="1273" title="William D. McCrackan" label="William D. McCrackan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874303" start="1298" end="1318" title="Neil Kensington Adam" label="Neil Kensington Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646853" start="1321" end="1342" title="Alice Stone Blackwell" label="Alice Stone Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q287044" start="1345" end="1363" title="Charles Lightoller" label="Charles Lightoller"/>
<link wikidata="Q130301468" start="1365" end="1381" title="Marietta T. Webb" label="Marietta T. Webb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306386" wikidata="Q885104" url="?curid=306386" title="George Izard">
<text>George Izard (October 21, 1776 – November 22, 1828) was a senior officer of the United States Army who served as the second governor of Arkansas Territory from 1825 to 1828. He was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society in 1807.

==Early life and education==
George Izard was born in Richmond, England, to Ralph Izard, who was a delegate to the Continental Congress and United States Senator from South Carolina, and Alice DeLancey, niece of New York Governor James DeLancey and a descendant of Stephanus Van Cortlandt and Gertrude Schuyler. He graduated from the College of Philadelphia (present-day University of Pennsylvania) in 1792. He attended military academies in England and Germany and received military engineering instruction in France.

==Military career==

On November 4, 1794, Izard was commissioned a Lieutenant in the newly established U.S. Corps of Artillerists and Engineers. Returning from Europe, he was assigned to an engineer company at West Point, New York. From there, he was ordered to oversee the construction of Castle Pinckney in South Carolina.

In January 1800, Izard became aide-de-camp to Army commander Alexander Hamilton. A few months later he was invited by William Loughton Smith, Minister Plenipotentiary to Portugal, to serve as his secretary, a position he accepted. He left Portugal the next year and returned to the United States. He officially resigned his army commission in June 1803.

In March 1812, Izard was appointed as Colonel of the newly organised 2d Artillery Regiment. He was promoted to Brigadier-General a year later, and served as Wade Hampton&#x27;s second in command until his resignation, when Izard succeeded him. Promoted to Major-General in January 1814, he was in charge of the Northern Army protecting Lake Champlain, until ordered to reinforce the Army of Niagara. He was discharged in June 1815.

==Governor of Arkansas Territory (1825–1828)==
Izard was appointed Governor of Arkansas Territory in March 1825, and served until his death in 1828. He died of complications of gout in Little Rock. Originally buried near the Peabody School there, Izard&#x27;s remains were moved to Mount Holly Cemetery in 1843.

==Legacy==
Izard County, Arkansas, is named after him. The unit he commanded still exists as 1st Battalion, 3d Air Defense Artillery Regiment.

==See also==
*List of governors of Arkansas
*List of University of Pennsylvania people

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q885104" start="0" end="12" title="George Izard" label="George Izard"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="65" end="72" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="80" end="98" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="124" end="154" title="List of Governors of Arkansas" label="governor of Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="208" end="238" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500974" start="303" end="311" title="Richmond, London" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="313" end="320" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q969896" start="325" end="336" title="Ralph Izard" label="Ralph Izard"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="364" end="384" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="389" end="410" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="416" end="430" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q63413343" start="436" end="450" title="Alice De Lancey Izard" label="Alice DeLancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="461" end="478" title="New York Governor" label="New York Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161014" start="479" end="493" title="James DeLancey" label="James DeLancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498488" start="514" end="537" title="Stephanus Van Cortlandt" label="Stephanus Van Cortlandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="583" end="606" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="College of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="620" end="646" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="836" end="846" title="Lieutenant" label="Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="872" end="912" title="Early_U.S._Artillery_formations#Corps_of_Artillerists_and_Engineers" label="U.S. Corps of Artillerists and Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="979" end="999" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049463" start="1059" end="1074" title="Castle Pinckney" label="Castle Pinckney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="1078" end="1092" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="1125" end="1137" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="1156" end="1174" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579645" start="1213" end="1235" title="William Loughton Smith" label="William Loughton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q116304320" start="1237" end="1273" title="United States Ambassador to Portugal" label="Minister Plenipotentiary to Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="1488" end="1495" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="1561" end="1578" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q266695" start="1607" end="1619" title="Wade Hampton I" label="Wade Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="1706" end="1719" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="1786" end="1800" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="2060" end="2064" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="2068" end="2079" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921230" start="2165" end="2185" title="Mount Holly Cemetery" label="Mount Holly Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q61042" start="2207" end="2229" title="Izard County, Arkansas" label="Izard County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636630" start="2304" end="2337" title="3rd Air Defense Artillery Regiment" label="3d Air Defense Artillery Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="2354" end="2383" title="List of governors of Arkansas" label="List of governors of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603202" start="2385" end="2426" title="List of University of Pennsylvania people" label="List of University of Pennsylvania people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="306387" wikidata="Q5110123" url="?curid=306387" title="Christian Science Sentinel">
<text>The Christian Science Sentinel (originally the &quot;Christian Science Weekly&quot;) is a magazine published by the Christian Science Publishing Society based in Boston, Massachusetts. The magazine was launched by Mary Baker Eddy in 1898. It includes articles, editorials, and accounts of healings from a Christian Science point of view.

The &quot;Christian Science Sentinel Radio Edition&quot; was a weekly radio program broadcast around the world and released monthly on CD and cassette tape. It dealt with the same issues as the magazine, via interviews and discussions. It was replaced with &quot;Sentinel&quot; Watch, a weekly podcast airing since 2016 on the website JSH-Online.

The &quot;Sentinel&quot;, along with the monthly &quot;Christian Science Journal&quot;, is a primary source for information about the church and its members. A sister publication, &quot;The Herald of Christian Science&quot;, exists in a number of foreign languages. Back issues of these magazines are made available at Christian Science Reading Rooms and also at some university and public libraries.

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="90" end="98" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110119" start="116" end="152" title="Christian Science Publishing Society" label="Christian Science Publishing Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="162" end="168" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="170" end="183" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q235069" start="214" end="229" title="Mary Baker Eddy" label="Mary Baker Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555508" start="409" end="422" title="radio program" label="radio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="474" end="476" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="481" end="494" title="cassette tape" label="cassette tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722725" start="742" end="767" title="The Christian Science Journal" label="Christian Science Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739417" start="873" end="904" title="The Herald of Christian Science" label="The Herald of Christian Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110122" start="1006" end="1036" title="Christian Science Reading Room" label="Christian Science Reading Room"/>
</links>
</doc>
