<doc id="303700" wikidata="Q2361279" url="?curid=303700" title="Moira MacTaggert">
<text>Dr. Moira MacTaggert, more recently known as Moira X, is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She first appeared in &quot;The Uncanny X-Men&quot; #96 (Dec. 1975) and was created by writer Chris Claremont and artist Dave Cockrum. She works as a geneticist and is an expert in mutant affairs. She is most commonly in association with the X-Men and has been a member of the Muir Island X-Men team and Excalibur.

For the first 44 years of publication, Moira was traditionally depicted in comic books as a supporting character to the X-Men and a human love interest for central character Professor Xavier. In 2019, as part Marvel&#x27;s &quot;House of X&quot; and &quot;Powers of X&quot; relaunch of &quot;X-Men&quot; comics by writer Jonathan Hickman, Moira&#x27;s backstory was fundamentally changed, revealing she had been a mutant all along, with a rare power that let her redo her life every time she died. The story set the stage for a major status quo change for &quot;X-Men&quot; comics, including the formation of the mutant nation state of Krakoa. Later still, Moira betrays the mutant cause and becomes an antagonist to the X-Men.

Moira MacTaggert has appeared in &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot;, portrayed by Olivia Williams, as well as &quot;X-Men: First Class&quot; and &quot;X-Men: Apocalypse&quot;, portrayed by Rose Byrne.

==Publication history==
Moira MacTaggert was created by Chris Claremont and Dave Cockrum, and first appeared in &quot;Uncanny X-Men&quot; #96 (December 1975). Moira was one of the major supporting characters in Claremont&#x27;s Uncanny X-Men run. She worked as a geneticist and was an expert in mutant affairs. She was romantically involved with Professor X. She would eventually found a foundation center on Muir Island centered on mutant research.

Moira MacTaggert received an entry in the &quot;Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe Update &#x27;89&quot; #4.

Grant Morrison wanted to use Moira on their run on &quot;New X-Men&quot; as the team scientist, but she was killed prior to the start of the series causing them to use Beast (Henry &quot;Hank&quot; McCoy) instead.

Moira was one of the feature characters in the 2011 two-issue limited series &quot;Chaos War: X-Men&quot;.

She is one of the main characters in &quot;House of X and Powers of X&quot;, written by Jonathan Hickman. &quot;House of X&quot; #2 retconned established continuity, revealing her to be a mutant with the ability to reincarnate within her own timeline; on her death, she is returned to the moment she is conceived with full knowledge of her previous lives. Her knowledge of potential futures, when divulged to Professor X and Magneto, leads to the formation of the nation-state of Krakoa and the new status quo for the X-Men books following &quot;House of X&quot; and &quot;Powers of X&quot;.

==Fictional character biography==

===Early years===
Born Moira Kinross to Scottish parents, Moira MacTaggert was one of the world&#x27;s leading authorities on genetic mutation, earning her a Nobel Prize for her work. She was the longest running human associate of the X-Men and was Professor Charles Xavier&#x27;s colleague, confidante, and also once his fiancée, having met and fallen in love with him while they were postgraduates at Oxford University. She ended their engagement for unknown reasons and returned to Scotland. She was married to her old flame, the late politician Joseph MacTaggert which caused delays with her former engagement to Xavier: Joe had proved to be an abusive husband; Moira separated from him after he beat her into a week long coma and, as it is implied, raped her, leaving her pregnant. She kept her son&#x27;s existence a secret, and when Joe refused her a divorce, she allowed people to believe she was widowed.

She eventually created a Mutant Research Centre on Muir Island, off the coast of Scotland. Moira was forced to contain and imprison her son Kevin, later called Proteus, when he developed reality warping abilities and severe psychosis. One of Moira&#x27;s goals was to understand human/mutant genetics, in order to cure her son.
Moira&#x27;s connection to the X-Men began long before the team formed. The silent partner in the founding of Xavier&#x27;s School for Gifted Youngsters and co-creator of Cerebro, Moira assisted Xavier in helping the young Jean Grey recover after the traumatic triggering of her mutant abilities.

Moira was a kind woman who took to helping humans and mutants alike. She rescued a young Rahne Sinclair (Wolfsbane) from an angry mob, and adopted the girl. She even attempted to treat Xavier&#x27;s son, a mutant known as Legion who suffered from dissociative identity disorder. When a confused, traumatized Cable first arrived from the future, he washed up in Scotland unable to speak English, and it was Moira who stood up for him against an angry mob. Taking him back to Muir Island, he scanned her mind and learned English in the process, as well as the truth about her son, and promised to keep her secrets. She taught him literature and the customs of the time and introduced him to Xavier. They became close friends ever since, being the first kind person Cable met in the present timeline, her later death devastating him enough to leave the X-Men. When Magneto was reduced to infancy, he was entrusted to Moira&#x27;s care on Muir Island, where she altered his genetic code in an attempt to keep him from reverting to villainy.

===Involvement with the X-Men===
Moira appeared at Xavier&#x27;s call to act as &quot;housekeeper&quot; for the team while they were on missions (a position that required her to demonstrate her proficiency with an M16 rifle against a demon within hours of her arrival). Though each of the X-Men formed some sort of relationship with the &quot;Widow&quot; MacTaggert, Moira and Sean Cassidy (Banshee) hit it off immediately, forming an on-and-off relationship that would last for the remainder of her life. Proteus&#x27; escape and eventual destruction at the hands of Colossus and the X-Men left Moira in a position of ethical compromise again: though Banshee stopped her from cloning her son, she saved his genetic structure on disk to allow herself the future option of bringing him back.

After finding out that her foster daughter, Rahne, was a mutant, Moira was the catalyst for change. She talked a discouraged Xavier into opening his school to the next generation of New Mutants, with Rahne becoming an initial member. She was also an integral part of the support for the X-Men and the New Mutants, providing medical aid including cloning Xavier after the Brood attacks, transferring his mind into a new body and restoring his ability to walk after a Brood embryo nearly killed him.
With the apparent death of the X-Men, Moira and Banshee formed an alternate team based from Muir, and carried on as the leader of the team without him when his duties with the X-Men called him away. Her behavior became unpredictable, her temper impressive, and her decisions harsh and unforgiving as she displayed behavior that made all who knew her suspicious. On Muir, she began to pit her charges against each other in an arena in merciless battles, supposedly allowing her the opportunity to study mutants in action.

Moira and her islanders were involved in the return of Proteus due to the influence of Advanced Idea Mechanics. This was a four-part story in 1991, that ran through that year&#x27;s annuals for the New Warriors, X-Men, New Mutants, and X-Factor. The Shadow King, the corrupting entity behind the island, allowed the Islanders to act heroically in defense of innocent lives.

Eventually, the entire population of Muir Island was identified as being possessed by and mentally corrupted by Shadow King, pitting the Islanders against the combined forces of the X-Men and X-Factor before Xavier freed them from his control.
Moira&#x27;s alteration of Magneto did not go unnoticed indefinitely. Enraged when he discovered Moira had tampered with his free will, Magneto took Moira captive and forced her to perform the procedure on half of the X-Men, turning them against their teammates. While Moira&#x27;s alterations worked, it was revealed that, due to mutants&#x27; powers requiring their body chemistry to operate in a specific manner, use of a mutant&#x27;s powers would cause them to automatically resist the &#x27;programming&#x27; and reverse the effects of the procedure, so anything Magneto had done was of his own free will. While hostage on Asteroid M, Moira witnessed Fabian Cortez draining Magneto of his powers and manipulating him into placing him as his right hand. Though Cortez fled, it was an observation that would eventually put Moira back in the hands of the Acolytes. Back on Earth, Moira was unable to accept her betrayal of her surrogate family and her own infallibility, and fled the X-Mansion, with Banshee in pursuit.

===Excalibur and the Legacy Virus===
When a mysterious virus began attacking the genetically engineered mutate population of Genosha, Moira volunteered her services as a geneticist and was forced to watch as the former slaves were decimated by disease. Returning to the X-Mansion, Moira found Illyana Rasputin suffering from the same illness, later identified as the Legacy Virus. Moving back to Muir Island after the girl&#x27;s death, Moira became the key figure in working for a cure to the disease (during this time, she also worked on curing Wolfsbane&#x27;s artificial bond with Havok).

The European superhero team Excalibur took up residence on Muir Island after assisting Moira. She had been attacked by agents of Mister Sinister who was seeking the genetic information on her son. Moira became an official member of the group, acting as their medic, team mother, and morale officer. An information leak revealed her to be the only human infected by the Legacy Virus—a bizarre turn of events possibly caused by her long exposure to the infected on Genosha, her autopsy of Illyana, or some susceptibility because she gave birth to a mutant. Despite these events, she maintained a strong outlook on life, helping to maintain discipline, reduce tension, and increase the team&#x27;s effectiveness throughout Europe. She convinced the team to stay behind when Onslaught emerged, telling them they might be needed if other heroes fell.

Conferring with the X-Men&#x27;s Beast did not result in appreciable progress. Locking herself in quarantine in a final attempt to cure the virus without endangering any of her teammates, Moira found her attempts foiled by her foster daughter, Wolfsbane, and Douglock. Wolfsbane originally leapt through the closing doors of the laboratory as the quarantine took effect. She soon found herself a willing assistant to her foster mother&#x27;s work. Douglock later caused much unintentional damage, his judgement clouded by personal feelings for Wolfsbane. Moira takes time off from her research to attend the bachelorette party and the wedding for her friends Meggan and Brian Braddock.
Moira did eventually find a cure for the disease, when the terrorist Mystique manipulated her research to force the virus to target only humans. Mystique, partly assisted by Sabretooth, then destroyed Muir Island, de-powered Wolfsbane with the power nullifier once developed by Forge, and brutally injured Moira. Bishop, Wolverine, and Rogue attempted to save Moira&#x27;s life. Despite Rogue&#x27;s powers temporarily granting her medical knowledge, she was unable to do so. Moira clung to life long enough to mentally transfer the information to Xavier in one final embrace between the former lovers. Xavier nearly went with her into death, but Jean Grey and Cable intervened on the astral plane, talking him down. She appeared to have died in the X-Men&#x27;s jet, far above the Atlantic Ocean, and was later buried in Scotland. A psychic representation of Moira was seen as an active portion of Xavier&#x27;s consciousness as he worked on rebuilding Genosha though &quot;she&quot; claimed she was just a manifestation of his imaginations.

Moira is next seen in the afterlife, in which she, Mockingbird, Gwen Stacy, and Dead Girl assist Doctor Strange in battling a being known as the Pitiful One. Moira finds herself more interested in the book club she formed with Mockingbird and Gwen Stacy than in battling evil.

===&quot;X-Men: Deadly Genesis&quot;===
After the events of M-Day and upon the reawakening of Vulcan, significant portions of Moira&#x27;s history with Xavier and the original X-Men are called into light. While in the rubble of Muir Island research center, Banshee freaks out when he notices Moira standing outside in the pouring rain, but when he rushes outside she has already disappeared. When she appears to him again, and believing he&#x27;s really seeing Moira&#x27;s spirit, Sean decides to follow her to a house where she leads him to an old stockroom. Moira&#x27;s image then fades away as Sean finds important notes from Xavier which reveals that during the early years of Xavier&#x27;s Academy, Moira founded and ran a secondary facility not far from the Xavier School, in which she had her own students—youths whom she took out of bad situations and adopted as her wards, training them in their abilities without the highly militant regimen of Charles&#x27; X-Men.

When Krakoa captured the original X-Men, it was Moira&#x27;s students whom Charles went to first—not the second team of Wolverine, Storm, Banshee, Colossus, Nightcrawler, Thunderbird and Sunfire as it was originally believed—putting them through the psionic equivalent of boot camp and allowing them to believe they were being trained over months as X-Men. Charles took them from Moira&#x27;s care immediately.

Moira&#x27;s students—Vulcan (Gabriel Summers, the lost brother of X-Men Cyclops and Havok), Petra, Darwin, and Sway—were apparently all killed, and Xavier suppressed even the memory of them from his own students to keep them from going back to save them. Only Moira&#x27;s project tapes—one made directly after the event before Xavier could suppress the memories—and an abandoned research center remain as clues.

===Chaos War===
During the &quot;Chaos War&quot; storyline, Moira MacTaggert is brought back from the afterlife, alongside the fallen X-Men members John Proudstar, Banshee, three Madrox dupes, and Sophie and Esme Cuckoo, after what happened to the death realms. After escaping from the Apache god Carrion Crow, the group discovers that Moira has been possessed by Destiny&#x27;s ghost. She returns to the afterlife after stopping the Carrion Crow from destroying the elemental spirits of life.

===&quot;House of X&quot; ===
In 2019&#x27;s &quot;House of X&quot;, it is revealed that Moira is actually a mutant with the power of reincarnation, starting her life again in the womb after each death, possessing full memories of her prior lives. She is also revealed to be alive, having replaced herself with a Shi&#x27;ar golem that went on to die at the hands of the Brotherhood. It can be assumed that the golem contracted the Legacy Virus, was seen in the afterlife following her death, and brought back to life during the Chaos War. Moira is revealed to be living her tenth life.

==&quot;The Lives of Moira MacTaggert&quot;==
===Life 1===
Moira Kinross is born to powerful Scots nobleman Lord Kinross. When she turns 13, her mutant ability manifests, but due to her passive power, there are no signs indicating that she has become a mutant other than a strong, temporary fever. Living a simple life, Moira meets Charles Xavier, but he passes through without forming a bond with her. She later marries a man named Kenneth Cowan and has three children: twin boys Callum and Dean, and a girl named Abigail. Kenneth dies when Moira is 68 years old, and she passes away from congestive heart failure at age 74.

===Life 2===
Her second life begins in utero, where she has already become fully sentient, possessing a perfect recollection of her prior life. This allows Moira to appear intellectually gifted, and she is pushed into academia. She doesn&#x27;t fight her parents&#x27; intentions, since she intends to understand her true nature. After she verifies that she isn&#x27;t suffering from psychosis or a disorder, and having lived through one life with Kenneth and learning all his faults, she makes a point not to fall in love with him when they meet. She enrolls at Oxford at age 16, becomes a biology professor at 20, and founds the Muir Research Institute at 31. At age 44, she finally deduces that she is a mutant after seeing Charles Xavier coming out as one on television. She boards a plane to the United States of America in order to meet him, but it crashes before reaching its destination, killing her.

===Life 3===
Moira makes a point of finding Xavier earlier in her third life. She meets Charles Xavier when they are both at Oxford University, and the two of them become the world&#x27;s foremost experts in genetic mutation. But Moira becomes displeased by his arrogance and thinly veiled god complex. She also becomes disgusted by her mutation, comparing it to cancer, and thus decides to invent a cure. Moira founds the Muir Research Institute, and at 36 she identifies the X-gene and eventually a cure. She intends for it to be voluntarily administered, but the very idea offends the Brotherhood of Mutants. Able to see the future, Destiny alone senses Moira&#x27;s mutant status and sees the effects her reincarnations are having on the timeline. Destiny orders Moira to stop wasting her gift by working against her own kind, and instead help prevent a future where humans try to exterminate the mutant race. Destiny also tells Moira of her own future, revealing that Moira will ultimately live either 10 or 11 lives, depending on the choices she makes in the 10th cycle. Destiny also reveals that if Moira dies before her powers manifest at the age 13, she won&#x27;t reincarnate. With that, Destiny warns Moira that she&#x27;ll continue to hunt her in each new life if Moira doesn&#x27;t work for the betterment of mutantkind. To make sure that Moira takes her seriously, she then has Pyro burn her to death, slowly, so she will always remember what this slow and painful death feels like.

===Life 4===
In her fourth life, reconsidering the positive nature of mutants and Xavier himself, Moira throws herself into studying the human-mutant dilemma. She meets Xavier and goes on to fall in love with and marry him, helping him to establish the Xavier School for Gifted Children. At first glance, this reality is almost a mirror of the current Marvel Universe with Moira, Xavier, and the X-Men fighting for the mutant cause for years. But ultimately at age 55, Moira realizes Destiny&#x27;s vision was right after all when mankind&#x27;s hatred and fear gains form: Bolivar Trask&#x27;s mutant-hunting robot Sentinels use adaptive artificial intelligence to anticipate and compensate for the variety of mutant powers, killing Moira&#x27;s love and her family.

===Life 5===
Now choosing aggression as a response to the violent tendencies of humanity, Moira runs away from home at 13 to encounter Xavier a full decade earlier than when they&#x27;re supposed to meet. Not wasting any time, Moira opens her mind to Xavier so he can see how his dream has failed in her past lives. The mind-reading radicalizes him, forcing the duo to form the mutant nation of Faraway instead of a school. Though the mutants finally seem to be safe from humanity, the adaptive Sentinels still invade their sanctuary. Moira is injured in the attack at age 43, and dies one year later in the ensuing genocide.

===Life 6===
In her sixth life Moira discovers the true threat to mutants is neither machines nor humanity but time itself. It turns out that while mutants are the natural evolutionary response to humans, they will never be the next evolutionary step for humanity, because humanity will render evolution obsolete by using the sentinels technology to adapt the environment to itself rather than adapt itself to its environment. Humans will then use technology to extend their lifespans until they reach evolutionary stagnation. At that point they will merge with their technology and become a genetically engineered new species. These new Post-Humans (&quot;Homo novissima&quot;) are human-machine hybrids that will depose both Homo sapiens and Homo superior as the dominant species on Earth. One thousand years in the future, the last surviving mutants are kept captive in preserve areas as a diversionary tactic to keep them from interfering with the process of breeding something far beyond human or mutant. Moira and Logan are among them, having survived on each other&#x27;s blood. One of the Post-Humans, the Librarian, explains his cohort&#x27;s plan to Moira and Logan: Homo novissima hopes to be absorbed by the Phalanx and &quot;ascend&quot; to the hive mind of a Dominion system, thus gaining control over time and space. Aware of Moira&#x27;s powers, the Librarian intends to send Moira and Logan to another planet to prevent her from dying and using her knowledge against Homo novissima in her resurrection. As long as post-humanity ascends to the Dominion before Moira dies, the Librarian&#x27;s knowledge of her abilities will exist outside of space-time, allowing the Dominion to stop or neutralize her interference with future timelines. However, Logan manages to kill the Librarian and, with her consent, Moira too.

===Life 7===
Knowing that the Trask family is responsible for creating the Sentinels, and how that technology will be used to overtake mutantkind, Moira applies not to Oxford but to the military, joining the British Air Force to learn all she can about killing. After building her skills, Moira goes underground and begins stalking the Trask family. Her goal is to prevent the rise of the Sentinels and Nimrod, giving Homo superior time to gain power before Homo novissima appears. Moira systematically murders Bolivar, Donald, Gwyneth, and Simon Trask over the span of a decade, and even takes out their children for good measure. Ten years after Moira eliminates the Trask bloodline, Dr. Hank Pym was assigned to create a weapon to use against mutants. He built a different line of robots named Ultrons. However, the Ultrons went rogue and turned on humanity. Before Moira died after discovering a wild Master Mold facility at the age of 49, she realized to her chagrin that artificial intelligence is a discovery rather than an invention. At a certain point in humanity&#x27;s environmental and societal evolution AI inevitably emerges.

===Life 8===
Abandoning Xavier&#x27;s peaceful dream to foster a safe future for mutants, Moira seeks out Magneto instead. Presenting Magneto with tales of her past lives and his future failures, Moira convinces him to join her. Together they conquer America, establishing the House of M. But when the followers of Xavier&#x27;s dream refuse to back down, the War of M begins. Eventually Moira witnesses Magneto&#x27;s defeat and death by the combined might of Earth&#x27;s humans and mutants, including the Fantastic Four, Avengers, and X-Men. Moira is imprisoned and later killed while attempting to escape.

===Life 9===
Though eventually a failure, the life-defining decision Moira made to turn to Magneto did validate her radical approach to beat humanity through force; Magneto was simply not enough. To that end, in her ninth life, Moira wakes Apocalypse from his slumber one year after meeting Xavier. Forming a powerful union, Moira becomes consort to Apocalypse, is enhanced by his technology, and is dubbed Mother Akkaba. Over the next three years, they murder the two main obstacles to their consolidation of the mutant race: Xavier and Magneto. Moira and Apocalypse then breach Arakko to rescue the First Horsemen, bringing back Apocalypse&#x27;s greatest warriors in the pursuit of survival of the fittest. In the years that follow, they found their own version of the X-Men, and enslave Mister Sinister to his yoke. By the time Moira is 42, the Apocalypse War for conquest of Earth has begun.

Earth&#x27;s heroes do not stand in the mutants’ way for long, as the Avengers are defeated three years into the war. The mutant race conquers Asia and establishes capital cities at Akkaba, Kyr and Tian. The war provokes a reaction from humanity in the form of the Man-Machine Supremacy, an alliance between humans and machines. While Moira and Apocalypse are distracted by the Annihilation Wave coming to Earth, Nimrod comes online. An anti-mutant, nano-Sentinel A.I., Nimrod is a quantum leap in technology, a paradigm shift which turns the tide of war back in the humans’ favor. Kyr and Tian are destroyed by Nimrod, while Moira and Apocalypse abandon Akkaba and flee back to the mutant island of Krakoa as their stronghold. Their population level reaches a crisis point, and their propagation becomes impossible due to the constant evasion-relocation-confrontation cycle.

As most of the mutant senior leaders die or disappear, the remaining ones approve the creation of the Sinister breeding pits on Mars, where Essex trains his chimeras to serve as soldiers on Krakoa upon reaching the age of 16. The first generation of chimeras draw from only one DNA source each. The second generation draws from two sources each, and the third draws from up to five each. The fourth generation is based on DNA from omega level mutants.

This last generation is made with a corrupted hive mind and is responsible for destroying 40% of the remaining mutant population, causing Krakoa to fall. These chimeras eventually commit suicide, destroying Mars and the Sinister pits in a self-singularity. The original Horsemen also die.

Moira and Apocalypse then discover that Mister Sinister himself had orchestrated the fall of Krakoa through his omega chimeras. He is later publicly executed by the Man-Machine Supremacy after defecting.

With the war raging for hundreds of years, Nimrod&#x27;s efforts lead the mutants to exile themselves in Shi&#x27;ar space, forming two main colonies: Benevolence and Chandilar. Remaining in the Sol system, Moira, Apocalypse, his new Horsemen and a select few mutants re-establish Krakoa as Asteroid K.

Apocalypse and Moira then formulate a plan to eliminate Nimrod, but during an assassination attempt on Apocalypse, Moira is brutally injured before they can destroy the intelligent and adaptable Sentinel.

Apocalypse&#x27;s forces eventually split into two teams: one group attacks the Temple of Concordance while the other heads into Nimrod&#x27;s vast archives to extract vital information about its origins. Once the files are gathered, Apocalypse sends Logan away, staying behind to guarantee the latter&#x27;s escape. Logan&#x27;s destination is revealed to be a container that has held Moira MacTaggert in stasis for over 16 years.

With the data embedded into Moira through a techno-organic interface designed by Apocalypse himself, she now knows how and when Nimrod is first brought online. Logan kills her so that she may take that information into her next life.

===Life 10===
Moira&#x27;s 10th life occurs in the current iteration of the Marvel Universe and if Destiny&#x27;s prediction was right, this might be the last opportunity she had to make the timeline what she wanted. This time, Moira decided to approach her tenth life differently. When she first meets Xavier in her 10th life, she allows him to read her mind to learn everything her lives had entailed. Since then, she&#x27;s been using the information from her previous lives to work with Xavier and Magneto to save mutants from humans and machines. As the years passed, it is revealed through her journals that Moira deliberately used her genetic expertise to find mates for herself and Professor X that, in combination with their own mutant genes, would potentially spawn mutants with reality-warping powers (Proteus and Legion), because she knew someone with that power would be needed in the future to enable the mutant resurrection protocol.

She notes how her influence indirectly imprinted the idea for a mutant stronghold in Magneto&#x27;s mind after Xavier used his powers to show Magneto the lives of Moira. This is why he created so many of his own, from Asteroid M to Avalon and Genosha. She also noted her worries for Charles Xavier, as while he kept being unacceptably hopeful and idealistic, he was becoming too dependent on her interpretation of past-life events, and she fears that she might have fractured Xavier&#x27;s psyche by allowing him to read her mind, which eventually leads to the creation of Onslaught when Charles uses his telepathic powers to shut down Erik&#x27;s mind completely. She reveals that she reluctantly allowed Xavier to read her mind over and over again, and laments, given her knowledge of Sinister&#x27;s treachery in her previous lives, that without her knowledge or consent, Xavier and Magneto tried to recruit him nevertheless, realizing in the process that Sinister has turned himself into a chimera mutant decades ahead of schedule compared to the other timelines, that chimera being the mutant clone of himself infused with Thunderbird&#x27;s DNA.

Eventually, Moira realized that she had spent too much time in the spotlight working overtly with Xavier and determined to live in secret in order to prepare the foundation for the eventual mutant nation of Krakoa, she and Xavier used the advanced technology from the Shi&#x27;ar to do some preliminary testing for their theory that a mutant could be restored from back-up, creating in the process a Shi&#x27;ar golem, a living husk whose empty body was then imparted with a perfect copy of Moira&#x27;s current memories and personality, recorded and re-uploaded by Charles Xavier using Cerebro.

Moira then replaced herself with the decoy at some point, allowing her to continue working from the shadows with Xavier and Magneto to make the dream of a peaceful mutant existence a reality. The decoy was able to easily convince &quot;herself&quot; and everyone else that it was Moira and even had all those adventures with Excalibur, contracting even the Legacy Virus and such before being killed during the attack of the Brotherhood, at the age of 49. Moira also notes that though Xavier kept fighting her influence, using the Cerebro unit on two different occasions to remove from his mind the knowledge of their plan, he apparently had become a man with a very different purpose following his demise at Cyclops&#x27; hands and his eventual return to the living.

Instead of his peaceful dream of coexistence between man and mutant which he believed at one point, Xavier now envisions a world where a mutant nation must be created as a seat from which mutants will rise as the dominant species on the planet. Moira has since taken residence in &quot;No-Place&quot;, a blackout zone within the newly sovereign, living island nation of Krakoa with Xavier and Magneto, the only people aware of her being alive and her actual role in this grand plan. She has become apparently very paranoid in her isolation, as she is deeply afraid of the notion of Destiny being revived to placate Mystique, or of any precognitive mutant in general because she fears what would happen if the other mutants discovered that they really are doomed.

Tensions began to build between Moira, Charles and Magneto during the events of Inferno, as Moira demands that Xavier and Magneto must destroy Destiny&#x27;s stored DNA and psionic records to prevent her resurrection from ever happening. Moira also demands that Mystique has to be removed from the seat of the Quiet Council.

Xavier and Magneto comply to Moira&#x27;s demands and gathered the data and DNA while also calling a vote for new members in the Quiet Council, which can be done at any time under Krakoan law, in order to oust Mystique. However, as Xavier and Magneto coyly make their case that it is time for change in the Quiet Council, stating that they are considering their own leadership roles and urging the rest of the council to also consider whether they&#x27;ll step down or remain, Mystique interrupts them, insisting there will be a vote at that moment, and what&#x27;s more, she has a candidate to nominate for membership on the Quiet Council, her resurrected wife, Destiny, much to Xavier and Magneto&#x27;s apparent chagrin and everyone else&#x27;s shock.

With Destiny alive once again, Moira decided to bring Emma Frost into their cabal in order to secure their grip on the Quiet Council and supported Xavier and Magneto&#x27;s plans to fill the final vacant seat on the Quiet Council with someone they could trust; Colossus. However, when Emma learns the truth, she&#x27;s very displeased with what she finds out and storms off saying that she will never trust them ever again after betraying her.

Emma Frost meets with Destiny and Mystique and shows them what Charles Xavier and Magneto showed her, including their past lives burning and torturing Moira McTaggert, which was also the reason Destiny was denied the chance to be resurrected even with all the secret missions that Mystique has done for the two. Armed with this knowledge, the two plan their revenge.

They take advantage of the fact that Moira McTaggert was picked up by the Orchis Foundation in France after it is revealed that she was under their surveillance for a while. Charles and Erik track Moira back to a secret Orchis site where they see bodies and a door where Moira&#x27;s signature was coming from but turns out it was a trap laid out by Destiny and Mystique.

As it turned out, they managed to get inside the secret No-Place in Krakoa after taking back Moira and they chopped off her arm and left it as a beacon to Magneto and Charles. At the same time, they cause so much death and destruction for Orchis that Karima Shapander aka Omega Sentinel and Nimrod personally lead the attack force and find the two mutant leaders in their site.

As Xavier and Magneto face off with the Orchis forces, Omega Sentinel kills all her own human henchmen, confessing that she, Nimrod, and their machine culture hate humans as much as mutants, and plan to destroy them too.

The battle begins in Xavier and Magneto&#x27;s favor, however, the tides quickly turn and they are both killed by Omega Sentinel and Nimrod, who manage to survive the encounter despite Xavier and Magneto unleashing their full might. As Magneto dies, he vows that he will see the villains again.

Meanwhile, back on Krakoa, Mystique and Destiny reveal their plan for Moira. They&#x27;ve discovered a way to cancel her mutant power from resetting the timeline if they kill her, the mutant negation gun Forge built years and years ago, given to them by none other than Emma Frost, who previously revealed Moira&#x27;s secret to Mystique and Destiny.

Using the gun, they negate Moira&#x27;s powers entirely, turning her human. As they gloat over this, Moira confesses that her real intent was never to preserve the mutant dream, actually following so many failures in her life, and the inability of stopping Nimrod from coming online, she had lost faith in the idea of a truly successful mutant society and in secret, she intent to depower all mutants, even those whose powers hadn&#x27;t manifested, so she could spare their eradication from either humanity or artificial intelligence. Moira is then saved from certain death by Cypher, whose connection to Krakoa allows him to be aware of what&#x27;s going on in Moira&#x27;s null space, and while he agrees with Mystique and Destiny that Moira must be condemned, they&#x27;ve made the mistake of turning her human, so killing her would be against Krakoan law.

Destiny senses three possible outcomes of their actions. If they kill Moira, they&#x27;ll be exiled and both will die. If they try to kill Cypher, they&#x27;ll both lose, and Destiny will never be resurrected again. However, if they let Moira go, they&#x27;ll maintain their places on the Quiet Council and have a chance to keep guiding mutantkind.

Reluctantly settling on the final option, Mystique and Destiny agree to let Moira live, with Cypher sending Moira through a Krakoa gate for the last time, with Mystique and Destiny vowing that Moira will be hunted by numerous forces.

Later as Xavier and Magneto are resurrected by Emma Frost, she reveals to them that she has revealed the secret of Moira X to the Quiet Council, and that all of them will bear the secret of Krakoa&#x27;s founding.

After going through the portal created by Douglas Ramsey, Moira finds herself back in Scotland. Abandoned by the mutants she once controlled, Moira has become increasingly bitter and dangerous. She steals a car so she can escape some unseen and unnamed pursuer. She finds herself coughing up blood and fortunately, since she made some connections in her days, she was able to get an appointment with Dr. Jane Foster. The prognosis is bad, as Moira has suddenly developed cancer which already spread to Stage IV, and the only cure she can find is Krakoan medicine, as if there was not a major waiting list for it. While Foster is out of the room, Mystique is able to gain access and attempts to kill Moira for her betrayal of Krakoa and Destiny, before Jane as Valkyrie bursts through the door, stopping Mystique from killing Moira and allowing MacTaggert to escape.

After cutting and dying her hair, Moira is once again on the run. She calls to Dr. Jane Foster again and finds out that the cancer she has in her lungs is being spread by a Krakoan floronic agent, suggesting that the living island Krakoa is directly responsible for her cancer. Moira destroys the phone, severing Jane&#x27;s connection to the woman she just saved and any possible answers she might get about why Krakoa is hunting her down. Enraged, Moira stops holding back, she cuts off her own techno-organic arm and lures Mystique into a trap and kills her by detonating a bomb in her room. She soon discovers that a bizarre Phalanx-looking Wolverine is also hunting her.

She infers that this Phalanx-Wolverine might come from the future which means she is about to do something dramatic to help the post-human side – which, apparently, she is quite keen on now that she has been kicked out by the mutants. Dubbing Phalanx-Woverine as Omega Wolverine, Moira confronts the genius techno-utopian businessman and billionaire Arnab Chakladar, founder of Epiphany, whose commercial memory drives served as a prosthetic cerebrum and a step towards true bio-tech synthesis, in his safehouse and explained her multiple lives and how mutants have already defeated death. This was enough for him to believe and help her. More than that, though, together they were going to try to build something and stop mutants. She wants his assistance to find a way to permanently cheat death and ultimately live forever and gets a new cyborg arm in the process. Meanwhile, Omega Wolverine is confronted by Wolverine (Laura Kinney), her sister Gabby and brother Daken. The three soon discover Omega Wolverine to be actually their real father ailing from the future. Logan came to the present to stop Moira from succeeding in her mission, by becoming an Omega Sentinel combined with the Phalanx.

Moira headed to Krakoa but because she&#x27;s no longer a mutant, she does something heinous and absolutely ruthless. Using her relationship with Banshee, she lures him into a trap and kills him and use his very skin like a suit to enter the Krakoan gates. After that, she tries to use the neutralizer gun on herself in order to get her powers back, so she could kill herself and erase the current time-line, but it does not work because Moira&#x27;s infiltration of Krakoa doesn&#x27;t go unnoticed, and Professor X mentally reaches out to her. Xavier tries to talk to Moira, implying that since Cerebro cannot copy the entirety of Moira&#x27;s psyche if she dies now there is no way of retaining the memories of her past lives, this allows Forge to get the drop on her, but not before she fires a shot from the same neutralizer gun that took her powers away. With her original plan to end the mutant race peacefully now transformed into a bitter war against the people she believes betrayed her, Moira has now fully embraced her selfish, evil desire to wipe out the mutants. Moira then tries to escape by kidnapping Destiny but Omega Wolverine shows up at the last minute before she could pass through a gateway and fatally stabbed her. Moira however is able to shoot Omega Wolverine with the neutralizer gun, which takes away his healing factor and allows the techno-organic virus to take over his body. As the X-Men were forced to respond to the Phalanx-controlled variant of Logan, Moira dies cursing Xavier for her fall from grace and vows to get her revenge.

===Life 11===
Moira&#x27;s eleventh life was prepared as a final back-up plan in case her assault on Krakoa failed. Moira and Arnab Chakladar had finished his work on biotech synthesis. A mnemonic copy of Moira was created before she left his lab, kept in reserve to activate only if she failed her mission on Krakoa. Crawlling her way out of her own grave, Moira MacTaggert was now a machine-encoded consciousness herself, an augmented intelligence, man and machine operating as one and the precursor of the deadly Human-Machine Supremacy from many of her futures. Driven by a sense of betrayal and the need to destroy the mutant nation which cast her aside after it was done with her and no longer needing to fear death, since she is now capable to re-uploaded her mind to get right back, as many times necessary into what is now her singular purpose; eliminate the mutants once and for all, indicating that she has become the same kind of threat she was attempting to prevent. Moira is later able to access Orchis internal relays to offer her services to Feilong and Dr Stasis.

Moira also creates a partnership with Druig of Thanos&#x27; Eternals group and begins to set in place a series of events that she hope will lead to humanity turning against the mutants and Krakoa being destroyed before they can gain supremacy over the planet, which is now Moira&#x27;s greatest fear.

With the apparent revelation that the mutant race is actually a form of &quot;excess deviation,&quot; similar to the Deviants metamorphosis, Moira hopes that this revelation will trigger the Eternals hard wired program to slaughter them. Later as the second annual Hellfire Gala is near, multiple anti-mutant adversaries looms ominously over the festivities, leading to the Avengers needing to step in to protect the Krakoa&#x27;s, Moira notes that while the two teams have fought before, pretty often in fact, neither has ever truly beaten the others. Moira even envisions she&#x27;ll be able to exploit the differences between the two groups of heroes and make them brutally kill each other, and ominous day dreams several fights where members of the two groups brutally murder each other, in line with the Eternals new &quot;Death to the Mutants&quot; messaging. Moira&#x27;s vision of the potential future, only possible &quot;If I play my cards right,&quot; sees Wolverine clawing Iron Man to death, easily swiping through his armor with his adamantium claws, while Thor lands a devastating blow on Cyclops, killing him instantly. In the two most intense deaths, Magneto suffocates Captain America with his own shield using his magnetism to end the Sentinel of Liberty&#x27;s life, while Captain Marvel unceremoniously snaps Rogue&#x27;s neck, putting an end to their long running feud and friendship. For these deaths to mean anything it would mean that the mutant&#x27;s ability to resurrect must be at risk, or else the X-Men&#x27;s deaths would mean nothing, hinting that part of Moira&#x27;s plan is revealing the Resurrection Protocols at the Hellfire Gala and potentially destroying the mutants ability to be revived.

After learning that Mary Jane Watson, the on-again off-again girlfriend of Peter Parker, has gained a ticket to the Hellfire Gala, Moira decides making her the perfect front for her to gain entrance to Krakoa and crash the party. She fully reveals herself to Mary Jane, showing she has shed the last vestiges of her humanity and is now fully an android, with only the mind of a living being. Moira then plans to brutally murder Mary Jane in the same way she murdered and skinned the X-Men Banshee.

Using her techno-organic form, however, she lets Mary Jane Watson wear her rather than Moira wear Mary. She bumps into Spider-Man, offering him a strangely cold reception thanks to her lack of knowledge about Spider-Man and MJ romantic connection. Later, MJ is able to set off his Spider-Sense, but he misinterprets his signal as MJ being under threat from the mutant Proteus.

What&#x27;s actually happening is that Moira has finally revealed herself to her son, who is one of the Five, in the hopes of getting him to betray the X-Men. But her gamble is folly, as she insults and demeans Proteus as no more than an experiment, not even truly her &quot;child&quot;. He demurs her insults, stating that he&#x27;s found a family among the Five and that he will not allow her to harm mutants.

Figuring out what&#x27;s going on, Spider-Man helps the X-Men fight Moira, but she manages to escape from the island still in MJ&#x27;s body. She later meets with none other than Druig of the Eternals, and reveals the names of the Five to the exact people who want to make mutants extinct.

After Mister Sinister successfully corrupted the X-Men into darker versions of themselves and began reshapping the future of mutantkind with his terrifying plans in Sins of Sinister, the corrupted Council eventually targeted the Living Island Krakoa itself with a blast from an orbital satellite and implicated the Orchis organization as the responsabile for the devastating attack which not only killed Krakoa but also destroyed most of the archive used to resurrect mutants and humans. With the public increasingly sympathetic to their cause, the X-Men teamed up with the Avengers and the Fantastic Four to take out Orchis, eliminating in the process Nimrod, the greatest threat to mutantkind&#x27;s continued existence, but unable to capture Moira who&#x27;s able to escape.

After spending a millennium hiding in the ruins of a dead Earth, Moira reemerged ready to help Sinister to recover the Moira Engine and reset the timeline one last time. Moreso, Mother Righteous, a divergent clone of Essex and another wildcard trying to recover the Moira Engine, began using the Legion of the Night to acquire many mystical artifacts from the ruins of the universe to build the Reliquary Perilous, actually a magical virus which would reset the timeline but send the data to Righteous instead of Sinister. However, before she could complete her schemes, she was ambushed by Wagnerine, whose child had secretly been made part of the Reliquary centuries ago. Too old and frail to even use his sonic scream, Banshee distracted Mother Righteous long enough for Wagnerine to kill her. By being patient, Moira was able to sneak into a very powerful position after taking possession of the Reliquary Perilous. With the shield protecting the stolen Moira Engine finally broken and with Mother Righteous&#x27; spell in her hands, Moira can reverse the timeline and give the present-day Orchis a serious advantage.

Moira X added the virus to the engine without Sinister&#x27;s knowledge, and further had the joy of watching Sinister try and fail to achieve Dominion status. With over four trillion Sinister-coded mutants in the galaxy by this point, Essex harvested their minds to ascend beyond time and space, only to discover a Sinister Dominion already existed, and rejected him. Moira X killed her own clones in the Moira Engine, sending a message back in time that mocked the present Sinister for his failure before eradicating his engine in the present day as well.

Moira and Orchis took many steps in the weeks to come for their chess match against mutantkind and when the third Hellfire Gala happened, Nimrod and Feilong&#x27;s Stark Sentinels introduced themselves to the mutant race. Orchis eliminated several Omega-class threats and lesser mutant targets. It gave Doctor Stasis plenty of time to gloat about his success at the last Hellfire Gala, when Moira was distracting security with her attack on Proteus. With some time in the Krakoan medicine factories, Stasis introduced a genetic modification into the mutant drugs—a kill-switch that allowed Orchis to kill any human who had used the tainted medicine, and blame mutants for the deaths. It served as a suitable distraction for Moira X to enter the Gala through a co-opted Krakoan gate. With a dagger dipped in Blightswill and her own mechanical immunity to telepathy, Moira plunged her weapon into Jean Grey&#x27;s back, taking another Omega-class mutant off the board and breaking Charles Xavier&#x27;s heart as his first and most beloved student died slowly.

Orchis held the human race hostage and compelled Charles Xavier to telepathically send all of mutantkind away. The Omega telepath forced the mutant race through the Krakoan gates to leave Earth behind, under the threat that Orchis would kill the humans if they returned. A few X-Men resisted and fled, but Xavier was held behind to watch as Orchis gunned down all the human witnesses who remained at the Gala. Moira X savored her victory a moment too long as Rogue arrived and obliterated her body and took Charles to safety.

As a machine herself, Moria was soon let onto the secret plan of Omega Sentinel and Nimrod; to turn Mars into a Worldmind using technology from Omega Sentinel&#x27;s future, and use it to lure a dominion that might absorb them into itself. However, Moira soon found herself sought out by a dominion; the mysterious Enigma, a dominion created by Nathaniel Essex.

Enigma had been limited to only the timeline of Earth-616 and its dependents by the Beyonders. By making Moira a part of it, it would gain access to the timelines of her previous lives. Enigma revealed that those who become part of a dominion are no longer themselves in any meaningful way, but offered to make an exception for Moira and make her a fully independent subroutine in its endless engine. Moira agreed to the offer, not knowing Charles Xavier was planning to kill her before her mutant powers manifested. That would stop her from restarting her life, prevent Krakoa from being established, avert the mutant massacre, and keep mutants safe. As Xavier&#x27;s about to execute a young Moira in the past, Rachel Grey stops him. She asks for a chance to change his mind. As Charles agrees, Rachel connects him with her team which made him cry and stop his mission. Before leaving however, Xavier enters Moira&#x27;s mind. He puts something in her mind and makes her forget that this moment happened.

Back at Orchis headquarters Charles comes face to face with Moira. He seemingly reaches into her mind and pulls her to the bench where they first met. She&#x27;s very confused and says she&#x27;s a robot, that he can&#x27;t do a telepathic takeover. He says it&#x27;s not a takeover but a signal, that she can leave at any time. She&#x27;s a thinking creature that touches the astral plane and he left a beacon that he could guide his message to back when she was a child. She sees that he almost killed her when she was a child. He wants to appeal to her better nature but she is doubtful that she should do anything to assist him considering he almost killed her when she was young. Charles tells Moira that he knew she would join Enigma and that&#x27;s what he needed to happen. He cooperated with and helped Orchis to get deep into their operation to get close to her. Charles tells her that Enigma grew from Essex. That Orchis&#x27; great sin was not making the AI but not realizing the AI they were enabling. Moira is surprised and concerned to learn Enigma is from Essex and says she can&#x27;t do anything to stop him because she&#x27;s not a Titan yet. She says Enigma will chew her up if she attacked him. Charles tells her that Jean is chasing him right now and that she cannot land a blow against him because she can&#x27;t find him. However, if Moira activates the signal Charles put in her brain at 13 years old Jean will be able to find her, thus Enigma. Her eyes are wide in shock.

Charles tells Moira that everything he&#x27;s done was to get to this point where he asks her to be a better person. He tells her he believed in her once, touching her face with his hand. She took them to Krakoa and it was wonderful for a while. His eyes filling with tears he tells her he still believes in her and doesn&#x27;t want to be wrong about her. She wipes away a tear and back in the present, announces herself to Jean. Enigma begins to call her a treacherous something as in that moment Jean destroys Moira in front of Charles in order to fight Enigma.

===&quot;Life 12&quot;===
In her thought to be impossible twelfth live, Moira gets to be reborn one more time and at age 13, she tensely awaits the activation of her mutant powers, only to realize that it wasn&#x27;t happening. Apparently as a reward for her help in defeating Enigma, she was now free from her burden and could finally live a normal and final life in a timeline created by the Phoenix.

==Powers and abilities==
For decades, Dr. Moira MacTaggert was depicted as a baseline human with the normal human strength of a woman of her age, height, and build who engages in moderate regular exercise. However, in the 2019 storyline, &quot;House of X&quot;, Moira was revealed to actually be a mutant with the ability to reincarnate herself upon death, reverting to the moment of her initial conception with all the memories she experienced in her previous lifetimes from as early as in utero. This allows her to manipulate the course of history by changing her own actions and thereby affecting people and circumstances that result from her presence. Her lifetimes have armed her with significant experience, including expertise in the fields of anthropology and genetics, firearms mastery, and leading various mutant survival movements until their eventual downfall.

According to Destiny, Moira&#x27;s reincarnation cycle is finite. When she encountered Destiny during her third life, she was informed that she had &quot;10, maybe 11&quot; lives in total, noting that if Moira were to die before her mutant power manifested at the age of 13, the reincarnation cycle would end. Moira can also be depowered by the use of artificial means which will end her reincarnation cycle too if she dies while depowered.

Moira&#x27;s x-gene possesses a natural defense mechanism that makes her invisible to other mutants and mutant sensors and detectors, providing the ultimate camouflage which will see her as a baseline human. Furthermore, this natural defense also prevents her x-gene from being properly cloned, so every clone of Moira is a mere human.

Telepathic intrusions on her mind will only see the memories of her current lifetime, however, telepaths can see all her lives&#x27; memories as long as she allows it.

Following her physical death while depowered, Moira became an &quot;augmented intelligence&quot; inhabiting a techno-organic body. Purely mechanical by design, Moira&#x27;s new body is equipped with holographic projectors that make her appear human to the naked eye, except for the occasional pulse of red light from her optics. She also exhibits superhuman strength, reflexes, and durability, modular and independent components, collapsible bladed weapons, immunity to telepathy, etc.

==Reception==
* In 2014, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; ranked Moira MacTaggert 61st in their &quot;Let&#x27;s rank every X-Man ever&quot; list.

==Other versions==

===Age of Apocalypse===
In the 1995-1996 &quot;Age of Apocalypse&quot; storyline, Moira is married to Bolivar Trask and head of the London-based Human High Council. As resistance to Apocalypse&#x27;s reign, Moira and her husband designed the Sentinels and armed the human resistance with an impressive weapons array. Their main focus was a plan to destroy Apocalypse&#x27;s forces in their North American positions, even though this would mean the deaths of many innocent civilians that had not yet escaped the country. The tyrant however, backfires by activating his Sea Walls, slaughtering the council and those within the Sea Walls’ reach.

===Age of X===
In the &quot;Age of X&quot; reality, Moira is the step-mother of Legion (stating that his father had been killed in a bombing in Israel) and therefore one of the few humans allowed to live on Fortress X. She also posed as the AI X, so she could use communication worms and sensors to communicate with and monitor the residents of Fortress X. It was later discovered that she was actually one of the multiple personalities of Legion, created as a &quot;Psychic Anti-body&quot; in order to protect Legion from Doctor Nemesis&#x27; actions on David&#x27;s mind, as he and the X-Club were processing the deletion of the personas in order to stabilize David&#x27;s psyche. Her power is so immense that when she was discovered by Xavier, she was able to defeat him and established the Age of X reality, where mutants were besieged into the Fortress X, everyday attacked by the waves of soldiers of the Human Coalition and used the personalities inside David&#x27;s mind along with the mutants of Utopia to fill this new world where David would be happy and seen as a hero, as part of the Force Warriors, the protectors of the Fortress, who erected force walls around the citadel every day. Even memories were rewritten, and a background was created. The telepaths and a few others mutants who were able to retain knowledge about the true universe were kept in the X-Brig, considered as mutants too dangerous for the community, but their imprisonment was because they might use their powers to reveal the truth. 
When her victims slowly understood that this reality wasn&#x27;t their one, she manipulated both Danielle Moonstar and her Moonstar Cadre in order to make them to stop any further discovery. Eventually her depiction was revealed and Legion absorb her. Later she offers to make a better world for David, but he declines her offer. During the Lost Legion story Moira&#x27;s powers were the main target of another personality of Legion and at the end she was seen inside David&#x27;s mind cursing Xavier.

===Cross-Time Caper===
Reichsminister of Genetics Moira MacTaggert, who hails from a reality in which Earth is dominated by Nazis, is featured in &quot;Excalibur&quot; #10 and 11 when she is brought into Earth-616 by the actions of a confused Widget. Making the trip with her is her personal bodyguard, a Nazi Callisto and Moira&#x27;s personal train, powered by an alternate Lockheed. It was also hinted that this Moira was behind the Super Team Lightning Force (a Nazi version of Excalibur). Moira&#x27;s violent actions ultimately result in Excalibur team being sent on a long and arduous cross-dimensional trip.

===House of M===
In the &quot;House of M&quot; reality, Moira MacTaggert was declared a criminal for attempting to cure her son Kevin of the mutant gene and his psychosis. King Magneto&#x27;s mutant supremacy saw this as an act against mutantkind, and Sentinels were dispatched to destroy Muir Island and capture Moira. Though Moira escaped, Kevin was also freed, sending him on a gruesome killing spree that was attributed to Moira as failed experiments, as she chases him across the globe. When the reality-hopping Exiles caught Proteus&#x27;s attention, Moira emerged from hiding to warn them about her son, who was intrigued by their presence and desired to ruin the realities they attempted to fix. When he attacks the team, Moira shot him, exposing him to the metal that was his deadly allergy and only weakness, forcing him to find a new body. Unsurprisingly, he chose to possess his mother, and rather than allow her son to possess her and use her against them, Moira commits suicide.

===New Exiles===
On the world of the Sons of Iron and Daughters of the Dragon, the New Exiles face a squad of alternate &#x27;core X-Men&#x27; who are loyal to Lilandra. These X-Men include an alternate version of Moira MacTaggert who is not married on this world or is going by her maiden name, Kinross. Moira&#x27;s codename is Hypernova and her powers are energy blasts. It is not known whether she is a mutant on this world or has gained powers through another method.

===Ultimate Marvel===
In the Ultimate Marvel continuity, Moira MacTaggert is the ex-wife of Charles Xavier, and their son David MacTaggert is Proteus. This version of Moira needs two crutches in order to move around. Moira runs a school/hospital for sick mutants, and assists in the Xavier Institute from behind the scenes. She does this even though Charles left her to join Magneto&#x27;s dream of a mutant society, abandoning her to raise their mentally ill child on her own. When Proteus escapes and begins body hopping, Moira calls in the X-Men for assistance. After murdering hundreds, Proteus is seemingly crushed to death under a car.

Later, the X-Men learn that Moira has been funding her hospital by producing and selling &quot;Banshee&quot;, a lethal and addictive Mutant Growth Hormone which amplifies mutant powers, made from the genetic material of Wolverine. When Wolverine attempts to destroy her Banshee supply, Moira attacks him with the previously unknown mutant ability to emit a deafening sonic cry. Wolverine quickly defeats Moira and leaves her to die in the exploding hospital, but she is later shown to have somehow survived when Quicksilver finds her emerging from the smoldering ruins. Her ensuing conversation with him implies that she is now in league with Quicksilver.

==In other media==
===Television===
* Moira MacTaggert appears in &quot;X-Men: The Animated Series&quot;, voiced by Lally Cadeau. This version is the girlfriend of Banshee, an old lover of Charles Xavier&#x27;s, and mother of Kevin.
** Moira appears in &quot;X-Men &#x27;97&quot;, voiced by Martha Marion. As of this series, she and Banshee have become engaged and joined Genosha&#x27;s ruling council.
* A character partially based on Moira MacTaggert named Yui Sasaki appears in &quot;Marvel Anime: X-Men&quot;, voiced by Yoshiko Sakakibara in the Japanese version and by Gwendoline Yeo in the English version. Similarly to MacTaggert, Yui is a geneticist and owner of the Sasaki Institute who was previously in a relationship with Charles Xavier.

===Film===
* Moira MacTaggert appears in &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot;, portrayed by Olivia Williams. This version is a nurse and an old colleague of Charles Xavier&#x27;s. In the post-credits scene, she attends to a brain-dead patient that Xavier sends his mind to.
* A young Moira MacTaggert appears in &quot;X-Men: First Class&quot;, portrayed by Rose Byrne. This version is an American CIA agent. While investigating the Hellfire Club&#x27;s activities in the 1960s, she discovers their mutant abilities and seeks out Xavier&#x27;s help. She later becomes a liaison to his fledgling X-Men while they work to stop the Hellfire Club from using the Cuban Missile Crisis to cause World War III, though she inadvertently contributes to Xavier becoming paraplegic while trying to stop rogue member Magneto. Following the mission, Xavier erases her memory of them to keep his newly founded school for mutants secret and protect her from the CIA&#x27;s retribution. 
* Moira MacTaggert appears in &quot;X-Men: Apocalypse&quot;, portrayed again by Rose Byrne. Having maintained her interest in mutant activity through to the 1980s, she investigates a cult in Egypt that was formed upon the existence of mutants being revealed to the public, only to inadvertently reawaken Apocalypse. Upon learning of this and partially because he missed her, Xavier invites her to the X-Mansion, during which she reveals she had a son via an unnamed father, whom she later divorced. Following an attack by Apocalypse and his Horsemen, MacTaggert joins the X-Men in foiling his plans, serving as their pilot. Once Apocalypse is defeated, Xavier restores her memories and enters a relationship with her.

===Video games===
* Moira MacTaggert appears in &quot;X-Men Legends&quot;, voiced by Michelle Arthur.
* Moira MacTaggert appears in &quot;X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse&quot;, voiced by Jane Carr.
* Moira MacTaggert appears in &quot;Marvel Heroes&quot;, voiced by Tara Strong.

===Miscellaneous===
* Moira MacTaggert appears in the novelization for &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot;, which depicts an alternate ending that sees her join Magneto for a game of chess.
* Moira MacTaggert appears in &quot;The Legacy Quest&quot; novel trilogy, by Steve Lyons. Exploiting her guilt, Sebastian Shaw forces her to help him find a cure for the Legacy Virus.
* Moira MacTaggert appears in the novel &quot;X-Men: Search and Rescue&quot;, by Greg Cox.

==References==
==External links==
* Marvel.com Biography of Moira MacTaggert</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2361279" start="0" end="20" title="Moira MacTaggert" label="Dr. Moira MacTaggert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361279" start="45" end="52" title="Moira MacTaggert" label="Moira X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114502" start="92" end="111" title="American comic book" label="American comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="126" end="139" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q631369" start="235" end="250" title="Chris Claremont" label="Chris Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q902536" start="262" end="274" title="Dave Cockrum" label="Dave Cockrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094617" start="322" end="328" title="Mutant (Marvel Comics)" label="mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="383" end="388" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468721" start="418" end="435" title="Muir Island X-Men" label="Muir Island X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603976" start="445" end="454" title="Excalibur (comics)" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452788" start="595" end="608" title="love interest" label="love interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q838076" start="631" end="642" title="Professor X" label="Professor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q85767469" start="680" end="730" title="House of X and Powers of X" label="&amp;quot;House of X&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Powers of X&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809926" start="778" end="794" title="Jonathan Hickman" label="Jonathan Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="823" end="844" title="retcon" label="fundamentally changed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="1077" end="1089" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q897782" start="1093" end="1099" title="Krakoa" label="Krakoa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1225" end="1246" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men: The Last Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q231163" start="1267" end="1282" title="Olivia Williams" label="Olivia Williams"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1301" end="1319" title="X-Men: First Class" label="X-Men: First Class"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1336" end="1353" title="X-Men: Apocalypse" label="X-Men: Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q228717" start="1374" end="1384" title="Rose Byrne" label="Rose Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q631369" start="1443" end="1458" title="Chris Claremont" label="Chris Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q902536" start="1463" end="1475" title="Dave Cockrum" label="Dave Cockrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399747" start="1505" end="1518" title="Uncanny X-Men" label="Uncanny X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q838076" start="1733" end="1744" title="Professor X" label="Professor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439694" start="1796" end="1807" title="Muir Island" label="Muir Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349691" start="1886" end="1942" title="Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe" label="Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe Update &amp;#x27;89"/>
<link wikidata="Q85767469" start="2320" end="2346" title="House of X and Powers of X" label="House of X and Powers of X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809926" start="2365" end="2381" title="Jonathan Hickman" label="Jonathan Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="2409" end="2418" title="Retroactive continuity" label="retconned"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2945" end="2953" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094617" start="3031" end="3047" title="Mutant (Marvel Comics)" label="genetic mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="3063" end="3074" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q838076" start="3154" end="3178" title="Professor X" label="Professor Charles Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="3308" end="3325" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439694" start="3871" end="3882" title="Muir Island" label="Muir Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3901" end="3909" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q718806" start="3980" end="3987" title="Proteus (Marvel Comics)" label="Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q432407" start="4258" end="4300" title="X-Mansion" label="Xavier&amp;#x27;s School for Gifted Youngsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961349" start="4319" end="4326" title="Cerebro" label="Cerebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350072" start="4371" end="4380" title="Jean Grey" label="Jean Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q996154" start="4551" end="4560" title="Wolfsbane (comics)" label="Wolfsbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607791" start="4668" end="4674" title="Legion (Marvel Comics)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="4693" end="4723" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="dissociative identity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267017" start="4754" end="4759" title="Cable (comics)" label="Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="5308" end="5315" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="5698" end="5707" title="M16 rifle" label="M16 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q647105" start="5875" end="5882" title="Banshee (comics)" label="Banshee"/>
<link wikidata="Q60002" start="6052" end="6060" title="Colossus (comics)" label="Colossus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047918" start="6458" end="6469" title="New Mutants" label="New Mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q897901" start="6647" end="6652" title="Brood (comics)" label="Brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548427" start="7383" end="7406" title="Advanced Idea Mechanics" label="Advanced Idea Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585469" start="7546" end="7557" title="Shadow King" label="Shadow King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211423" start="7863" end="7871" title="X-Factor (comics)" label="X-Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="8040" end="8049" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063514" start="8572" end="8585" title="Fabian Cortez" label="Fabian Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727146" start="9043" end="9049" title="Genegineer" label="mutate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898025" start="9064" end="9071" title="Genosha" label="Genosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651308" start="9232" end="9248" title="Magik (Illyana Rasputina)" label="Illyana Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893188" start="9306" end="9318" title="Legacy Virus" label="Legacy Virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849486" start="9524" end="9529" title="Havok (comics)" label="Havok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603976" start="9561" end="9570" title="Excalibur (comics)" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q302534" start="9662" end="9677" title="Mister Sinister" label="Mister Sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075745" start="10304" end="10313" title="Onslaught (Marvel Comics)" label="Onslaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q302186" start="10413" end="10418" title="Beast (comics)" label="Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q996154" start="10624" end="10633" title="Wolfsbane (comics)" label="Wolfsbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108790" start="10639" end="10647" title="Warlock (New Mutants)" label="Douglock"/>
<link wikidata="Q737236" start="11135" end="11143" title="Mystique (comics)" label="Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q431862" start="11240" end="11250" title="Sabretooth (character)" label="Sabretooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296652" start="11379" end="11385" title="Bishop (comics)" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q186422" start="11387" end="11396" title="Wolverine (character)" label="Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q838097" start="11402" end="11407" title="Rogue (comics)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q73544" start="12161" end="12172" title="Mockingbird (Marvel Comics)" label="Mockingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q945817" start="12174" end="12184" title="Gwen Stacy" label="Gwen Stacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021211" start="12190" end="12199" title="Dead Girl (comics)" label="Dead Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q907767" start="12207" end="12221" title="Doctor Strange" label="Doctor Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q897782" start="13371" end="13377" title="Krakoa" label="Krakoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="13497" end="13502" title="Storm (Marvel Comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342183" start="13523" end="13535" title="Nightcrawler (comics)" label="Nightcrawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q546340" start="13537" end="13548" title="Thunderbird (John Proudstar)" label="Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q977088" start="13553" end="13560" title="Sunfire (comics)" label="Sunfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="13638" end="13647" title="recruit training" label="boot camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568977" start="13800" end="13806" title="Vulcan (Marvel Comics)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840793" start="13829" end="13841" title="Third Summers brother" label="lost brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q857921" start="13851" end="13858" title="Cyclops (Marvel Comics)" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q849486" start="13863" end="13868" title="Havok (comics)" label="Havok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589362" start="13871" end="13876" title="Petra (comics)" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204855" start="13878" end="13884" title="Darwin (comics)" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202575" start="13890" end="13894" title="Sway (comics)" label="Sway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072801" start="14226" end="14235" title="Chaos War (comics)" label="Chaos War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051111" start="14557" end="14564" title="Destiny (Irene Adler)" label="Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q85767469" start="14739" end="14749" title="House of X" label="House of X"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="15866" end="15890" title="congestive heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075745" start="28717" end="28726" title="Onslaught (Marvel Comics)" label="Onslaught"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31032" end="31038" title="List of Marvel Comics characters: K#Krakoa" label="Krakoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27810" start="44052" end="44068" title="Mary Jane Watson" label="Mary Jane Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="44107" end="44119" title="Peter Parker" label="Peter Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517329" start="45778" end="45794" title="Sins of Sinister" label="Sins of Sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051111" start="54386" end="54393" title="Destiny (Irene Adler)" label="Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="55839" end="55859" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274103" start="56023" end="56040" title="Age of Apocalypse" label="Age of Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641739" start="56078" end="56091" title="Bolivar Trask" label="Bolivar Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q782181" start="56218" end="56227" title="Sentinels (comics)" label="Sentinels"/>
<link wikidata="Q960912" start="56648" end="56656" title="Age of X" label="Age of X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246088" start="58848" end="58857" title="Earth-616" label="Earth-616"/>
<link wikidata="Q547306" start="58887" end="58893" title="Widget (comics)" label="Widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="58949" end="58953" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q857541" start="58954" end="58962" title="Callisto (comics)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196544" start="59020" end="59028" title="Lockheed (comics)" label="Lockheed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072636" start="59291" end="59301" title="House of M" label="House of M"/>
<link wikidata="Q718806" start="59389" end="59394" title="Proteus (Marvel Comics)" label="Kevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="59438" end="59445" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q782181" start="59513" end="59522" title="Sentinel (comics)" label="Sentinels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074284" start="59778" end="59784" title="Exiles (Marvel Comics)" label="Exiles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60338" end="60348" title="Exiles (Marvel Comics)#New Exiles" label="New Exiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890491" start="60758" end="60773" title="Ultimate Marvel" label="Ultimate Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60821" end="60835" title="Alternative versions of Professor X#Ultimate Charles Xavier" label="Charles Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60871" end="60878" title="Proteus (Marvel Comics)#Ultimate Proteus" label="Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="61104" end="61111" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936907" start="61239" end="61251" title="body hopping" label="body hopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646396" start="61272" end="61277" title="Ultimate X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61467" end="61474" title="Banshee (comics)#Ultimate Marvel" label="Banshee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61592" end="61601" title="Alternative versions of Wolverine#Ultimate Marvel" label="Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q647105" start="61729" end="61748" title="Banshee (comics)" label="deafening sonic cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q929273" start="61884" end="61895" title="Quicksilver (comics)" label="Quicksilver"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62101" end="62127" title="X-Men: The Animated Series" label="X-Men: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480502" start="62145" end="62157" title="Lally Cadeau" label="Lally Cadeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q647105" start="62193" end="62200" title="Banshee (character)" label="Banshee"/>
<link wikidata="Q838076" start="62218" end="62232" title="Charles Xavier" label="Charles Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q718806" start="62255" end="62260" title="Proteus (Marvel Comics)" label="Kevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q109558622" start="62288" end="62302" title="X-Men &amp;#x27;97" label="X-Men &amp;#x27;97"/>
<link wikidata="Q898025" start="62401" end="62408" title="Genosha" label="Genosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461966" start="62516" end="62535" title="Marvel Anime" label="Marvel Anime: X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408347" start="62553" end="62571" title="Yoshiko Sakakibara" label="Yoshiko Sakakibara"/>
<link wikidata="Q449072" start="62603" end="62617" title="Gwendoline Yeo" label="Gwendoline Yeo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62827" end="62848" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men: The Last Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q231163" start="62869" end="62884" title="Olivia Williams" label="Olivia Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q105350971" start="62934" end="62948" title="Charles Xavier (film character)" label="Charles Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63095" end="63113" title="X-Men: First Class" label="X-Men: First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q228717" start="63134" end="63144" title="Rose Byrne" label="Rose Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109149" start="63209" end="63222" title="Hellfire Club (comics)" label="Hellfire Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="63434" end="63454" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="63464" end="63477" title="World War III" label="World War III"/>
<link wikidata="Q105424624" start="63580" end="63587" title="Magneto (film character)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63783" end="63800" title="X-Men: Apocalypse" label="X-Men: Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071805" start="64051" end="64061" title="Apocalypse (character)" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690825" start="64288" end="64296" title="Horsemen of Apocalypse" label="Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957004" start="64520" end="64533" title="X-Men Legends" label="X-Men Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836904" start="64551" end="64566" title="Michelle Arthur" label="Michelle Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64604" end="64640" title="X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse" label="X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151232" start="64658" end="64667" title="Jane Carr" label="Jane Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283458" start="64705" end="64718" title="Marvel Heroes (video game)" label="Marvel Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029" start="64736" end="64747" title="Tara Strong" label="Tara Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613208" start="65015" end="65026" title="Steve Lyons (writer)" label="Steve Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265812" start="65050" end="65064" title="Sebastian Shaw (character)" label="Sebastian Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893188" start="65108" end="65120" title="Legacy Virus" label="Legacy Virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227430" start="65203" end="65211" title="Greg Cox (writer)" label="Greg Cox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303701" wikidata="Q3060180" url="?curid=303701" title="Eugène Spuller">
<text>Eugène Spuller (8 December 183523 July 1896) was a French politician and writer.
He was born at Seurre (Côte-d&#x27;Or), his father being a German who had married and settled in France. After studying law at Dijon, he went to Paris, where he was called to the bar, and became close to Léon Gambetta, collaborating with him in 1868 in the foundation of the &quot;Revue politique&quot;. He had helped Emile Ollivier in his electoral campaign in Paris in 1863, but when in 1869 Ollivier was preparing to &quot;rally&quot; to the empire, Spuller supported the republican candidate. During the siege of Paris he escaped from the city with Gambetta, becoming his energetic lieutenant in the provinces.

After the peace he edited his chief&#x27;s Parisian organ, the &quot;République française&quot;, until in 1876 he entered the Chamber of Deputies for the department of the Seine. He was minister of foreign affairs during the brief Gambetta administration, and subsequently one of the vice-presidents of the chamber, serving on the budget commission and on a special industrial and agricultural inquiry. His Parisian constituents thought him too moderate on the clerical question, and he had to seek election in 1885 in the Côte d&#x27;Or, which in later years he represented in the Senate.

He was minister of education, religion and the fine arts in Maurice Rouvier&#x27;s cabinet of 1887; minister of foreign affairs under Pierre Tirard (1889–1890), and minister of education in 1894 in the Casimir-Perier cabinet. His published works include some volumes of speeches and well-known studies of Ignatius of Loyola (1876) and of Jules Michelet (1876).

==Statue of Liberty dedication==
On 4 July 1884 Spuller and other members of the French Cabinet formally presented the Statue of Liberty to the United States.

Following the ceremony, the statue was dismantled into numbered sections and packed in 210 wooden cases and put aboard the government steamship &#x27;Isère&#x27;, which sailed on 21 May 1885 for New York City.

==Death and tomb==
Spuller died in Sombernon on 23 July 1896 following a lengthy illness. Spuller&#x27;s tomb in the Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris is marked by a statue representing &quot;National Education&quot;, by sculptor Paul Gasq.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3060180" start="0" end="14" title="Eugène Spuller" label="Eugène Spuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342" start="104" end="118" title="Côte-d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Côte-d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="208" end="213" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q295090" start="285" end="298" title="Léon Gambetta" label="Léon Gambetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q286293" start="399" end="413" title="Emile Ollivier" label="Emile Ollivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="869" end="874" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q471293" start="1348" end="1363" title="Maurice Rouvier" label="Maurice Rouvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q708359" start="1422" end="1435" title="Pierre Tirard" label="Pierre Tirard"/>
<link wikidata="Q315656" start="1490" end="1504" title="Jean Casimir-Perier" label="Casimir-Perier"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="1593" end="1611" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q310791" start="1626" end="1640" title="Jules Michelet" label="Jules Michelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="1769" end="1786" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q134502" start="2056" end="2065" title="Sombernon" label="Sombernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311" start="2138" end="2160" title="Père Lachaise Cemetery" label="Père Lachaise Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q526858" start="2249" end="2258" title="Paul Gasq" label="Paul Gasq"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303702" wikidata="Q658273" url="?curid=303702" title="Caersws F.C.">
<text>Caersws Football Club () is a football team, playing in the . 

The club was founded in 1887 as Caersws Amateurs, and adopted the present name when amateur status was dropped in 1974. The team plays at the Recreation Ground, Caersws, which accommodates 4000 spectators (500 seated), notable as being able to accommodate everyone in the village over four times.

The team&#x27;s first choice strip is blue shirts, white shorts and blue socks. The second choice strip is orange shirts, black shorts and orange socks.

== History ==
Although founded in the late 19th century, the club enjoyed little if any success until the 1960s when it won the Mid-Wales League in 1959–60, 1960–61, and 1962–63, and appeared in three Welsh Amateur Cup finals, winning the cup in 1960–61. They also won the cup (now renamed the Welsh Intermediate Cup) in 1989. In the league, the team&#x27;s fortunes waned until they won the title again in 1978, and four more times before they were invited to join the Cymru Alliance in 1990. In 1992 they became founder members of the League of Wales.

Caersws won the League Cup in 2000–01 and 2001–02, and played in the Intertoto Cup, being defeated 3–1 on aggregate by PFC Marek Dupnitsa of Bulgaria.

== Stadium ==

The club plays at the Recreation Ground.

== Biggest victories and losses ==
*Biggest win: 20–1 v. Aberystwyth Town in 1962.
*Biggest defeat: Unknown
*Biggest League of Wales defeat: 0–7 v. Total Network Solutions in 1995.

== Honours ==
===League===
Cymru Alliance League
*Champions (1): 1991–92
*&quot;Runners-up (1):&quot; 1990–91

Ardal NE League
*Champions (1): 2022–23
*&quot;Runners-up (1):&quot; 2021–22

Mid Wales League
*Champions (9): 1959–60, 1960–61, 1962–63, 1977–78, 1982–83, 1985–86, 1988–89, 1989–90, 1996–97
*&quot;Runners-up (8):&quot; 1953–54, 1958–59, 1961–62, 1963–64, 1976–77, 1978–79, 1984–85, 1987–88

===Cups===
Welsh Intermediate Cup 
*Winners (1): 1988–89
*&quot;Runners-up (2):&quot; 1983–84, 1991–92

Welsh Amateur Cup
*Winners (1): 1960–61
*&quot;Runners-up (3):&quot; 1952–53, 1962–63, 1963–64

Cymru Alliance League Cup
*Winners (1): 2014–15
*&quot;Runners-up (3):&quot; 1990–91, 2011–12, 2012–13

Welsh League Cup
*Winners (3): 2000–01, 2001–02, 2006–07
*&quot;Runners-up (1):&quot; 1992–93

Central Wales Challenge Cup
*Winners (6): 1977–78, 1988–89, 1991–92, 2010–11, 2014–15, 2017–18
*&quot;Runners-up (5):&quot; 1978–79, 1979–80, 1984–85, 2022–23, 2023–24

Mid Wales League Cup
*Winners (6): 1979–80, 1982–83, 1987–88, 1989–90, 1990–91, 1991–92
*&quot;Runners-up (7):&quot; 1953–54, 1954–55, 1960–61, 1969–70, 1984–85, 1986–87, 1988–89

Montgomeryshire Cup
*Winners: 1952–53, 1959–60, 1962–63, 1969–70, 1970–71, 1971–72, 1974–75, 1976–77, 1977–78, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1984–85, 1985–86, 1986–87, 1987–88, 1988–89, 1989–90, 1990–91, 2001–02

Montgomeryshire Amateur League Cup
*Winners (3): 2011–12, 2012–13, 2014–15
*&quot;Runners-up (1):&quot; 1985–86

Village Cup
*Winners (4): 1983–84, 2011–12, 2012–13, 2013–14

J Emrys Morgan Cup
*&quot;Runners-up (2):&quot; 1984–85, 2013–14

== Europe ==
==References==
== External links ==
* Official Website
* Club guide on a Welsh Premier League Football</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q658273" start="0" end="21" title="Caersws F.C." label="Caersws Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="30" end="38" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q658273" start="96" end="112" title="Caersws F.C." label="Caersws Amateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q635169" start="225" end="232" title="Caersws" label="Caersws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424520" start="717" end="734" title="FAW Trophy" label="Welsh Amateur Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557436" start="986" end="1000" title="Cymru Alliance" label="Cymru Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="1140" end="1153" title="Intertoto Cup" label="Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520817" start="1190" end="1208" title="PFC Marek Dupnitsa" label="PFC Marek Dupnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="1212" end="1220" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q319756" start="1337" end="1353" title="Aberystwyth Town F.C." label="Aberystwyth Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="1428" end="1451" title="The New Saints F.C." label="Total Network Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557436" start="1489" end="1503" title="Cymru Alliance" label="Cymru Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587349" start="1527" end="1534" title="1991–92 Cymru Alliance" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586521" start="1564" end="1571" title="1990–91 Cymru Alliance" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073342" start="1573" end="1588" title="Ardal Leagues" label="Ardal NE League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841046" start="1651" end="1667" title="Mid Wales League" label="Mid Wales League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424520" start="1876" end="1898" title="FAW Trophy" label="Welsh Intermediate Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424520" start="1969" end="1986" title="FAW Trophy" label="Welsh Amateur Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557436" start="2065" end="2079" title="Cymru Alliance" label="Cymru Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q647072" start="2169" end="2185" title="Welsh League Cup" label="Welsh League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q112241925" start="2264" end="2291" title="CWFA Challenge Cup" label="Central Wales Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841046" start="2433" end="2449" title="Mid Wales League" label="Mid Wales League"/>
<link wikidata="Q130050786" start="2613" end="2632" title="Montgomeryshire Challenge Cup" label="Montgomeryshire Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303703" wikidata="Q1061166" url="?curid=303703" title="Data mart">
<text>A data mart is a structure/access pattern specific to &quot;data warehouse&quot; environments. The data mart is a subset of the data warehouse that focuses on a specific business line, department, subject area, or team. Whereas data warehouses have an enterprise-wide depth, the information in data marts pertains to a single department. In some deployments, each department or business unit is considered the &quot;owner&quot; of its data mart, including all the &quot;hardware&quot;, &quot;software&quot;, and &quot;data&quot;. This enables each department to isolate the use, manipulation, and development of their data. In other deployments where conformed dimensions are used, this business unit ownership will not hold true for shared dimensions like customer, product, etc.

Warehouses and data marts are built because the information in the database is not organized in a way that makes it readily accessible. This organization requires queries that are too complicated, difficult to access or resource intensive.

While transactional databases are designed to be updated, data warehouses or marts are read only. Data warehouses are designed to access large groups of related records. Data marts improve end-user response time by allowing users to have access to the specific type of data they need to view most often, by providing the data in a way that supports the collective view of a group of users.

A data mart is basically a condensed and more focused version of a data warehouse that reflects the regulations and process specifications of each business unit within an organization. Each data mart is dedicated to a specific business function or region. This subset of data may span across many or all of an enterprise&#x27;s functional subject areas. It is common for multiple data marts to be used in order to serve the needs of each individual business unit (different data marts can be used to obtain specific information for various enterprise departments, such as accounting, marketing, sales, etc.).

The related term spreadmart is a pejorative describing the situation that occurs when one or more business analysts develop a system of linked spreadsheets to perform a business analysis, then grow it to a size and degree of complexity that makes it nearly impossible to maintain. The term for this condition is &quot;Excel Hell&quot;.

== Reasons for creating a data mart ==
* Easy access to frequently needed data
* Creates a collective view by a group of users
* Improves end-user response time
* Ease of creation
* Lower cost than implementing a full data warehouse
* Potential users are more clearly defined than in a full data warehouse
* Contains only business essential data and is less cluttered.
* It has key data information
== Design schemas ==

*Star schema - fairly popular design choice; enables a relational database to emulate the analytical functionality of a multidimensional database
*Snowflake schema
*Activity schema - a time-series based schema
==Data mart vs data warehouse==
Data warehouse:
* Holds multiple subject areas
* Holds very detailed information
* Works to integrate all data sources
* Does not necessarily use a dimensional model but feeds dimensional models.

Data mart:
* Often holds only one subject area- for example, Finance, or Sales
* May hold more summarized data (although it may hold full detail)
* Concentrates on integrating information from a given subject area or set of source systems
* Is built focused on a dimensional model using a star schema.

== Dependent data mart ==
According to the Inmon school of data warehousing, a dependent data mart is a logical subset (view) or a physical subset (extract) of a larger data warehouse, isolated for one of the following reasons:

*A need refreshment for a special data model or schema: e.g., to restructure for OLAP.
*Performance: to offload the data mart to a separate computer for greater efficiency or to eliminate the need to manage that workload on the centralized data warehouse.
*Security: to separate an authorized data subset selectively.
*Expediency: to bypass the data governance and authorizations required to incorporate a new application on the Enterprise Data Warehouse.
*Proving Ground: to demonstrate the viability and ROI (return on investment) potential of an application prior to migrating it to the Enterprise Data Warehouse.
*Politics: a coping strategy for IT (Information Technology) in situations where a user group has more influence than funding or is not a good citizen on the centralized data warehouse.
*Politics: a coping strategy for consumers of data in situations where a data warehouse team is unable to create a usable data warehouse.

According to the Inmon school of data warehousing, tradeoffs inherent with data marts include limited scalability, duplication of data, data inconsistency with other silos of information, and inability to leverage enterprise sources of data.

The alternative school of data warehousing is that of Ralph Kimball. In his view, a data warehouse is nothing more than the union of all the data marts. This view helps to reduce costs and provides fast development, but can create an inconsistent data warehouse, especially in large organizations. Therefore, Kimball&#x27;s approach is more suitable for small-to-medium corporations.

== See also ==
* Data warehouse
* Enterprise architecture
* OLAP cube

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1061166" start="2" end="11" title="Data mart" label="data mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193351" start="60" end="74" title="data warehouse" label="data warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097770" start="1029" end="1052" title="Operational database" label="transactional databases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172314" start="1110" end="1119" title="File system permissions" label="read only"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580284" start="2041" end="2051" title="spreadmart" label="spreadmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="2167" end="2179" title="spreadsheets" label="spreadsheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q578372" start="2508" end="2521" title="Response time (technology)" label="response time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331138" start="2783" end="2794" title="Star schema" label="Star schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="2837" end="2856" title="relational database" label="relational database"/>
<link wikidata="Q642514" start="2902" end="2927" title="multidimensional database" label="multidimensional database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345076" start="2929" end="2945" title="Snowflake schema" label="Snowflake schema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2947" end="2962" title="Activity schema" label="Activity schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q186588" start="2967" end="2978" title="Time series" label="time-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432172" start="3172" end="3189" title="Dimensional modeling" label="dimensional model"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092450" start="3385" end="3408" title="information integration" label="integrating information"/>
<link wikidata="Q93065" start="3567" end="3572" title="Bill Inmon" label="Inmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329910" start="3644" end="3648" title="View (database)" label="view"/>
<link wikidata="Q193351" start="3693" end="3707" title="data warehouse" label="data warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172480" start="3787" end="3797" title="data model" label="data model"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146953" start="3801" end="3807" title="logical schema" label="schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q642514" start="3834" end="3838" title="Online analytical processing" label="OLAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="3893" end="3901" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="4797" end="4808" title="scalability" label="scalability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182260" start="4810" end="4829" title="data duplication" label="duplication of data"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163219" start="4831" end="4849" title="data inconsistency" label="data inconsistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109900" start="4992" end="5005" title="Ralph Kimball" label="Ralph Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q193351" start="5340" end="5354" title="Data warehouse" label="Data warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048431" start="5357" end="5380" title="Enterprise architecture" label="Enterprise architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007722" start="5383" end="5392" title="OLAP cube" label="OLAP cube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303705" wikidata="Q7659931" url="?curid=303705" title="Sydney Football Club">
<text>Sydney Football Club may refer to the following clubs based in Sydney, Australia. These clubs which bear the city&#x27;s name participate in distinct codes of football.

*Sydney FC, a soccer (association football) club
*Sydney Roosters, a rugby league club
*Sydney Swans, an Australian rules football club
*a defunct Australian rules (and later rugby union club), formed in 1865
*Sydney Football Club (NSWAFL), an Australian rules football club formed in 1881 and closed in 1954</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q330143" start="171" end="180" title="Sydney FC" label="Sydney FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573367" start="220" end="235" title="Sydney Roosters" label="Sydney Roosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272176" start="258" end="270" title="Sydney Swans" label="Sydney Swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="345" end="356" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603526" start="380" end="409" title="Sydney Football Club (NSWAFL)" label="Sydney Football Club (NSWAFL)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303709" wikidata="Q2352741" url="?curid=303709" title="Victorian Football League">
<text>The Victorian Football League (VFL) is an Australian rules football competition in Australia operated by the Australian Football League (AFL) as a second-tier, regional, semi-professional competition. It includes teams from clubs based in eastern states of Australia: Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland, including reserves teams for the eastern state AFL clubs. It succeeded and continues the competition of the former Victorian Football Association (VFA) which began in 1877. The name of the competition was changed to the Victorian Football League in 1996. Under its VFL brand, the AFL also operates a women&#x27;s football competition known as VFL Women&#x27;s, which was established in 2016.

Its predecessor, the VFA, was formed in 1877 and was the second-oldest Australian rules football league, replacing the loose affiliation of clubs that existed in the early years of the game. The VFA was the top-level club competition in Victoria until 1896 but became the secondary-level competition from 1897, after its eight strongest clubs seceded to form the Australian Football League VFL (now AFL). As a secondary-level competition, the VFA enjoyed peaks of popularity, in the 1940s with a faster-paced rival code of rules and in the 1970s by playing on Sundays at a time when its competitor, the VFL, played on Saturdays.

In 1995, the VFA ceased to exist as an independent organisation and control of its football competition was taken over by its former rival, the AFL which operates the competition through its subsidiary, the Victorian State Football League. AFL clubs&#x27; reserves teams first entered the competition in 2000. In 2021, the competition expanded geographically, when the Australian Football League merged the Victorian Football League with the North East Australian Football League to include clubs from New South Wales and Queensland. In 2022, it comprised 21 teams from the eastern states, nine of which have a continuous VFA heritage.

== History ==
=== Victorian Football Association ===
==== VFA formative years (1877–1896) ====

The Victorian Football Association (VFA) was founded on 17 May 1877 at the meeting of club secretaries immediately preceding the 1877 season. It was formed out of a desire to provide a formal administrative structure to the governance of the sport, and it had the power to impose binding decisions on its members on matters including the Laws of the Game, player eligibility and other disputes, as well as to facilitate intercolonial football. Decisions were made based on a vote of the Board of Management, which was composed of two delegates from each senior club, a structure which was retained until the late 1980s. It replaced a system under which the secretaries of the senior clubs met at the beginning of each year to decide on matters of mutual interest, but the system was informal and disputes often went unresolved.
The five foundation senior clubs in the Melbourne metropolitan area were Albert-park, Carlton, Hotham (later North Melbourne), Melbourne and St Kilda. Provincial clubs were also eligible for senior representation on the Association, even though most seldom played matches against the metropolitan teams; Geelong, the nearest provincial club to the metropolis, was the most prominent provincial club, joining the Association in 1877 and playing regularly against metropolitan clubs by 1880. There was no formal system of promotion and relegation between the senior and junior levels, with it largely at a club&#x27;s discretion whether or not it joined the Association as a paying senior member. The affiliation fee for senior clubs was initially set at one guinea.

Through the first decade of the VFA&#x27;s existence, the structure of the football season did not change significantly from the informal system which had evolved over previous years. Setting of fixtures was the responsibility of club secretaries rather than the Association itself, and in a typical season, a club could play against other VFA teams, non-VFA clubs, at odds against junior teams (usually twenty players against twenty-three), and in some seasons against intercolonial teams; although as the number of senior clubs increased, the number of matches against non-VFA clubs declined. Prior to the 1888 season, there was no formally endorsed system for awarding a VFA premiership: as had been the case since the early 1870s, the premier club was determined by public and press consensus, which by the mid-1880s was conventionally but informally understood to be the senior club which suffered the fewest losses during the season. Premierships won under this then-informal method are now considered official, and consensus was typically uncontroversial.

In 1888, the VFA first took responsibility for the onfield competition, and introduced its first formal premiership system by adopting a system of premiership points; it also awarded for the first time a premiership cap in the Association&#x27;s colours to players of the premier team. The Association&#x27;s influence over the on-field competition grew, and from 1894, the Association assumed responsibility for centrally setting the fixtures and standardising the number of games played by each team.

After the formal introduction of the premiership, the often-changeable collection of senior clubs in the VFA soon became settled at twelve premiership-eligible clubs: , , Fitzroy, Footscray, , , , Port Melbourne, , , South Melbourne and Williamstown; they were joined by a thirteenth club, , in 1892. Three Ballarat-based clubs – Ballarat, Ballarat Imperial and South Ballarat – were also voting members of the VFA through this time, but were not involved in the onfield premiership.

==== Split (1897–1937) ====

During the 1890s, there was an off-field power struggle within the VFA between the stronger and weaker clubs, as the stronger clubs sought greater administrative control commensurate with their relative financial contribution to the game. This came to a head in 1896 when it was proposed that gate profits, which were always lower in matches against the weaker clubs, be shared equally amongst the Association clubs; in response to the threat that this might be endorsed on the votes of the weaker clubs, six of the strongest clubs – , , , , and – seceded from the VFA, inviting and to join them, to form the Victorian Football League (VFL), which became the leading senior football body in Victoria. The remaining VFA clubs – Footscray, North Melbourne, Port Melbourne, Richmond and Williamstown – were given the opportunity to compete as a junior competition under and without representation on the VFL&#x27;s administration, but rejected the offer and continued as an independent body. The two new competitions competed in parallel from their respective 1897 seasons.

The VFA rebuilt to ten clubs over its first independent decade, mostly by adding leading junior clubs to its ranks such as Brunswick, Prahran, West Melbourne, Essendon Town/Association, Preston, Brighton, Northcote and Hawthorn. Because the VFA was independent from the VFL (and, upon its establishment in 1906, the Australasian Football Council), the VFA had the power to set its own rules. The VFA reduced the number of on-field players from twenty to eighteen in 1897, a move followed by the VFL two years later. The VFA tried reducing the number of players further to 17 in 1908, then to 16 in 1912, before reverting to the national standard 18 in 1919. The VFA went into recess during World War I, with the 1916 and 1917 seasons cancelled and the 1915 and 1918 seasons shortened.
Over the first thirty years of the VFA&#x27;s independence, its relationship with the VFL was, in general, mutually antagonistic. At different times (1913–1918 and 1923–1925), the two competitions had permit reciprocity agreements in place to prevent one competition from poaching players from the other without a clearance, but these were sporadic and remained in place only when convenient to both competitions. At the same time, the strongest clubs in the VFA often sought to defect to the VFL, which the VFL was happy to encourage when it expanded, and there were ultimately four defections: in 1908; and , and in 1925. Attempting to defect was seen as treacherous within the VFA, and clubs which attempted to defect but failed were sometimes expelled from the VFA by the remaining clubs: was expelled from the VFA twice (in 1908 and 1921, before reforming and rejoining on both occasions), and West Melbourne was expelled permanently in 1908.

The loss of the VFA&#x27;s strongest three clubs to the VFL in 1925 firmly cemented the VFA as the second-tier competition in the state. Between 1925 and 1929, the addition of outer suburban clubs in Coburg (1925), Camberwell (1926), a new club from Preston (1926), Yarraville (1928), Oakleigh (1929) and Sandringham (1929) expanded the VFA back to twelve teams. The relationship with the VFL improved, and a new permit reciprocity agreement was established in 1931.

==== Throw-pass era (1938–1949) ====

In 1938, the VFA made a bold rule change by legalising throwing of the football in general play, provided the throw was underarm with both hands below shoulder height. The change helped to speed up the game, and introduced more run-and-carry play in an era which had previously been dominated by a long-kicking style, proving popular with many spectators. Additionally, the VFA ended its permit agreement with the VFL, and began to aggressively recruit star players by offering salaries well in excess of the maximum set by VFL player payment laws. This included Laurie Nash, Bob Pratt and Ron Todd, who were in the primes of their careers and were considered amongst the best players in the country. These changes gave the VFA a product which could compete with the VFL for public interest, and it made the late 1930s and 1940s one of the most successful periods in the VFA&#x27;s history. The VFA competition went into recess from 1942 until 1944 due to World War II, but continued to perform strongly upon returning in 1945. The VFA was incorporated in 1946.

While the throw-pass was in effect, particularly during the early 1940s, there were talks between the VFA and VFL towards re-amalgamating the two bodies. Although the throw-pass had been a great success for the VFA, it was felt that a single controlling body for football in Victoria playing under a uniform set of rules was in the best interests of football as a whole. Negotiations for an amalgamation took place over several years, but broke down several times over a variety of issues, including representation at board level, Australian National Football Council representation, and a promotion and relegation structure between the VFA and VFL.

In the end, the two bodies never amalgamated, but the schism ended in 1949 when the bodies re-established a permit reciprocity agreement and the VFA was granted a non-voting position on the Australian National Football Council, later upgraded to a voting position in 1953; as a condition of joining, it was forced to abandon the throw-pass rule and adopt the national standard rules. These changes benefitted Victorian football as a whole, gave the VFA a say in national administration of the game. It also gave the VFA the right to compete in interstate matches, and at interstate carnivals over the 1950s and 1960s, the VFA generally competed at a similar standard to Tasmania as the fourth- or fifth-best team in the competition.

However, joining the ANFC also stripped the VFA of the throw-pass, and therefore of the on-field distinctions which allowed it to compete with the VFL for fans; this, coupled with the increased mobility of suburban Melburnians – who, due to the increased affordability of cars and the lifting in 1950 of wartime travel restrictions, were no longer captive audiences for their local VFA teams – resulted in a significant downturn in most VFA clubs during the 1950s. On-field, the competition became dominated by the few clubs with strong community links such as Port Melbourne, Williamstown, Sandringham, Oakleigh and Moorabbin (who had joined the VFA alongside Box Hill in 1951); the gap between those clubs and the weaker clubs, many of whom were periodically forced to play as amateurs due to a lack of money, grew large and the popularity of the competition declined.

==== Gillon era (1954–1980) ====
Alex Gillon presided over the VFA from 1954 until 1980. During that time, the VFA underwent a series of changes to reinvigorate it after its post-throw pass decline of the 1950s. Major strategic changes were undertaken, including:
*As Melbourne expanded geographically, the VFA embarked on a deliberate plan to establish its presence in new areas by expanding the number of teams into the newer, outer suburbs. Between 1958 and 1966, new clubs were added in Dandenong, Geelong West, Mordialloc, Sunshine, Frankston, Waverley and Werribee.
*In 1961, when the eighteenth club joined, the VFA was split into First and Second Divisions, the First Division having 10 teams, and Second Division holding the balance, with one team promoted and one team relegated between the two divisions each season. This plan was aimed at improving overall competitiveness of the competition and overcoming the huge gap between the strongest and weakest clubs which had led to unentertaining football in the late 1950s.
*In 1959, the VFA again reduced the size of the on-field team to sixteen, eliminating the two wing positions, to result in a more open field than under league rules. The VFA played 16-a-side from 1959 until 1992.
*In 1960, the VFA first began playing premiership matches on Sundays. This allowed VFA matches to be played without competing the VFL for spectators, and within a few years, clubs found that Sunday matches were as much as three to four times more lucrative than Saturday games. By the 1970s, all games were played on a Sunday, while the VFL played its games on Saturdays. This was similar to the College/Pro football day divide still present in the US. The Victorian Government supported the VFA&#x27;s new-found vigour, and rejected requests by the VFL to hold its own games on Sundays until the mid-1980s.
*Finally, the VFA&#x27;s importance grew significantly after signing a television broadcast deal with ATV0 (later Network Ten), which saw a weekly live broadcast (in colour, when the technology became available) of one game from 1967 until 1981, at a time when VFL matches were shown only as partial replays.

All of these changes resulted in the VFA enjoying a successful period during the 1970s. Increased sponsorship, public awareness, and a greater number of former and fringe VFL players joining the VFA gave it a product which allowed it to flourish in the Sunday timeslot. The VFA at this time comprised twenty clubs, ten in each division, with a constant membership between 1966 and 1981. Attendances at matches more than doubled between 1967 and 1975.

The VFA&#x27;s relationship with the VFL and ANFC again deteriorated during the 1960s. In 1965, the VFA stopped recognising its permit reciprocity agreement in retribution for two takeovers of VFA club grounds by VFL clubs (St Kilda at Moorabbin and North Melbourne at Coburg); then in 1967, the VFL stopped recognising the agreement in retribution for the VFA&#x27;s the introduction of excessive transfer fees on its players. After the VFA refused to comply with an ANFC demand that a new reciprocal permit agreement be established, the VFA was expelled from the ANFC in 1970.

==== Decline (1981–1994) ====
The decline of the VFA is often said to have commenced in 1982 when the VFL&#x27;s struggling South Melbourne Swans moved to Sydney, as all Sydney Swans home games were played on Sunday and televised, ending the VFA&#x27;s monopoly on Sunday football; Network Ten ended its weekly VFA coverage in the same year. However, this was not the sole cause for decline, which had started in the late 1970s: changing demographics meant that many traditional clubs had slowly found themselves in areas with high migrant populations, which either made it difficult to compete with soccer for local for fans and players, or simply brought a level of cultural apathy towards the sport in general; VFA historian Marc Fiddian also noted a decline in the number of ex-VFL players signing with VFA clubs through the late 1970s, which reduced the Association&#x27;s drawing power, and an increasing gulf in quality between the best and worst clubs. Player payments increased through the 1980s, and declining financial support and sponsorship meant that many clubs began to struggle badly, and often found themselves unable to compete financially with local suburban leagues. The VFA had also developed a reputation for rough play and violence, and it was not until the late 1980s that it was able to clean up on-field discipline and shake that image.

In 1981, new VFA president Alan Wickes attempted to rectify the decline with further expansion: the VFA expanded further into the outer suburbs to twenty-four teams in 1983, adding Springvale, Moorabbin, Kilsyth and Berwick, and Wickes had a vision of expanding to thirty teams with an additional lower division which could affiliate more directly with the top tiers of suburban football; but (with the exception of Springvale), the new second division teams did little to reinvigorate the competition, and the clubs rejected any further expansion.

The VFA&#x27;s direction changed dramatically with the election of Brook Andersen as president in 1985. At the time, the VFL was looking at national expansion (ultimately becoming the Australian Football League in 1990) and Andersen&#x27;s executive committee believed that the VFA could fill a new role as top state level league in Victoria when this happened; however, it believed that the VFA would need to be rationalised to a competition of twelve financially stable teams for this to occur. Andersen attempted but failed to obtain a mandate from the clubs to impose this rationalisation, but the VFA under his guidance nevertheless contracted, as it showed no lenience in suspending clubs who failed to meet minimum requirements. Several long-term second division clubs, struggling with rising costs and foreseeing the dissolution of the second division (which ultimately occurred when fifteen teams remained in the 1989 season), also took the opportunity to return to suburban football before being forced out. The eight-year period between 1984 and 1991 saw twelve clubs exit the VFA: Mordialloc, Kilsyth, Berwick, Geelong West and Camberwell returned to suburban football; Yarraville, Moorabbin, Northcote and Caulfield were suspended; and Sunshine, Brunswick-Broadmeadows and Waverley all folded.

The VFA rejoined the ANFC as a non-voting member in 1987, and replaced the board of club delegates with an independent executive committee in 1988, and also regained weekly television coverage from the 1988 season onwards, with the ABC broadcasting a match each Saturday. The VFA eventually returned to the standard 18-per-side rules in 1993.

===Victorian Football League===
==== End of the VFA (1994–1999) ====
Despite the rationalisation to its twelve strongest teams and improved television coverage, the financial position of the competition and the vast majority of its clubs remained perilous into the early 1990s, and it was clear that the VFA was no longer a viable independent body in the long term. At the end of the 1994 season, the VFA was formally disbanded in an administrative capacity, and the on-field competition was turned over to the AFL&#x27;s Victorian State Football League which the AFL had set up two years earlier to take control of Australian football at all levels in Victoria and which ran the statewide under-18s competition (the present day NAB League) and the AFL reserves competition in Victoria. This ended the VFA&#x27;s 97 years of independence from the VFL/AFL and, for the first time since 1896, created a single control for most Australian football in Victoria. Victorian Football Association Limited was deregistered in 2012.

The VSFL retained the use of the VFA name for the competition for the 1995 season but, in 1996, renamed the competition Victorian Football League (VFL), The Australian Football League&#x27;s former name until 1990. The VSFL sought to align the competition with the under-18s competition, with each former VFA club affiliated with an under-18s team to provide a developmental pathway from under-18 football into state-level senior football. In doing this, the number of metropolitan teams was cut from twelve to nine in 1995, with Prahran, Oakleigh and Dandenong departing. This left nine clubs with a VFA heritage, coming from different eras: Port Melbourne and Williamstown from the pre-1897 era; Preston, Coburg and Sandringham from the 1920s expansion; Box Hill, Werribee and Frankston from the 1950s/1960s expansion; and Springvale from the 1980s expansion.

The VSFL intended that each statewide under-18s team would be affiliated with a VFL club, so embarked upon a period of expansion to represent the four under-18s teams from country Victoria, as well as Tasmania (which was represented in the competition for a period of time). In this expansion, existing powerhouse country clubs North Ballarat and Traralgon joined the league in 1996, with new clubs established in Bendigo, Albury (the Murray Kangaroos, representing the Ovens &amp; Murray region) and Tasmania between 1998 and 2001. The regional senior clubs struggled to be financially viable in the statewide competition, with Traralgon and Murray lasting only two and three years respectively. Since 2018, no regional clubs have contested the competition.

==== Merger with the AFL reserves (2000–2019) ====
From 1995 until 1999, the VSFL operated its two open-age competitions – the VFA/VFL and the Victorian AFL Reserves competition – separately; however, its intention had always been to merge the two, and this took place following the 1999 season, after the agreement of the AFL clubs. Under the administration&#x27;s new name &quot;Football Victoria&quot; (later AFL Victoria), those two competitions were merged into a single competition still known as the Victorian Football League. Since this time, the VFL has been contested by a mixture of three types of clubs:
*VFL clubs, operating on a stand-alone basis and maintaining a complete list of players
*The reserves teams of AFL clubs, comprised on AFL reserves players and a small list of supplementary players to make up a full team
*VFL clubs operating under an affiliation arrangements with an AFL clubs, whereby players from the AFL club would join the senior team of the VFL club when not selected to play in the AFL. At times, there were rules limiting the number of AFL-listed players who could play in a VFL team, but these rules no longer exist.
All three models compete to a relatively even standard, with premierships having been won by all three types of team since the merger. An additional reserves affiliation option, under which AFL clubs were allowed to spread their reserves players across all of the league&#x27;s VFL clubs rather than into a single aligned club, has also existed since 2021 but has not been taken up by any AFL clubs.

The affiliation deals greatly improved the financial viability of the clubs in question, but they diluted their ability to represent their suburb. There have been many changes to the affiliation arrangements in the decade since the VSFL took over the VFA competition, as well as a shift in the arrangement preferred by the AFL clubs. Initially, only four of the ten Victorian AFL clubs were involved in a VFL affiliation, with the rest fielding reserves teams. At its peak of between 2003 and 2006, nine of the ten Victorian AFL clubs were involved in an affiliation, with only Geelong fielding its own reserves team. Most clubs have since migrated away from this model, and since 2021 seven of the ten Victorian AFL clubs have fielded stand-alone reserves teams in the VFL. Through the 2000s, the AFL preferred that its Victorian clubs retained VFL-affiliations, and offered a disincentive in the form of an inflated licence fee for fielding a stand-alone team; however, the AFL did not otherwise prevent teams from fielding stand-alone reserves teams if they were willing and able to pay the fee. The total licence and running costs for an AFL club to field its reserves team in the VFL were estimated to be $500,000 per year in 2011.

Through this period, the VFL remained moderately popular in Victoria, although not nearly as well-supported as the dominant Australian Football League. Matches attracted both traditional fans of the VFA/VFL clubs, and fans of affiliated AFL clubs keen to watch their reserves players in action. The match of the week and most finals continued to be televised live in Melbourne by the ABC until 2014, and since 2015 by the Seven Network as a lead-in to its AFL coverage.

==== Northeast expansion (2020–present) ====
The 2020 VFL season was cancelled as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Upon the VFL&#x27;s resumption in 2021, the North East Australian Football League (NEAFL) – which had served as the state league in Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, Northern Territory and Queensland – was wound up and absorbed into the VFL; this resulted in the reserves teams from the New South Wales and Queensland AFL clubs (Sydney, Greater Western Sydney, Brisbane and Gold Coast) joining the league, and two of the NEAFL&#x27;s other Queensland-based senior clubs – Aspley and Southport – joining, although Aspley departed after the 2021 season. This brought the league to its largest size since the 1980s, with 22 clubs competing: eight stand-alone VFL clubs, eleven AFL reserves teams, and three traditional VFA/VFL clubs in reserves affiliations with AFL clubs. The league was also revamped to improve its ability to serve as a talent pathway, with each club required to field at least six under-22 players in each game. The 2021 season also saw increased broadcast coverage with Foxtel and its streaming service &quot;Kayo&quot; showing games in addition to the ongoing deal with Seven Network.

==Awards==

===Best and fairest===

The first award for the Association best and fairest player was the Woodham Cup, first awarded in 1923; this was renamed the Recorder Cup in 1926. Starting from 1933, a second award, the V.F.A. Medal, was awarded concurrently; the awards were both based on the votes of the umpires, but were based on different voting systems. In 1940, the Association dispensed with the Recorder Cup voting system, and awarded both trophies to the same player based on the same set of votes.

Since 1945, the award for the best and fairest player in each VFA/VFL season has been the J. J. Liston Trophy, named after long-term Association president John James Liston, who died in 1944.

===Other awards===
* The Jim &#x27;Frosty&#x27; Miller Medal is awarded annually to the leading goal-kicker in the VFL home-and-away season; it was struck in 1999 and named after Jim &#x27;Frosty&#x27; Miller, who kicked 885 goals for Dandenong between 1966 and 1974.
* The Norm Goss Memorial Medal, awarded annually to the player voted best afield in the VFL grand final; it was struck in 1983 in honour of Norm Goss, Sr., a senior administrator in both the VFA and the Port Melbourne Football Club.
* The Fothergill–Round–Mitchell Medal, awarded annually to the most promising young talent in the VFL competition; it was struck in 1989 and is named after the three players who have won a Brownlow Medals in the VFL/AFL and won a Recorder Cup/Liston Trophy in the VFL: Des Fothergill and Barry Round, after whom the award was originally named, and Sam Mitchell, whose name was added to the award in 2018.
* The Frank Johnson Medal, awarded to the player voted best afield for the VFL in interstate football games; named after Frank Johnson, the only VFA player ever selected as captain of an All-Australian Team.

== Salary cap ==
The VFL is classed as a semi-professional competition. In 2007 the league had a salary cap of $185,000, excluding service payments. There are a significantly higher number of AFL reserves due to affiliations with Victorian clubs, but player payments for these appearances is apparently not included in the VFL&#x27;s salary cap. Following the 2013 VFL season, it was revealed that several clubs were lobbying VFL executives to increase the salary cap in a bid to keep high-level players who had relieved themselves of participating in the league to accept more attractive financial offers in local football competitions, where such caps are far less regulated.

As of the 2022 season, standalone clubs in the league, of which there are eight, have a A$220,000 salary cap, while the AFL reserve and affiliate clubs have a A$110,000 salary cap.

== Attendance ==
Attendances are small by AFL standards, and generally less than the SANFL and WAFL, with an average of between 500 and 1,000 in attendance. Crowds for many finals matches tend to average in the 2,000–6,000 range, with the Grand Final typically attracting a crowd in the 10,000–14,000 mark.

The VFL does not publish home-and-away attendance figures, as some games are played as AFL curtain raisers; however, various sources quote attendances for some games of the stronger clubs that maintain home records of their own.

== Media coverage ==

=== Television ===
Television coverage has been critical to the exposure of the VFA/VFL during its history, and has typically taken the form of the match of the week being televised live into Melbourne, as well as most finals. Television and streaming deals during the league&#x27;s history are as follows:
*1967–1981: weekly broadcasts of Sunday&#x27;s match of the round on Channel 0/Channel 10
*1984–1986: match of the round in the final two rounds, plus finals on Channel 10
*1987: finals only on Channel 2 in Victoria
*1988–2014: Weekly broadcasts of match of the round on Saturday afternoons, plus most or all finals, on Channel 2 in Victoria. Commentators included Ross Booth and Phil Cleary.
*2000: in addition to ABC&#x27;s coverage, one Monday night match televised each week on the Seven Network&#x27;s C7 Sport subscription channel. At this time, pay TV penetration was low, and this lasted only one year.
*2015–2019: weekly broadcasts of match of the round on Saturday afternoons, plus most finals, on Channel 7
*2021: up to three matches per round available on sports streaming service Kayo Sports, one Sunday &quot;match of the round&quot; game broadcast on Seven, and one Thursday night game broadcast on Fox Footy (only when no AFL Thursday night fixture is scheduled).
*2022–present: one match per round broadcast live on Seven Network and available live and on-demand nationally on 7plus streaming site, and all additional matches live streamed and available on demand on the AFL website and AFL Live app.

The VFA holds the distinction of having the first match to be broadcast live on television in Australia, when the second half of the match between Oakleigh and Preston on 25 May 1957 was televised on Channel 2 (ABC).

=== Radio ===
The first regular radio broadcasts of VFA games were made by 3XY, a little after the station commenced operations in 1935. The commentator was former Geelong VFL player Wallace &quot;Jumbo&quot; Sharland who had earlier been the first to describe VFL matches, that being on 3AR in 1923. In 1954 3AK began broadcasting VFA games, albeit only for a season or two. The 1970s also saw broadcasts on 3UZ, and local Geelong station, 3GL, broadcast all Geelong West matches. In 1982, the then-dominant Melbourne sports radio station, 3AW, broadcast the Grand Final. In 2003, 3AK evolved into sports radio station SEN 1116, and provided a coverage of VFL matches, but this was discontinued after they won the rights to broadcast the AFL (Australian Football League) from the 2007 season. From 1993 onwards radio&#x27;s main home for the competition was on Casey Radio where the team, headed up by Ken Moore, did a terrific job bringing games to the wider public. The station gave a start to such broadcasters as Nigel Carmody, Darren Parkin and Tristan Foenander and has proven a terrific breeding ground for emerging sports broadcasters. The station still broadcasts the league today, combined with doing the local league down in Melbourne&#x27;s southeast.

VFL Radio is produced by BPM Media who broadcast live at least one game a week during the regular season plus each day of the finals series. The coverage is broadcast on the Vision Australia Radio network throughout Victoria on analogue radio, by Aussie digital radio (SEN 2) and on the internet at vfl.com.au or bpmmedia.com.au.

==Clubs==
The Victorian Football League operates on a single ladder system, with no divisions, conferences nor promotion and relegation from other leagues.

=== Current clubs ===
Twenty-one clubs are currently playing in the VFL in 2025.

===Future clubs===
=== Former clubs ===

The VFA and VFL have undergone significant format changes since its induction which means several clubs have either left the league or changed identity for different reasons. Excluded from this list are provincial clubs who were full administrative members of the VFA in its first decade, but who never played enough games against other clubs to be considered relevant in the premiership.


===Timeline===
===Map=== 


===Uniforms (current clubs)===
===Uniforms (future clubs)===
==VFA presidents==
The following men served as president of the VFA between its establishment in 1877 and its becoming defunct in 1994.
==VFL Women&#x27;s==

From the 2016 season, a statewide women&#x27;s football league aligned with the VFL was established by AFL Victoria. The competition initially comprised the six Premier Division clubs and the top four Division 1 clubs from the now-defunct Victorian Women&#x27;s Football League (VWFL), and was aligned and co-branded with the VFL to improve market penetration. Following the 2017 season, the competition was reconfigured to affiliate teams more closely with AFL clubs. In 2018, the league comprised thirteen teams; twelve were based in Victoria and nine were affiliated with AFL clubs, with one in the Northern Territory. The league ran from May to September, running concurrently with the VFL.

==Former grades==
===Seconds/reserves===

The VFA/VFL operated a seconds or reserves competition from the 1920s, initially emerging from the Victorian Junior Football Association. From its inception until 1979, the seconds team played on Saturday afternoons, playing at home when the senior team played away and vice versa. Since 1980, seconds matches have been played as curtain-raisers to senior matches, on Saturdays or Sundays as necessary. The competition was later renamed the reserves, and then from the beginning of the 2012 season it has been known as the AFL Victoria Development League, a move that coincided with the introduction of the AFL Victoria Development Academy which provides development opportunities for up to 25 selected VFL players per year. For most of the VFA&#x27;s history, fielding a team in the seconds grade was mandatory for all senior teams, but in the state league era many regional clubs – as well as all AFL clubs fielding their reserves teams in the VFL seniors – opted not to contest the minor grade. The Development League was abolished after the 2017 season with all VFL clubs&#x27; reserve players now play suburban football when not playing with the VFL seniors.

===Thirds/Under-19s===

The VFA operated an under-19s competition, initially known as the Thirds, between 1952 and 1994. The Under-19s was disbanded when the AFL&#x27;s VSFL took over the VFA competition after the 1994, with the statewide under-19s competition (the present day NAB League) replacing its function as an under-18s competition.

== See also ==
* List of VFA/VFL premiers
* List of VFA/VFL records
* History of Australian rules football in Victoria (1859–1900)

== References ==
== External links ==
* List of VFA/VFL premiers since 1877 (archived)
* (archived)
* VFL Mark of the Year competition (archived)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2352741" start="4" end="29" title="Victorian Football League" label="Victorian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352741" start="31" end="34" title="Victorian Football League" label="VFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="42" end="67" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="109" end="135" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330629" start="239" end="266" title="eastern states of Australia" label="eastern states of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="268" end="276" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="278" end="293" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="298" end="308" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412834" start="320" end="333" title="reserve team" label="reserves team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352741" start="425" end="455" title="Victorian Football League" label="Victorian Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352741" start="457" end="460" title="Victorian Football League" label="VFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q74108869" start="653" end="669" title="VFL Women&amp;#x27;s" label="VFL Women&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="774" end="799" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775155" start="869" end="892" title="History of Australian rules football in Victoria (1859–1900)" label="early years of the game"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="1066" end="1106" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League VFL (now AFL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870980" start="1212" end="1222" title="throw-pass era" label="rival code"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948131" start="1540" end="1571" title="Victorian State Football League" label="Victorian State Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="1702" end="1728" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412524" start="1775" end="1812" title="North East Australian Football League" label="North East Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350854" start="2967" end="2978" title="Albert Park Football Club (VFA)" label="Albert-park"/>
<link wikidata="Q858633" start="2980" end="2987" title="Carlton Football Club" label="Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736412" start="2989" end="3019" title="North Melbourne Football Club" label="Hotham (later North Melbourne)"/>
<link wikidata="Q911681" start="3021" end="3030" title="Melbourne Football Club" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084121" start="3035" end="3043" title="St Kilda Football Club" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q958369" start="3198" end="3205" title="Geelong Football Club" label="Geelong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775155" start="3823" end="3842" title="History of Australian rules football in Victoria (1859–1900)" label="over previous years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505228" start="4026" end="4033" title="Handicapping" label="at odds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044572" start="5399" end="5406" title="Fitzroy Football Club" label="Fitzroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305526" start="5408" end="5417" title="Footscray Football Club" label="Footscray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230791" start="5425" end="5439" title="Port Melbourne Football Club" label="Port Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272176" start="5445" end="5460" title="Sydney Swans" label="South Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021296" start="5465" end="5477" title="Williamstown Football Club" label="Williamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851463" start="5558" end="5566" title="Ballarat Football Club" label="Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871057" start="5568" end="5585" title="Ballarat Imperial Football Club" label="Ballarat Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879211" start="5590" end="5604" title="South Ballarat Football Club" label="South Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="6351" end="6376" title="Victorian Football League (1897–1989)" label="Victorian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979502" start="6937" end="6946" title="Brunswick Football Club" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237729" start="6948" end="6955" title="Prahran Football Club" label="Prahran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985878" start="6957" end="6971" title="West Melbourne Football Club" label="West Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399476" start="6973" end="6998" title="Essendon Association Football Club" label="Essendon Town/Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958881" start="7000" end="7007" title="Northern Bullants" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967640" start="7009" end="7017" title="Brighton Football Club" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057765" start="7019" end="7028" title="Northcote Football Club" label="Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034556" start="7033" end="7041" title="Hawthorn Football Club" label="Hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091324" start="7130" end="7159" title="Australasian Football Council" label="Australasian Football Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7504" end="7515" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316618" start="7913" end="7922" title="retain and transfer system" label="clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985878" start="8498" end="8512" title="West Melbourne Football Club" label="West Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139022" start="8748" end="8754" title="Coburg Football Club" label="Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025052" start="8763" end="8773" title="Camberwell Football Club" label="Camberwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958881" start="8798" end="8805" title="Northern Bullants" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049543" start="8814" end="8824" title="Yarraville Football Club" label="Yarraville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074112" start="8833" end="8841" title="Oakleigh Football Club" label="Oakleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416834" start="8853" end="8864" title="Sandringham Football Club" label="Sandringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149310" start="9617" end="9628" title="Laurie Nash" label="Laurie Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933679" start="9630" end="9639" title="Bob Pratt" label="Bob Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364481" start="9644" end="9652" title="Ron Todd (footballer)" label="Ron Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10010" end="10022" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352741" start="10219" end="10222" title="Victorian Football Association" label="VFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="10227" end="10230" title="Australian Football League" label="VFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091324" start="10648" end="10684" title="Australian National Football Council" label="Australian National Football Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="10707" end="10731" title="promotion and relegation" label="promotion and relegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057092" start="11312" end="11330" title="interstate matches in Australian rules football" label="interstate matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825201" start="11438" end="11446" title="Tasmania Australian rules football team" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230791" start="12063" end="12077" title="Port Melbourne Football Club" label="Port Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021296" start="12079" end="12091" title="Williamstown Football Club" label="Williamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416834" start="12093" end="12104" title="Sandringham Football Club" label="Sandringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074112" start="12106" end="12114" title="Oakleigh Football Club" label="Oakleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970938" start="12119" end="12128" title="Moorabbin Football Club" label="Moorabbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951531" start="12163" end="12171" title="Box Hill Football Club" label="Box Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18641442" start="12407" end="12418" title="Alex Gillon" label="Alex Gillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215698" start="12865" end="12874" title="Dandenong Football Club" label="Dandenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529866" start="12876" end="12888" title="Geelong West St Peters Football Club" label="Geelong West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910822" start="12890" end="12900" title="Mordialloc Football Club" label="Mordialloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641482" start="12902" end="12910" title="Sunshine Football Club (VFA)" label="Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492251" start="12912" end="12921" title="Frankston Football Club" label="Frankston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975417" start="12923" end="12931" title="Waverley Football Club" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983569" start="12936" end="12944" title="Werribee Football Club" label="Werribee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589335" start="14076" end="14096" title="Government of Victoria" label="Victorian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363315" start="14329" end="14333" title="ATV0" label="ATV0"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="14341" end="14352" title="Network Ten" label="Network Ten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15213" end="15234" title="1964 VFA season#St Kilda.27s move to Moorabbin Oval" label="St Kilda at Moorabbin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15239" end="15264" title="1965 VFA season#North Melbourne.27s move to Coburg Oval" label="North Melbourne at Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272176" start="15739" end="15751" title="Sydney Swans" label="Sydney Swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353274" start="16960" end="16971" title="Alan Wickes" label="Alan Wickes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048577" start="17114" end="17124" title="Springvale Football Club" label="Springvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q123111791" start="17126" end="17135" title="Moorabbin Football Club (1979–1987)" label="Moorabbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165719" start="17137" end="17144" title="Kilsyth Football Club" label="Kilsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985857" start="17149" end="17156" title="Berwick Football Club" label="Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="17667" end="17693" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910822" start="18576" end="18586" title="Mordialloc Football Club" label="Mordialloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985857" start="18597" end="18604" title="Berwick Football Club" label="Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529866" start="18606" end="18618" title="Geelong West St Peters Football Club" label="Geelong West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025052" start="18623" end="18633" title="Camberwell Football Club" label="Camberwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049543" start="18665" end="18675" title="Yarraville Football Club" label="Yarraville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057765" start="18688" end="18697" title="Northcote Football Club" label="Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054510" start="18702" end="18711" title="Caulfield Football Club" label="Caulfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641482" start="18732" end="18740" title="Sunshine Football Club (VFA)" label="Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979502" start="18742" end="18764" title="Brunswick Football Club" label="Brunswick-Broadmeadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975417" start="18769" end="18777" title="Waverley Football Club" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="19023" end="19026" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948131" start="19657" end="19688" title="Victorian State Football League" label="Victorian State Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669202" start="19864" end="19874" title="NAB League" label="NAB League"/>
<link wikidata="Q120738903" start="19884" end="19896" title="AFL reserves" label="AFL reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="20316" end="20342" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054048" start="21350" end="21364" title="North Ballarat Football Club" label="North Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880065" start="21369" end="21378" title="Traralgon Football Club" label="Traralgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887084" start="21436" end="21443" title="Bendigo Football Club" label="Bendigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939329" start="21457" end="21473" title="Murray Kangaroos" label="Murray Kangaroos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113348" start="21492" end="21517" title="Ovens &amp;amp; Murray Football League" label="Ovens &amp;amp; Murray region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687447" start="21523" end="21531" title="Tasmania Devils Football Club (VFL)" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q120738903" start="21925" end="21959" title="AFL reserves" label="Victorian AFL Reserves competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651558" start="22194" end="22206" title="AFL Victoria" label="AFL Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412834" start="22491" end="22504" title="reserve team" label="reserves team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824185" start="22649" end="22673" title="reserves affiliations of Australian Football League clubs" label="affiliation arrangements"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="24703" end="24729" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="25001" end="25014" title="Seven Network" label="Seven Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q85737300" start="25099" end="25114" title="2020 VFL season" label="2020 VFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="25148" end="25165" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412524" start="25211" end="25256" title="North East Australian Football League" label="North East Australian Football League (NEAFL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825206" start="25299" end="25327" title="Australian rules football in the Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825188" start="25329" end="25344" title="Australian rules football in New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825209" start="25346" end="25364" title="Australian rules football in the Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825194" start="25369" end="25379" title="Australian rules football in Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272176" start="25509" end="25515" title="Sydney Swans" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119600" start="25517" end="25539" title="Greater Western Sydney Football Club" label="Greater Western Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q637601" start="25541" end="25549" title="Brisbane Lions" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094295" start="25554" end="25564" title="Gold Coast Suns" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808162" start="25652" end="25658" title="Aspley Football Club" label="Aspley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570948" start="25663" end="25672" title="Southport Australian Football Club" label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976628" start="26169" end="26175" title="Foxtel" label="Foxtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091549" start="26208" end="26212" title="Kayo Sports" label="Kayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106103" start="26390" end="26401" title="Recorder Cup" label="Woodham Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106103" start="26447" end="26459" title="Recorder Cup" label="Recorder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106103" start="26889" end="26908" title="J. J. Liston Trophy" label="J. J. Liston Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21535516" start="26954" end="26971" title="John James Liston" label="John James Liston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970525" start="27017" end="27052" title="Jim &amp;#x27;Frosty&amp;#x27; Miller Medal" label="Jim &amp;#x27;Frosty&amp;#x27; Miller Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196952" start="27171" end="27200" title="Jim &amp;#x27;Frosty&amp;#x27; Miller" label="Jim &amp;#x27;Frosty&amp;#x27; Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215698" start="27227" end="27236" title="Dandenong Football Club" label="Dandenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971109" start="27266" end="27290" title="Norm Goss Memorial Medal" label="Norm Goss Memorial Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16079693" start="27400" end="27414" title="Norm Goss, Sr." label="Norm Goss, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7230791" start="27463" end="27491" title="Port Melbourne Football Club" label="Port Melbourne Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473930" start="27499" end="27530" title="Fothergill–Round–Mitchell Medal" label="Fothergill–Round–Mitchell Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853498" start="27682" end="27696" title="Brownlow Medal" label="Brownlow Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013617" start="27762" end="27776" title="Des Fothergill" label="Des Fothergill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864691" start="27781" end="27792" title="Barry Round" label="Barry Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407927" start="27841" end="27853" title="Sam Mitchell (footballer)" label="Sam Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487559" start="28019" end="28032" title="Frank Johnson (footballer, born 1932)" label="Frank Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727805" start="28085" end="28104" title="All-Australian Team" label="All-Australian Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371047" start="28148" end="28165" title="semi-professional" label="semi-professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="28204" end="28214" title="salary cap" label="salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972332" start="28467" end="28482" title="2013 VFL season" label="2013 VFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q108907345" start="28796" end="28807" title="2022 VFL season" label="2022 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="28874" end="28876" title="Australian dollar" label="A$"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="28906" end="28909" title="Australian Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965465" start="29053" end="29058" title="SANFL" label="SANFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984357" start="29063" end="29067" title="West Australian Football League" label="WAFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="29770" end="29779" title="Streaming media" label="streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363315" start="29847" end="29924" title="ATV (Australian TV station)" label="weekly broadcasts of Sunday&amp;#x27;s match of the round on Channel 0/Channel 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="29937" end="30006" title="Network Ten" label="match of the round in the final two rounds, plus finals on Channel 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650431" start="30029" end="30050" title="ABV (TV station)" label="Channel 2 in Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650431" start="30155" end="30176" title="ABV (TV station)" label="Channel 2 in Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q126371089" start="30200" end="30210" title="Ross Booth" label="Ross Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181785" start="30215" end="30226" title="Phil Cleary" label="Phil Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008343" start="30342" end="30350" title="C7 Sport" label="C7 Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="30543" end="30552" title="Seven Network" label="Channel 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091549" start="30628" end="30639" title="Kayo Sports" label="Kayo Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476706" start="30749" end="30758" title="Fox Footy" label="Fox Footy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075033" start="30929" end="30934" title="7plus" label="7plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074112" start="31201" end="31209" title="Oakleigh Football Club" label="Oakleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958881" start="31214" end="31221" title="Preston Football Club (VFA)" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="31254" end="31269" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Channel 2 (ABC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730602" start="31347" end="31350" title="3XY" label="3XY"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078522" start="31455" end="31489" title="Jumbo Sharland" label="Wallace &amp;quot;Jumbo&amp;quot; Sharland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636205" start="31581" end="31584" title="3AK" label="3AK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636418" start="31681" end="31684" title="3UZ" label="3UZ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31713" end="31716" title="95.5 K-Rock#3GL" label="3GL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636210" start="31813" end="31816" title="3AW" label="3AW"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595257" start="31832" end="31843" title="Grand final" label="Grand Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547305" start="31892" end="31900" title="SEN 1116" label="SEN 1116"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="32016" end="32042" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048562" start="32134" end="32145" title="Casey Radio" label="Casey Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936140" start="32712" end="32734" title="Vision Australia Radio" label="Vision Australia Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q132168217" start="33101" end="33105" title="2025 VFL season" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q120756416" start="33352" end="33368" title="List of provincial clubs in the Victorian Football Association" label="provincial clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927346" start="34026" end="34064" title="Victorian Women&amp;#x27;s Football League" label="Victorian Women&amp;#x27;s Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="34389" end="34407" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845901" start="34624" end="34661" title="Victorian Junior Football Association" label="Victorian Junior Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669202" start="35919" end="35950" title="NAB League" label="statewide under-19s competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669202" start="35968" end="35978" title="NAB League" label="NAB League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603356" start="36050" end="36074" title="List of VFA/VFL premiers" label="List of VFA/VFL premiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q122835039" start="36077" end="36100" title="List of VFA/VFL records" label="List of VFA/VFL records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775155" start="36103" end="36163" title="History of Australian rules football in Victoria (1859–1900)" label="History of Australian rules football in Victoria (1859–1900)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303710" wikidata="Q583868" url="?curid=303710" title="Victor Duruy">
<text>Jean Victor Duruy (; 10 September 1811 – 25 November 1894) was a French historian and statesman.

==Life==
Duruy was born in Paris, the son of a factory worker, and at first intended for his father&#x27;s trade. Having passed brilliantly through the École Normale Supérieure, where he studied under Jules Michelet, he accompanied Michelet as secretary in his travels through France, substituting for him at the École Normale in 1836, when only twenty-four. Ill health forced him to resign, and poverty caused him to undertake writing an extensive series of school textbooks, which made him well known.

He devoted himself to secondary school education, holding his chair in the College Henri IV at Paris for over a quarter of a century. Already known as a historian by his &quot;Histoire des Romains et des peuples soumis à leur domination&quot; (7 vols, 1843–1844), he was chosen by Napoleon III to assist him in his biography of Julius Caesar, and his abilities being thus brought under the emperor&#x27;s notice, he was in 1863 appointed minister of education. In this position he worked incessantly, attempting broad and liberal reforms. On 18 March 1864, Duruy visited the Christian Brothers&#x27; boarding school in Passy (the &quot;Pensionnat des Frères des écoles chrétiennes à Passy&quot;) and complimented the Brothers &quot;in the most flattering terms upon the appearance and tendency of the pensionnat&quot;. Another ministerial visit took place on 12 May of the same year,
caused by the resistance to the projet de loi for special instruction which was manifested in the parliamentary commission which had been appointed to examine the subject. To overcome this opposition M. Duruy invited the members of the commission to accompany him to Passy, in order to demonstrate to them, as he expressed it, the successful realization of his project by the Christian Brothers.

Ironically, despite open domestic opposition to his views in education, he was instrumental in the reformation of Galatasaray High School in 1868, in strict concordance with his secular views, as the first Western-style state higher education institution in the Ottoman Empire.

Among his measures were the reorganization of higher education (&quot;enseignement spécial&quot;), the foundation of the &quot;conférences publiques&quot;, which became universal throughout France, and of a course of secondary education for girls by lay teachers. He introduced modern history and modern languages into the curriculum both of the &quot;lycées&quot; and of the colleges. He greatly improved the state of primary education in France, and proposed to make it compulsory and free of charge, but failed to obtain the emperor&#x27;s support for this move. In the new cabinet that followed the elections of 1869, Duruy was replaced by Louis Olivier Bourbeau, and was made a senator. After the fall of the Empire he took no part in politics, except for an unsuccessful candidacy for the senate in 1876. From 1881 to 1886 he served as a member of the &quot;Conseil Supérieur de l&#x27;Instruction Publique&quot;. In 1884 he was elected to the &quot;Académie française&quot; in succession to François Mignet. In 1886, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society.

==Works==

As an historian Duruy aimed in his earlier works at a graphic and picturesque narrative which should make his subject popular. His fame, however, rests mainly on the revised edition of his Roman history, which appeared in a greatly enlarged form in 5 vols. under the title of &quot;Histoire des Romains depuis les temps les plus reculés jusqu&#x27;à la mort de Théodose&quot; (&quot;History of the Romans from the Most Ancient Times up to the Death of Theodosius&quot;; 1879–1885), an illustrated edition was published from 1879 to 1885 (English translation by Clarke &amp; Miss Ripley, in 6 vols., 1883–1886). His &quot;Histoire des Grecs&quot;, similarly illustrated, appeared in 3 volumes from 1886 to 1891 (English translation in 4 volumes, 1892). He was the editor, from its commencement in 1846, of the &quot;Histoire universelle, publiée par une société de professeurs et de savants&quot;, for which he himself wrote a &quot;Histoire sainte d&#x27;après la Bible,&quot; &quot;Histoire grecque,&quot; &quot;Histoire romaine,&quot; &quot;Histoire du moyen âge,&quot; &quot;Histoire des temps modernes,&quot; and &quot;Abrégé de l&#x27;histoire de France.&quot;

His other works include &quot;Atlas historique de la France accompagné d&#x27;un volume de texte&quot; (1849); &quot;Histoire de France de 1453 à 1815&quot; (1856), of which an expanded and illustrated edition appeared as &quot;Histoire de France depuis l&#x27;invasion des Barbares dans la Gaule romaine jusqu&#x27;à nos jours&quot; (1892); &quot;Histoire populaire de la France&quot; (1862–1863); &quot;Histoire populaire contemporaine de la France&quot; (1864–1866); &quot;Causeries de voyage: de Paris à Vienne&quot; (1864); and &quot;Introduction générale à l&#x27;histoire de France&quot; (1865).

A memoir by Ernest Lavisse appeared in 1895 under the title of &quot;Un Ministre: Victor Duruy&quot;. See also the notice by Jules Simon (1895), and &quot;Portraits et souvenirs&quot; by Gabriel Monod (1897).

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* &quot;Annual Report of the Commissioner of Education&quot;. U.S. Government Printing Office.
*Prévot, André (1964). &quot;L&#x27;enseignement technique chez les Frères des écoles chrétiennes au XVIIIe et au XIXe siècles&quot;. Ligel.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q583868" start="0" end="17" title="Victor Duruy" label="Jean Victor Duruy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83259" start="250" end="274" title="École Normale Supérieure" label="École Normale Supérieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q310791" start="299" end="313" title="Jules Michelet" label="Jules Michelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878600" start="678" end="694" title="College Henri IV" label="College Henri IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="884" end="896" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="931" end="944" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q138579" start="1178" end="1196" title="Brothers of the Christian Schools" label="Christian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241308" start="1222" end="1227" title="Passy" label="Passy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046075" start="1239" end="1291" title="Pensionnat des Frères des écoles chrétiennes à Passy" label="Pensionnat des Frères des écoles chrétiennes à Passy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007545" start="1998" end="2021" title="Galatasaray High School" label="Galatasaray High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2146" end="2160" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350850" start="2807" end="2829" title="Louis Olivier Bourbeau" label="Louis Olivier Bourbeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="3119" end="3137" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q660553" start="3161" end="3176" title="François Mignet" label="François Mignet"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="3221" end="3251" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3826" end="3832" title="William Jones Clarke" label="Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q981891" start="5048" end="5062" title="Ernest Lavisse" label="Ernest Lavisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q548532" start="5161" end="5172" title="Jules Simon" label="Jules Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087450" start="5223" end="5236" title="Gabriel Monod" label="Gabriel Monod"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303711" wikidata="Q741023" url="?curid=303711" title="Roger Maris">
<text>Roger Eugene Maris (born Maras; September 10, 1934 – December 14, 1985) was an American professional baseball right fielder who played 12 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB). He is best known for setting a new MLB single-season home run record with 61 home runs in 1961. 

Maris played in the minor leagues from 1953 to 1956, and made his major league debut for the Cleveland Indians in 1957. He was traded to the Kansas City Athletics during the 1958 season, and to the New York Yankees after the 1959 season. Maris finished his playing career as a member of the St. Louis Cardinals in 1967 and 1968. Maris was an AL All-Star from 1959 through 1962, the AL Most Valuable Player in 1960 and 1961, and an AL Gold Glove Award winner in 1960. Maris appeared in seven World Series; he played for Yankees teams that won the World Series in 1961 and 1962 and for a Cardinals team that won the World Series in 1967.

Maris&#x27;s home run record was controversial, as the previous single-season home run record (60, set by Babe Ruth in 1927) was set during a period when MLB teams played 154 games per season. Maris broke Ruth&#x27;s record in the year the AL baseball season was extended to 162 games, hitting his 61st home run in the last game of the season, which led to questions about the legitimacy of his record. Maris&#x27; major league record remained unbroken until Mark McGwire surpassed it in 1998; his AL record stood until 2022, when Aaron Judge hit 62 home runs for the New York Yankees.

==Early life==
Roger Eugene Maris was born on September 10, 1934, in Hibbing, Minnesota; in 1955, his father changed the surname from Maras to Maris. Roger&#x27;s parents, Rudolph S. &quot;Rudy&quot; Maras and Ann Corrine &quot;Connie&quot; (née Perkovich) were born in Minnesota, and were of Croatian heritage.

Maris&#x27; brother Rudolph, who was a year older, developed polio at age 18 in 1951. It was Rudolph who began Maris&#x27; baseball career. Maris recalls Rudolph forcing him to play the sport, saying that he physically would drag him out by his ear to play the game that he hated desperately. While he loved taking breaks from his schoolwork and spending time outdoors, he could not stand baseball. By the time he was playing baseball in high school, he no longer had to be forced to play and enjoyed the game. Maris&#x27; parents had a turbulent marriage and divorced in 1960. The Maris family moved to Grand Forks, North Dakota, in 1938, and to Fargo, North Dakota, in 1946. Maris entered Fargo Central High School in 1948. In 1950, Maris, a Catholic, transferred to Bishop Shanley High School in Fargo, and graduated from there in June 1952. Maris played both baseball and football for the Shanley Deacons. In football, Maris set a national high school record, which still stands, for most return touchdowns in a game, with four (two kickoff returns, one punt return, and one interception return). In that 1951 game, he also scored a fifth touchdown on a 32-yard run from scrimmage. He met his future wife, Patricia, in the tenth grade at a high school basketball game.

==Minor league baseball career==
Maris began play for the Indians&#x27; minor league organization at Fargo (the Fargo-Moorhead Twins) in 1953. He was named rookie of the year in the Northern League, then moved on to Keokuk, Iowa, the next season. In four minor league seasons from 1953 to 1956, Maris hit .303 with 78 home runs and 353 runs batted in (RBI). In Game 2 of the 1956 Junior World Series, Maris, playing for the Indianapolis Indians of the American Association (Triple-A league), set a record by driving in seven runs. With all five teams for which Maris played in the minors, the clubs&#x27; win-loss records improved from the prior season.

==Major league baseball career==
===Cleveland Indians (1957–1958)===
Maris made his major league debut on April 16, 1957, with the Cleveland Indians. He finished the game 3-for-5 with a run scored in a 3–2 loss against the Chicago White Sox. Two days later, he hit the first home run of his career, a grand slam off Detroit Tigers pitcher Jack Crimian at Briggs Stadium in Detroit. He finished his rookie season with a .235 average, 14 home runs and 51 RBI in 116 games. On June 15, 1958, after playing in 51 games and hitting .225 with nine home runs and 27 RBI for the Indians, he was traded to the Kansas City Athletics with Dick Tomanek and Preston Ward for Vic Power and Woodie Held.

===Kansas City Athletics (1958–1959)===
After the trade, Maris played in 99 games and hit .247 with 19 home runs and 53 RBI for Kansas City in 1958. In 1959, he played in 122 games and batted .273 with 16 home runs and 72 RBI; he missed 45 games during the second half of the season as a result of an appendix operation. He was selected to play in the second of two All-Star Games held that year. In the late 1950s, Kansas City frequently traded their best young players to the New York Yankees—a practice which led them to be referred to as the Yankees&#x27; &quot;major league farm team&quot;—and Maris was no exception. In a seven-player deal completed on December 11, 1959, he was sent to the Yankees with Kent Hadley and Joe DeMaestri in exchange for Marv Throneberry, Norm Siebern, Hank Bauer, and Don Larsen.

===New York Yankees (1960–1966)===
In his Yankees debut on April 19, 1960, Maris hit a single, double, and two home runs in an 8–4 win over the Boston Red Sox. He was named to the AL All-Star roster again and played in both games. He finished the season leading the AL in slugging percentage (.581), runs batted in (112), and extra base hits (64). He also hit 39 home runs and had a .283 batting average in 136 games. He won the American League&#x27;s Most Valuable Player award and was recognized as an outstanding defensive outfielder with a Gold Glove Award. The Yankees won the American League pennant, the first of five consecutive pennants, but lost a seven-game World Series to the Pittsburgh Pirates culminating in Bill Mazeroski&#x27;s dramatic walk-off home run. Maris hit .267 with two solo home runs, six runs scored and a double in the series loss.

====1961====
In 1961, the AL expanded from eight to ten teams. In the expansion draft, the newly created Los Angeles Angels and Washington Senators were restricted to drafting players from AL rosters. The perceived result was that American League team rosters had become watered down, as players who would otherwise have been playing at AAA, if not lower, were now in the AL. In order to maintain a balanced schedule, AL owners extended the season from 154 games to 162 games in 1961. (The National League expanded from eight to ten teams and its season to 162 games in 1962.) On January 23, 1961, an Associated Press reporter asked Maris whether the schedule changes might threaten Babe Ruth&#x27;s single-season home run record; Maris replied, &quot;Nobody will touch it ... Look up the records and you&#x27;ll see that it&#x27;s a rare year when anybody hits 50 homers, let alone 60.&quot;
Yankee home runs began to come at a record pace. One famous photograph lined up six 1961 Yankees, including Mantle, Maris, Yogi Berra and Bill Skowron, under the nickname &quot;Murderers Row&quot;, because they hit a combined 165 home runs the previous season (the title &quot;Murderers Row&quot;, originally coined in 1918, had most famously been used to refer to the 1927 Yankees). As mid-season approached, it seemed quite possible that either Maris or Mantle, or perhaps both, would break Ruth&#x27;s 34-year-old home run record. Sportswriters began to play the &quot;M&amp;M Boys&quot; against each other, inventing a rivalry where none existed; in fact, the two men were friends and roommates. Mantle, however, was felled by a hip infection causing hospitalization late in the season, leaving Maris as the single remaining player with the opportunity to break Ruth&#x27;s home run record. In the middle of the season, baseball commissioner Ford Frick (a friend of Ruth) announced at a press conference that unless Ruth&#x27;s record was broken in the first 154 games of the season, the new record should be shown separately in the &quot;record books&quot;, with some &quot;distinctive mark&quot; next to it indicating it had been done in a 162-game season. The asterisk as such a mark was immediately suggested by New York Daily News sportswriter Dick Young. In spite of its formality, Frick&#x27;s so-called ruling was merely a suggestion: Major League Baseball had no direct control over any record books until many years later. As he closed in on Ruth&#x27;s record, Maris received death threats and NYPD detective Kieran Burke was assigned to watch over him.

Maris had 59 home runs after the Yankees&#x27; 154th game and therefore failed to beat Ruth&#x27;s 60 home runs within the original season length. Maris hit his 61st home run on October 1, 1961, in the fourth inning of the last game of the season, at Yankee Stadium in front of 23,154 fans. Boston Red Sox pitcher Tracy Stallard gave up the record home run, which was caught by fan Sal Durante in the right field bleachers. Maris was awarded the 1961 Hickok Belt as the top professional athlete of the year and won the American League&#x27;s MVP Award for the second straight year. It is said, however, that the stress of pursuing the record was so great for Maris that his hair occasionally fell out in clumps during the season. Within a few years the asterisk controversy died down and all prominent baseball record keepers listed Maris as the single-season record holder. Maris ultimately finished his record-setting season with a .269 average, a major-league leading 132 runs scored, 61 home runs and an AL-leading 141 RBI in 161 games.

====1962–1966====

In 1962, Maris made his fourth consecutive All-Star team appearance and his seventh and final All-Star game appearance. He batted .256 with 33 home runs and 100 RBI in 157 games. In Game 7 of the 1962 World Series, Maris made a game-saving play in the bottom of the ninth inning against the San Francisco Giants. With the Yankees leading 1–0 and Matty Alou on first, Willie Mays doubled toward the right-field line. Maris cut off the ball and made a strong throw to prevent Alou from scoring the tying run; the play set up Willie McCovey&#x27;s series-ending line drive to second baseman Bobby Richardson, capping what would prove to be the final World Series title for the Yankees until 1977.

In 1963, Maris played in only 90 games, hitting .269 with 23 home runs and 53 RBI. Maris was injured in Game 2 of the 1963 World Series, in which the Yankees were swept by the Los Angeles Dodgers in four games.

In 1964, Maris rebounded, appearing in 141 games and batting .281 with 26 home runs and 71 RBI. Maris hit a home run in Game 6 of the 1964 World Series, in which the Yankees lost to the St. Louis Cardinals in seven games. In 1965, his physical problems returned, and he had off-season surgery to remove a bone chip in his hand. In 1966, the Yankees&#x27; and Maris&#x27;s fortunes continued to decline as he played most of the season with a misdiagnosed broken bone in his hand. On December 8, 1966, he was traded to the St. Louis Cardinals for Charley Smith.

===St. Louis Cardinals (1967–1968)===
Maris played his final two seasons with the Cardinals, contributing to the team&#x27;s 1967 and 1968 pennants, as well as the 1967 World Series championship. In the 1967 World Series, he hit .385 with a home run and 7 RBI, the best Series performance of Maris&#x27; career.

==Media appearances==
Maris and Mantle starred in a 1962 film, &quot;Safe at Home!&quot;, playing themselves. That year, Maris, Mantle, and Yankee teammate Yogi Berra also made appearances in the film &quot;That Touch of Mink&quot;, starring Cary Grant and Doris Day.

In 1980, Maris, Mantle, Whitey Ford, Elston Howard, and other former Yankee players made appearances in the film &quot;It&#x27;s My Turn&quot;, starring Michael Douglas and Jill Clayburgh.

Maris&#x27; wife, Pat, appeared as herself on October 2, 1961, episode of the game show &quot;To Tell the Truth&quot;. She received three of the four possible votes.

==Later years and death==
In the 1970s and 1980s, Maris and his brother owned and operated Maris Distributing, the Budweiser beer distributorship in Gainesville, Florida (and Ocala, Florida), where he moved after retiring from baseball after the 1968 season. Gussie Busch, who owned the St. Louis Cardinals and Anheuser-Busch, had gotten Maris started in the beer business upon his 
arrival in St. Louis. Maris also coached baseball at Gainesville&#x27;s Oak Hall High School, which named its baseball field after him in 1990.

In 1978, Maris returned to Yankee Stadium on Old Timers Day, ending a decade-long boycott from the Yankees. He was introduced by Mantle and got a standing ovation from the crowd.

Maris was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in 1983. In response, Maris organized the annual Roger Maris Celebrity Golf Tournament to raise money for cancer research and treatment. He died of the disease at age 51 on December 14, 1985, at M.D. Anderson Hospital in Houston, Texas and was buried at Holy Cross Cemetery in Fargo, North Dakota.

== Hall of Fame candidacy ==
Maris was considered for election to the National Baseball Hall of Fame via voting of the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America (BWAA) from 1974 to 1988. Maris has not been elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame.

In 1977, sportswriter Greg Hansen criticized baseball writers in the &quot;St. Petersburg Independent&quot; for excluding Maris from the Hall of Fame after Maris received only 72 votes in that year&#x27;s voting. Hansen noted that there were many outfielders in the Hall of Fame who had never won two MVP awards, and that no one else had ever hit 61 home runs in a season. &quot;To show you what an injustice this is to the man, Maris finished just a notch ahead of &quot;Harvey Kuenn&quot;, for crying out loud.&quot; Hansen wrote that Maris had resented the media&#x27;s intrusion on his privacy; he said that Maris&#x27;s tense relationship with the media had affected the voting. Hansen also wrote that Maris had told him after the voting that he knew he would never get inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame: &quot;I&#x27;ll leave the Hall of Fame to the geniuses that vote on it. I will never get in. I have always known that. I will not argue with you about why or why not I should be elected.&quot;

In 2010, the Baseball Hall of Fame established a Golden Era Committee (replacing the Veterans Committee) to vote on the possible Hall of Fame induction of previously overlooked players along with retired umpires, managers and executives who made the greatest contributions to baseball between 1947 and 1972.
Beginning in December 2011, this committee voted every three years on ten candidates from the era selected by the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America&#x27;s (BBWAA) Historical Overview Committee. Maris did not appear on the first Golden Era Committee ballot in 2011 or on the second one in 2014 (one former player was voted to the Hall of Fame in 2011 and no one was voted in by the committee in 2014).

In August 2011, George Vecsey of &quot;The New York Times&quot; called Maris &quot;a terrific player for a few brief years&quot;. Vecsey wrote that while Maris had two seasons where he played at Hall of Fame caliber, and while Maris played in an era that was not influenced by performance-enhancing substances, he did not believe that Maris&#x27;s career statistics were worthy of induction.

=== Golden Days Committee ===
In July 2016, four new committees were established. The Golden Days Era Committee (1950–1969) was scheduled to meet and vote for the first time in December 2020 for the 2021 Hall of Fame induction. Maris is the 24th former player on the Hall of Fame rated list of 85 eligible candidates for the Golden Days Committee Ballot. In August 2020, the Hall of Fame rescheduled The Golden Days Committee winter meeting in 2020 to December 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The committee&#x27;s ballot consists of ten candidates compiled by the BBWAA&#x27;s Historical Overview Committee. Maris was named one of the ten finalists, but ultimately was not part of the chosen class, which consisted of Minnie Miñoso, Tony Oliva, Jim Kaat, and Gil Hodges.

==Legacy==

Speaking at the 1980 All-Star Game, Maris said, &quot;They acted as though I was doing something wrong, poisoning the record books or something. Do you know what I have to show for 61 home runs? Nothing. Exactly nothing.&quot; Ford Frick, baseball&#x27;s commissioner in 1961, had stated that the single-season home-run total had to be achieved in 154 games in order to be an official record. Despite this, there was no separate designation of the record, and it was affirmed by two different committees, in 1968 and 1991. 

Maris&#x27;s single-season MLB home run record was broken by Mark McGwire, who hit 70 in 1998. Barry Bonds set a new MLB record with 73 home runs in 2001. Maris&#x27;s home run mark was also surpassed by McGwire in 1999 (with 65) and by Sammy Sosa (with 66 in 1998, 63 in 1999, and 64 in 2001). McGwire, Sosa, and Bonds have all been linked to performance-enhancing drugs. Maris remained the AL record-holder for most home runs in a season until Aaron Judge hit his 62nd home run on October 4, 2022, in the Yankees&#x27; 161st game of the year.

In 1964, Maris received North Dakota&#x27;s Roughrider Award, which recognizes North Dakotans shaped by their state achieving national recognition that reflects credit and honor upon it and its citizens.

In 1977, Maris was inducted into the North Dakota American Legion Baseball Hall of Fame.

A Roger Eugene Maris plaque dedication and No. 9 retirement ceremony in Monument Park at Yankee Stadium was held on July 22, 1984 (Old-Timers&#x27; Day). The inscribed plaque, subtitled &quot;Against All Odds&quot;, calls Maris &quot;A great player and author of one of the most remarkable chapters in the history of major league baseball.&quot; Maris participated in the ceremony, wearing a Yankee #9 uniform. Elston Howard (No. 32), a teammate of Maris, was honored along with Maris.
The Roger Maris Museum, which opened in 1984 at the West Acres Shopping Center in Fargo, and the Roger Maris Cancer Center, which opened in 1990 at Sanford Hospital in Fargo, are both named after Maris.

The United States Postal Service issued a &quot;Roger Maris, 61 in 61&quot; commemorative stamp on September 17, 1999, as part of the Celebrate the Century series. This places him in rarer company than even being elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame, as only 30 baseball players have been given their own commemorative U.S. postage stamp as of 2022.
Actor Barry Pepper portrayed Maris in the 2001 HBO film &quot;61*&quot;, directed by Billy Crystal.

In 2005, in light of accusations of steroid use against the three players who had, by then, hit more than 61 home runs in a season (McGwire, Sosa and Bonds), the North Dakota Senate wrote to Major League Baseball to express the opinion that Roger Maris&#x27;s 61 home runs should be recognized as the single-season record.

Maris was inducted into the Baseball Reliquary&#x27;s Shrine of the Eternals in 2009.

At least through 2010, Newman Signs Inc., naming rights holder to Newman Outdoor Field in Fargo, sponsored billboard signage declaring Maris the &quot;Legitimate Home Run King&quot;.

On September 24, 2011, at Yankee Stadium, the Yankees celebrated the 50th anniversary of Maris&#x27;s single-season home run record.

In October 2022, he was inaugurated in the Croatian-American Sports Hall of Fame.

== MLB statistics ==
Maris&#x27;s major league statistics:

== MLB awards ==
Maris&#x27;s major league awards:
===Other awards, honors, and achievements===

* Hickok Belt (1961)
* Sporting News Player of the Year (1961)
* World Series champion: 1961, 1962, 1967
* AL leader in home runs, runs scored, and total bases: 1961
* AL leader in runs batted in and extra base hits: 1960, 1961
* AL leader in slugging average: 1960
* AL leader in double plays turned as right fielder and outfielder: 1959
* AL leader in fielding average as right fielder: 1960, 1964
* NL leader in fielding average as right fielder: 1967
* New York Yankees No. 9 retired / Monument Park honoree: 1984

==See also==
* List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders
* List of Major League Baseball home run records

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="0" end="18" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Eugene Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="25" end="30" title="Roger Maris" label="Maras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="101" end="109" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149560" start="110" end="121" title="right field" label="right field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="149" end="170" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738192" start="213" end="246" title="List of Major League Baseball progressive single-season home run leaders" label="MLB single-season home run record"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="255" end="263" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="296" end="309" title="Minor League Baseball" label="minor leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="369" end="386" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128565926" start="417" end="438" title="Kansas City Athletics" label="Kansas City Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="474" end="490" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="567" end="586" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="621" end="629" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="661" end="681" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q120649" start="710" end="726" title="Rawlings Gold Glove Award" label="Gold Glove Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="767" end="779" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051846" start="838" end="842" title="1961 World Series" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051837" start="847" end="851" title="1962 World Series" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295892" start="906" end="910" title="1967 World Series" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="1019" end="1028" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="1372" end="1384" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234676" start="1444" end="1455" title="Aaron Judge" label="Aaron Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q828736" start="1569" end="1587" title="Hibbing, Minnesota" label="Hibbing, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="1793" end="1801" title="Croats" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="1874" end="1879" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34144" start="2417" end="2442" title="Grand Forks, North Dakota" label="Grand Forks, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="2460" end="2479" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061180" start="2504" end="2529" title="Central High School (Fargo, North Dakota)" label="Fargo Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2557" end="2565" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488770" start="2582" end="2608" title="Shanley High School" label="Bishop Shanley High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="2726" end="2734" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q650807" start="2813" end="2822" title="touchdown" label="touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="3159" end="3171" title="minor league" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q732549" start="3303" end="3315" title="Keokuk, Iowa" label="Keokuk, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="3388" end="3396" title="Batting average (baseball)" label="hit .303"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="3423" end="3437" title="Run batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313514" start="3467" end="3486" title="Junior World Series" label="Junior World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180539" start="3511" end="3531" title="Indianapolis Indians" label="Indianapolis Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867334" start="3539" end="3559" title="American Association (20th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="3561" end="3576" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A league"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="3873" end="3890" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="3965" end="3982" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074753" start="4043" end="4053" title="grand slam (baseball)" label="grand slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="4058" end="4072" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111890" start="4081" end="4093" title="Jack Crimian" label="Jack Crimian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750255" start="4097" end="4111" title="Briggs Stadium" label="Briggs Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="4115" end="4122" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q128565926" start="4343" end="4364" title="Kansas City Athletics" label="Kansas City Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273463" start="4370" end="4382" title="Dick Tomanek" label="Dick Tomanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242010" start="4387" end="4399" title="Preston Ward" label="Preston Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557501" start="4404" end="4413" title="Vic Power" label="Vic Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032773" start="4418" end="4429" title="Woodie Held" label="Woodie Held"/>
<link wikidata="Q9656" start="4733" end="4741" title="Vermiform appendix" label="appendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569640" start="4798" end="4812" title="1959 Major League Baseball All-Star Game (second game)" label="All-Star Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="4910" end="4926" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="5011" end="5020" title="farm team" label="farm team"/>
<link wikidata="Q11301305" start="5142" end="5153" title="Kent Hadley" label="Kent Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209429" start="5158" end="5171" title="Joe DeMaestri" label="Joe DeMaestri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778104" start="5188" end="5204" title="Marv Throneberry" label="Marv Throneberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051584" start="5206" end="5218" title="Norm Siebern" label="Norm Siebern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126788" start="5220" end="5230" title="Hank Bauer" label="Hank Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q919907" start="5236" end="5246" title="Don Larsen" label="Don Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="5393" end="5407" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815849" start="5521" end="5540" title="slugging percentage" label="slugging percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="5549" end="5563" title="run batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999029" start="5575" end="5589" title="extra base hit" label="extra base hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="5637" end="5652" title="Batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="5678" end="5693" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="5701" end="5721" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q120649" start="5793" end="5809" title="Gold Glove Award" label="Gold Glove Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q869082" start="5918" end="5930" title="1960 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="5938" end="5956" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q862301" start="5972" end="5986" title="Bill Mazeroski" label="Bill Mazeroski"/>
<link wikidata="Q859678" start="6003" end="6020" title="walk-off home run" label="walk-off home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569991" start="6182" end="6197" title="1960 Major League Baseball expansion draft" label="expansion draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="6217" end="6235" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Los Angeles Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q111678972" start="6240" end="6259" title="Washington Senators (1961–71)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="6602" end="6617" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="6713" end="6729" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="6795" end="6804" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q367566" start="7128" end="7138" title="Yogi Berra" label="Yogi Berra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910892" start="7143" end="7155" title="Bill Skowron" label="Bill Skowron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16279853" start="7182" end="7195" title="Murderers Row" label="Murderers Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562088" start="7374" end="7386" title="1927 New York Yankees season" label="1927 Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711828" start="7577" end="7589" title="M&amp;amp;M Boys" label="M&amp;amp;M Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077090" start="7951" end="7961" title="Ford Frick" label="Ford Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q190212" start="8272" end="8280" title="asterisk" label="asterisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="8325" end="8344" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273574" start="8358" end="8368" title="Dick Young (sportswriter)" label="Dick Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="8614" end="8618" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="8926" end="8940" title="Yankee Stadium (1923–2008)" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="8966" end="8980" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831851" start="8989" end="9003" title="Tracy Stallard" label="Tracy Stallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135207" start="9126" end="9137" title="Hickok Belt" label="Hickok Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="9830" end="9843" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051837" start="9932" end="9949" title="1962 World Series" label="1962 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="10027" end="10047" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133102" start="10082" end="10092" title="Matty Alou" label="Matty Alou"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="10103" end="10114" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569094" start="10259" end="10273" title="Willie McCovey" label="Willie McCovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q869771" start="10324" end="10340" title="Bobby Richardson" label="Bobby Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295885" start="10549" end="10566" title="1963 World Series" label="1963 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="10607" end="10626" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295887" start="10777" end="10794" title="1964 World Series" label="1964 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="10829" end="10848" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="11164" end="11183" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084361" start="11188" end="11201" title="Charley Smith" label="Charley Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295892" start="11368" end="11385" title="1967 World Series" label="1967 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398522" start="11586" end="11599" title="Safe at Home!" label="Safe at Home!"/>
<link wikidata="Q367566" start="11673" end="11683" title="Yogi Berra" label="Yogi Berra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304614" start="11724" end="11742" title="That Touch of Mink" label="That Touch of Mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q83410" start="11759" end="11769" title="Cary Grant" label="Cary Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="11774" end="11783" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345775" start="11810" end="11821" title="Whitey Ford" label="Whitey Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q332991" start="11823" end="11836" title="Elston Howard" label="Elston Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930335" start="11905" end="11922" title="It&amp;#x27;s My Turn (film)" label="It&amp;#x27;s My Turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="11939" end="11954" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q230665" start="11959" end="11973" title="Jill Clayburgh" label="Jill Clayburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q872948" start="12070" end="12087" title="To Tell the Truth" label="To Tell the Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="12258" end="12267" title="Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q487999" start="12292" end="12312" title="Gainesville, Florida" label="Gainesville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q918195" start="12318" end="12332" title="Ocala, Florida" label="Ocala, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620937" start="12402" end="12414" title="Gussie Busch" label="Gussie Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="12430" end="12449" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="12454" end="12468" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073532" start="12598" end="12618" title="Oak Hall High School" label="Oak Hall High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083341" start="12716" end="12730" title="Old Timers Day" label="Old Timers Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138590" start="12876" end="12896" title="non-Hodgkin lymphoma" label="non-Hodgkin lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525831" start="13092" end="13114" title="MD Anderson Cancer Center" label="M.D. Anderson Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="13118" end="13132" title="Houston" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="13174" end="13193" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="13266" end="13296" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="13315" end="13360" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="13421" end="13442" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416611" start="13514" end="13552" title="Evening Independent" label="&amp;quot;St. Petersburg Independent&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128037" start="13917" end="13929" title="Harvey Kuenn" label="Harvey Kuenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521285" start="14504" end="14524" title="Golden Era Committee" label="Golden Era Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521285" start="14540" end="14558" title="Veterans Committee" label="Veterans Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="14877" end="14922" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545478" start="15193" end="15206" title="George Vecsey" label="George Vecsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15216" end="15234" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="16047" end="16064" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315554" start="16291" end="16304" title="Minnie Miñoso" label="Minnie Miñoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653317" start="16306" end="16316" title="Tony Oliva" label="Tony Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195984" start="16318" end="16326" title="Jim Kaat" label="Jim Kaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q515894" start="16332" end="16342" title="Gil Hodges" label="Gil Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q11185946" start="16373" end="16391" title="1980 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1980 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="16943" end="16955" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="16977" end="16988" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370848" start="17472" end="17488" title="Roughrider Award" label="Roughrider Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906829" start="17795" end="17808" title="Monument Park (Yankee Stadium)" label="Monument Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="17812" end="17826" title="Yankee Stadium (1923)" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083341" start="17854" end="17874" title="Old-Timers&amp;#x27; Day" label="Old-Timers&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q332991" start="18134" end="18147" title="Elston Howard" label="Elston Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761344" start="18209" end="18231" title="The Roger Maris Museum" label="The Roger Maris Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984234" start="18261" end="18287" title="West Acres Shopping Center" label="West Acres Shopping Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="18417" end="18445" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972283" start="18547" end="18568" title="Celebrate the Century" label="Celebrate the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="18641" end="18671" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885391" start="18741" end="18759" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the United States" label="U.S. postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q315604" start="18778" end="18790" title="Barry Pepper" label="Barry Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q662081" start="18819" end="18822" title="HBO Films" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q248088" start="18834" end="18837" title="61*" label="61*"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="18857" end="18870" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866551" start="19225" end="19243" title="Baseball Reliquary" label="Baseball Reliquary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19251" end="19273" title="Baseball Reliquary#Shrine of the Eternals" label="Shrine of the Eternals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018465" start="19350" end="19370" title="Newman Outdoor Field" label="Newman Outdoor Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135207" start="19844" end="19855" title="Hickok Belt" label="Hickok Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q105912272" start="19865" end="19897" title="The Sporting News Player of the Year Award" label="Sporting News Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137106" start="20376" end="20429" title="List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q987124" start="20432" end="20491" title="List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589039" start="20494" end="20550" title="List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643442" start="20553" end="20606" title="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577606" start="20609" end="20655" title="List of Major League Baseball home run records" label="List of Major League Baseball home run records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303715" wikidata="Q243264" url="?curid=303715" title="Heptathlon">
<text>A heptathlon is a track and field combined events contest made up of seven events. The name derives from the Greek ἑπτά (hepta, meaning &quot;seven&quot;) and ἄθλος (áthlos, or ἄθλον, áthlon, meaning &quot;competition&quot;). A competitor in a heptathlon is referred to as a heptathlete.

There are two heptathlons – the men&#x27;s and the women&#x27;s heptathlon – composed of different events. The men&#x27;s heptathlon is older and is currently held indoors, contested at the IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics. The women&#x27;s heptathlon is held outdoors and was introduced in the 1980s, first appearing in the Olympics in 1984. It is currently contested in the athletics programme of the Olympics and at the World Athletics Championships.

==Women&#x27;s heptathlon==
Women&#x27;s heptathlon is the combined event for women contested in the athletics programme of the Olympics and at the World Athletics Championships. The World Athletics Combined Events Tour determines a yearly women&#x27;s heptathlon champion. The women&#x27;s outdoor heptathlon consists of the following events, with the first four contested on the first day, and the remaining three on day two:

* 100 metres hurdles
* High jump
* Shot put
* 200 metres
* Long jump
* Javelin throw 
* 800 metres

The heptathlon has been contested by female athletes since the early 1980s, when it replaced the pentathlon as the primary women&#x27;s combined event contest (the javelin throw and 800 m were added). It was first contested at the Olympic level in the 1984 Summer Olympics. In recent years some women&#x27;s decathlon competitions have been conducted, consisting of the same events as the men&#x27;s competition in a slightly different order, and World Athletics has begun keeping records for it, but the heptathlon remains the championship-level combined event for women. Nafissatou Thiam, representing Belgium, is the 2024 Olympic Gold Medallist, after successfully defending her previous 2016 and 2020 titles. She is also the reigning European Champion. Katarina Johnson-Thompson, representing Great Britain, is the current World Champion and Commonwealth Champion. Odile Ahouanwanou. Yekaterina Voronina, Kiara Reddingius, Luisarys Toledo and Ariana Ince hold the African, Asian, Oceanian, South American and NACAC (North American, Central American and Caribbean) titles respectively. Adriana Rodríguez, Marthe Koala, Swapna Barman and Elenani Tinai hold the Panamerican Games, African Games, Asian Games and Pacific Games titles respectively.

There is also a Tetradecathlon, which is a double heptathlon, consisting of 14 events, seven events per day.

===Points system===
The heptathlon scoring system was devised by Dr Karl Ulbrich, a Viennese mathematician. The formulae are constructed so that, for each event, a designated benchmark performance (for example, approximately 1.82 m for the high jump) scores 1000 points. Each event also has a minimum recordable performance level (e.g. 0.75 m for the high jump), corresponding to zero points. The formulae are devised so that successive constant increments in performance correspond to gradually increasing increments in points awarded.

The events are split into three groups, and the scores are calculated according to the three formulae:

:Running events (200 m, 800 m and 100 m hurdles):
::formula_1)
:Jumping events (high jump and long jump):
::formula_2)
:Throwing events (shot put and javelin):
::formula_3)

&quot;P&quot; is for points, &quot;T&quot; is for time in seconds, &quot;M&quot; is for height or distance in centimeters and &quot;D&quot; is distance in meters. &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot; and &quot;c&quot; have different values for each of the events, as follows:

===Benchmarks===
The following table shows the benchmark levels needed to earn 1000, 900, 800 and 700 points in each event.

===Women&#x27;s world records compared with heptathlon bests===
== Men&#x27;s heptathlon ==
The other version is an indoor competition, normally contested by men only. It is the men&#x27;s combined event in the IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics. The men&#x27;s indoor heptathlon consists of the following events, with the first four contested on the first day, and remaining three on day two:

* 60 metres
* long jump
* shot put
* high jump
* 60 metres hurdles
* pole vault
* 1000 metres

The scoring is similar for both versions. In each event, the athlete scores points for his performance in each event according to scoring tables issued by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF). The athlete accumulating the highest number of points wins the competition.

===Benchmarks===
The following table shows the minimum benchmark levels required to earn 1000 points in each event.

===Men&#x27;s world records compared with heptathlon bests===

==All-time top 25==
===Women===
*
====Notes====

*Jackie Joyner-Kersee also scored 7215 (1988), 7158 (1986), 7148 (1986), 7128 (1987), 7044 (1992), 6979 (1987), 6910 (1986), 6878 (1991).
*Carolina Klüft also scored 7001 (2003), 6952 (2004), 6887 (2005).
*Nafissatou Thiam also scored 6947 (2022), 6880 (2024).
*Jessica Ennis also scored 6906 (2012).
*Sabine Paetz also scored 6897 (1988).
*Larisa Nikitina also scored 6875 (1989).

====Annulled marks====
*Tatyana Chernova scored 6880 (2011), this performance was annulled due to doping offences.

=== Men ===
*
====Notes====

*Ashton Eaton also scored 6632 (2014), 6568 (2011), 6499 (2010), 6470 (2016).
*Roman Šebrle also scored 6420 (2001), 6358 (2000), 6350 (2004), 6319 (1999).
*Kyle Garland also scored 6415 (2023).
*Kevin Mayer also scored 6392 (2021), 6348 (2018, 2023).
*Sebastian Chmara also scored 6386 (1999).
*Bryan Clay also scored 6365 (2004).
*Simon Ehammer also scored 6363 (2022).
*Damian Warner also scored 6343
*Eelco Sintnicolaas also scored 6341 (2013).
*Sander Skotheim also scored 6318 (2023).

== Medalists ==

===Women&#x27;s Olympic medalists===
===Women&#x27;s World Championships medalists===
=== Men&#x27;s World Indoor Championships medalists ===
== Season&#x27;s bests ==

=== Women&#x27;s heptathlon ===

The world record as of 18/07/2024 is highlighed in yellow.

=== Men&#x27;s indoor heptathlon ===
==National records==
*Updated 10 August 2024.

===Women&#x27;s heptathlon===


=== Men&#x27;s indoor heptathlon ===


== Men&#x27;s heptathlon under-20 records ==
Key:
&lt;br&gt;


=== Men&#x27;s heptathlon under-20 bests ===
(In completed heptathlons of more than 5200 points)

==See also==

* Combined events at the Olympics

Other multiple event contests include:
;Summer sports
* Biathle
* Duathlon
* Triathlon
* Quadrathlon
* Pentathlon (athletics)
* Pentathlon
* Modern pentathlon
* Hexathlon (primarily a youth or junior event) 
* Octathlon (primarily a youth or junior event although logistical problems have seen senior octathlons contested, for example at the 2007 South Pacific Games)
* Decathlon

;Winter sports
* Biathlon
* Nordic combined

;Other
* Chess-boxing

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==

* National Records
* IAAF combined events scoring tables and explanation
* IAAF list of heptathlon records in XML
* Heptathlon all-time list
* Heptathlon points counter </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q243264" start="2" end="12" title="Heptathlon" label="heptathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="18" end="33" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q725169" start="479" end="523" title="IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics" label="IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="626" end="634" title="Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628622" start="638" end="642" title="Athletics at the 1984 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s heptathlon" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q715044" start="677" end="696" title="Athletics at the Summer Olympics" label="athletics programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="724" end="753" title="World Athletics Championships" label="World Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q715044" start="857" end="876" title="Athletics at the Summer Olympics" label="athletics programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="904" end="933" title="World Athletics Championships" label="World Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130941" start="939" end="975" title="World Athletics Combined Events Tour" label="World Athletics Combined Events Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q164731" start="1187" end="1205" title="100 metres hurdles" label="100 metres hurdles"/>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="1208" end="1217" title="High jump" label="High jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q180935" start="1220" end="1228" title="Shot put" label="Shot put"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="1231" end="1241" title="200 metres" label="200 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="1244" end="1253" title="Long jump" label="Long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q178108" start="1256" end="1269" title="Javelin throw" label="Javelin throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q271008" start="1273" end="1283" title="800 metres" label="800 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q983987" start="1382" end="1392" title="Women&amp;#x27;s pentathlon" label="pentathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="1537" end="1557" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184654" start="1593" end="1602" title="decathlon" label="decathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="1732" end="1747" title="World Athletics" label="World Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167514" start="1858" end="1874" title="Nafissatou Thiam" label="Nafissatou Thiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q109311608" start="1905" end="1932" title="Athletics at the 2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Olympic Gold Medallist"/>
<link wikidata="Q26234145" start="1976" end="1980" title="Athletics at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s heptathlon" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q65242164" start="1985" end="1989" title="Athletics at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s heptathlon" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q15533453" start="2023" end="2040" title="2018 European Athletics Championships" label="European Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077997" start="2042" end="2067" title="Katarina Johnson-Thompson" label="Katarina Johnson-Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39080065" start="2112" end="2126" title="2023 World Championships in Athletics" label="World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294383" start="2131" end="2152" title="2018 Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q328631" start="2154" end="2171" title="Odile Ahouanwanou" label="Odile Ahouanwanou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18180800" start="2173" end="2192" title="Yekaterina Voronina" label="Yekaterina Voronina"/>
<link wikidata="Q111011767" start="2194" end="2210" title="Kiara Reddingius" label="Kiara Reddingius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2212" end="2227" title="Luisarys Toledo" label="Luisarys Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q66317900" start="2232" end="2243" title="Ariana Ince" label="Ariana Ince"/>
<link wikidata="Q70216630" start="2374" end="2391" title="Adriana Rodríguez" label="Adriana Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774651" start="2393" end="2405" title="Marthe Koala" label="Marthe Koala"/>
<link wikidata="Q33082994" start="2407" end="2420" title="Swapna Barman" label="Swapna Barman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2425" end="2438" title="Elenani Tinai" label="Elenani Tinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454443" start="2550" end="2564" title="Tetradecathlon" label="Tetradecathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q725169" start="4065" end="4109" title="IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics" label="IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q246681" start="4261" end="4270" title="60 metres" label="60 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="4273" end="4282" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q180935" start="4285" end="4293" title="shot put" label="shot put"/>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="4296" end="4305" title="high jump" label="high jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026754" start="4308" end="4325" title="60 metres hurdles" label="60 metres hurdles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185027" start="4328" end="4338" title="pole vault" label="pole vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629556" start="4341" end="4352" title="1000 metres" label="1000 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="4513" end="4563" title="International Association of Athletics Federations" label="International Association of Athletics Federations"/>
<link wikidata="Q209390" start="4879" end="4899" title="Jackie Joyner-Kersee" label="Jackie Joyner-Kersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q223672" start="5017" end="5031" title="Carolina Klüft" label="Carolina Klüft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167514" start="5084" end="5100" title="Nafissatou Thiam" label="Nafissatou Thiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6091" start="5140" end="5153" title="Jessica Ennis-Hill" label="Jessica Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273953" start="5180" end="5192" title="Sabine John" label="Sabine Paetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q445831" start="5219" end="5234" title="Larisa Nikitina" label="Larisa Nikitina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100" start="5285" end="5301" title="Tatyana Chernova" label="Tatyana Chernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789" start="5407" end="5419" title="Ashton Eaton" label="Ashton Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q310015" start="5485" end="5497" title="Roman Šebrle" label="Roman Šebrle"/>
<link wikidata="Q112865013" start="5563" end="5575" title="Kyle Garland" label="Kyle Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195752" start="5602" end="5613" title="Kevin Mayer" label="Kevin Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q945273" start="5659" end="5675" title="Sebastian Chmara" label="Sebastian Chmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q316156" start="5702" end="5712" title="Bryan Clay" label="Bryan Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q97302878" start="5739" end="5752" title="Simon Ehammer" label="Simon Ehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012723" start="5779" end="5792" title="Damian Warner" label="Damian Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q927805" start="5811" end="5829" title="Eelco Sintnicolaas" label="Eelco Sintnicolaas"/>
<link wikidata="Q100138179" start="5856" end="5871" title="Sander Skotheim" label="Sander Skotheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035233" start="6509" end="6540" title="Combined events at the Olympics" label="Combined events at the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q452172" start="6598" end="6605" title="Biathle" label="Biathle"/>
<link wikidata="Q429006" start="6608" end="6616" title="Duathlon" label="Duathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10980" start="6619" end="6628" title="Triathlon" label="Triathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479040" start="6631" end="6642" title="Quadrathlon" label="Quadrathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24688986" start="6645" end="6667" title="Pentathlon (athletics)" label="Pentathlon (athletics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163125" start="6670" end="6680" title="Pentathlon" label="Pentathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q32485" start="6683" end="6700" title="Modern pentathlon" label="Modern pentathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715312" start="6703" end="6712" title="Hexathlon" label="Hexathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496090" start="6752" end="6761" title="Octathlon" label="Octathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q113590" start="6884" end="6908" title="2007 South Pacific Games" label="2007 South Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q184654" start="6912" end="6921" title="Decathlon" label="Decathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166788" start="6940" end="6948" title="Biathlon" label="Biathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201965" start="6951" end="6966" title="Nordic combined" label="Nordic combined"/>
<link wikidata="Q490499" start="6977" end="6989" title="Chess-boxing" label="Chess-boxing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303716" wikidata="Q407205" url="?curid=303716" title="Exhaust">
<text>Exhaust, exhaustive, or exhaustion may refer to:
==Law==
*Exhaustion of intellectual property rights, limits to intellectual property rights in patent and copyright law
**Exhaustion doctrine, in patent law
** Exhaustion doctrine under U.S. law, in patent law
*Exhaustion of remedies, restrictions on opening a new lawsuit while an original suit is pending

==Mathematics==
*Brute-force attack, a cryptanalytic attack, also known as exhaustive key search
*Collectively exhaustive, in probability and set theory, a collection of sets whose union equals the complete space
*Exhaustion by compact sets, in analysis, a sequence of compact sets that converges on a given set
*Method of exhaustion, in geometry, finding the area of a shape by approximating it with polygons
*Proof by exhaustion, proof by examining all individual cases

==Medicine==
*Fatigue, a weariness caused by exertion
*Adrenal exhaustion or hypoadrenia, a hypothesized maladaption of the adrenal glands
*Heat exhaustion or hyperthermia, a medical condition where the body is unable to control its accumulation of heat
*Nervous exhaustion or neurasthenia, a nineteenth-century diagnosis encompassing fatigue, anxiety, and depression

==Technology==
*Exhaust, in steam engines, steam released from a cylinder
*Exhaust brake, a method of slowing diesel engines
*Exhaust gas, a gas which occurs as a result of combustion of fuel
*Exhaust manifold, a structure collecting an engine&#x27;s exhaust outlets
*Exhaust system, a mechanism for venting exhaust gases from an internal combustion engine
*Exhaust velocity, a measure of engine efficiency
*Data exhaust, the trail of data left by users during online activity

==Other uses==
*Emotional exhaustion
*Exhaust (band), a clarinet, drum, and tape trio in Montreal, Canada
**&quot;Exhaust&quot; (album), the band&#x27;s 1998 self-titled album
*Exhaust date, the projected date that a telecommunications area code will have assigned all of its numbers
*Exhaustive ballot, a multi-round voting system</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q407205" start="0" end="7" title="Exhaust" label="Exhaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q407205" start="9" end="19" title="Exhaust" label="exhaustive"/>
<link wikidata="Q407205" start="24" end="34" title="Exhaust" label="exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q683070" start="58" end="100" title="Exhaustion of intellectual property rights" label="Exhaustion of intellectual property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q683070" start="171" end="190" title="Exhaustion doctrine" label="Exhaustion doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047627" start="209" end="243" title="Exhaustion doctrine under U.S. law" label="Exhaustion doctrine under U.S. law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420188" start="260" end="282" title="Exhaustion of remedies" label="Exhaustion of remedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q869370" start="374" end="392" title="Brute-force attack" label="Brute-force attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370333" start="455" end="478" title="Collectively exhaustive" label="Collectively exhaustive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420187" start="571" end="597" title="Exhaustion by compact sets" label="Exhaustion by compact sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q865019" start="670" end="690" title="Method of exhaustion" label="Method of exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299950" start="768" end="787" title="Proof by exhaustion" label="Proof by exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="844" end="851" title="Fatigue" label="Fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684712" start="885" end="903" title="Adrenal exhaustion" label="Adrenal exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12643772" start="970" end="985" title="Heat exhaustion" label="Heat exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q510236" start="1085" end="1103" title="Nervous exhaustion" label="Nervous exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="1227" end="1239" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501824" start="1274" end="1287" title="Exhaust brake" label="Exhaust brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q320173" start="1325" end="1336" title="Exhaust gas" label="Exhaust gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982767" start="1392" end="1408" title="Exhaust manifold" label="Exhaust manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q683005" start="1467" end="1481" title="Exhaust system" label="Exhaust system"/>
<link wikidata="Q51504" start="1557" end="1573" title="Exhaust velocity" label="Exhaust velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27146137" start="1607" end="1619" title="Data exhaust" label="Data exhaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q776232" start="1693" end="1713" title="Emotional exhaustion" label="Emotional exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420179" start="1715" end="1729" title="Exhaust (band)" label="Exhaust (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420179" start="1785" end="1812" title="Exhaust (album)" label="&amp;quot;Exhaust&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="1854" end="1866" title="Exhaust date" label="Exhaust date"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420189" start="1962" end="1979" title="Exhaustive ballot" label="Exhaustive ballot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303718" wikidata="Q856468" url="?curid=303718" title="Carmarthen Town A.F.C.">
<text>Carmarthen Town Association Football Club () is a Welsh semi-professional football club based in Carmarthen.The team play their home games at Richmond Park. The club colours, reflected in their crest and kit, are gold and black.

Formed in 1950, Carmarthen Town was elected into the Welsh Football League in 1953. Their first league honour came in 1959–60, with promotion from Division 2 West to the First Division of the Welsh League. Carmarthen Town&#x27;s first trophy was the Welsh Football League Cup, which they won in the 1995–96 season. Since then the club have gone on to win the Welsh Cup once and the Welsh League Cup three times. They have also qualified for UEFA competitions on four occasions.

 Carmarthen Town play in and have never won a league title, despite having been in the top tier of Welsh football for 24 years until their relegation in the 2019–2020 season. The club had their highest finish in 2000–2001, with third place, which qualified them for European competition for the first time.

==Stadium==


From 1952 Carmarthen Town have played at Richmond Park in Carmarthen. The ground has been redeveloped over recent years into a small, modern and compact football stadium with a capacity of 3,000. The club&#x27;s new Clay Shaw Butler Stand has a 1000-seat capacity which enabled Carmarthen Town to host the club&#x27;s first home European fixture at the ground in July 2007 when they entertained Norwegian side SK Brann.

==Supporters==
In the 2012–13 season Carmarthen&#x27;s average attendance was 296, placing them fourth out of twelve teams in the Cymru Premier. The highest league gate of the season came against Afan Lido FC with 213 spectators and the lowest, 167, against Airbus UK Broughton.
==Current squad==








==Club officials==

;Senior club staff
*President: Einsley Harris
*Chairman: Chris Edwards
*Club Secretary &amp; Football Administrator: Gareth Davies
*Press Officer: Rob Lloyd
*Social Media accounts: Joshua Edwards
*Tuck Shop Manager: Kath Edwards
*Bar Manager: Roger Hunt

;Coaching and medical staff
*Manager: Kristian O’leary
*Assistant Manager: Sean Cresser
*Coach: Craig Hanford
*Sports Therapist: Ryan Evans
*KitMan: Mark Hannington

===Managerial history===
The following managers have each been in charge of Carmarthen Town since the club gained promotion to the highest tier in Welsh football, the Cymru Premier, in 1996.

As of January 2014

==Honours==

The Welsh Football League
* Welsh second tier (currently Welsh Football League Division One)
**Winners (1): 1995–96
* Welsh third tier (currently Welsh Football League Division Two)
**Winners (1): 1959–60

Domestic Cup Competition
* Welsh Cup:
**Winners (1): 2006–07
**Runners-up (2): 1998–99, 2004–05
*Cymru Premier Cup:
**Winners (3): 2004–05, 2012–13, 2013–14
**Runners-up (1): 2003–04
*Welsh Football League Cup
**Winners (1): 1995–96
*West Wales Senior Cup:
**Winners (1): 2004
**Runners-up (2): 2003, 2006

European Competition
*UEFA Cup
**Qualification:2005–06, 2007–08
*UEFA Intertoto Cup
**Qualification: 2001–02, 2006–07

==Records==
===Record wins===
*Record league win: 9–1 against UWIC Inter Cardiff, 21 October 2000
*Record league home win:
:9–1 against UWIC Inter Cardiff, 21 October 2000
:8–0 against Cardiff Grange Quins, 10 December 2005
:8–0 against Connah&#x27;s Quay Nomads, 8 December 2007
*Record league away win: 7–1 against Caersws, 6 October 2006

===Record defeats===
*Record league defeat: 0–8 against The New Saints, 29 March 2009
*Record league home defeat:
:1–5 against Bangor City, 7 December 1996
:0–4 against Aberystwyth Town, 26 February 1997
:0–4 against Ton Pentre, 4 September 1996
:0–6 against Haverfordwest County, 8 December 2000
*Record league away defeat: 8–0 at The New Saints, 29 March 2009

===Player records===
*Most goals in season:
:18 by Danny Thomas in 2007–08
:18 by Richard Parker in 1999-00
*Most goals in match: 5 by Tim Hicks against Connah&#x27;s Quay Nomads, 8 December 2007
*Club top scorer: 56 by Danny Thomas from 116 appearances (+41 substitute appearances)
*Most club appearances: 199 (+12 substitute appearance) by Paul Fowler

===European record===
*Record European win: 5–1 against Longford Town, 28 July 2005
*Record European defeat: 0–8 against SK Brann, 19 July 2007

:&quot;Carmarthen Town&#x27;s scores are given first in all scorelines.&quot;
==See also==
List of Carmarthen Town A.F.C. seasons

==References==
==External links==
;Official websites
* at the Cymru Premier official website
* Carmarthen Town at the UEFA official website

;News sites
* Carmarthen Town at the unofficial Cymru Premier website

;Other
* Carmarthen Town at OpenCorporates</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q856468" start="0" end="41" title="Carmarthen Town A.F.C." label="Carmarthen Town Association Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="74" end="82" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q835835" start="97" end="107" title="Carmarthen" label="Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330933" start="142" end="155" title="Richmond Park (Carmarthen)" label="Richmond Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="283" end="304" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981898" start="377" end="392" title="Welsh Football League Division Two" label="Division 2 West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402539" start="400" end="414" title="Welsh Football League Division One" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981896" start="480" end="505" title="Welsh Football League Cup" label="Welsh Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="589" end="598" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q647072" start="612" end="628" title="Welsh League Cup" label="Welsh League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685107" start="671" end="688" title="UEFA competitions" label="UEFA competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132937" start="921" end="930" title="League of Wales 2000–01" label="2000–2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330933" start="1072" end="1085" title="Richmond Park (Carmarthen)" label="Richmond Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q835835" start="1089" end="1099" title="Carmarthen" label="Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205685" start="1441" end="1449" title="SK Brann" label="SK Brann"/>
<link wikidata="Q977963" start="1474" end="1481" title="2012–13 Welsh Premier League" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="1582" end="1595" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q776074" start="1648" end="1660" title="Afan Lido F.C." label="Afan Lido FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q553732" start="1710" end="1729" title="Airbus UK Broughton F.C." label="Airbus UK Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="2365" end="2378" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402539" start="2480" end="2514" title="Welsh Football League Division One" label="Welsh Football League Division One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981898" start="2569" end="2603" title="Welsh Football League Division Two" label="Welsh Football League Division Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="2656" end="2665" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q647072" start="2726" end="2743" title="Welsh League Cup" label="Cymru Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603850" start="2760" end="2767" title="2004–05 Welsh League Cup" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850187" start="2769" end="2776" title="2012–13 Welsh League Cup" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843105" start="2778" end="2785" title="2013–14 Welsh League Cup" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954181" start="2804" end="2811" title="2003–04 Welsh Premier League" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981896" start="2813" end="2838" title="Welsh Football League Cup" label="Welsh Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="2958" end="2966" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q580161" start="2983" end="2990" title="2005–06 UEFA Cup" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q476048" start="2992" end="2999" title="2007–08 UEFA Cup" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="3001" end="3019" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q603713" start="3037" end="3044" title="2001 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q965532" start="3046" end="3053" title="2006 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096167" start="3117" end="3135" title="Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C." label="UWIC Inter Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096167" start="3191" end="3209" title="Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C." label="UWIC Inter Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244234" start="3240" end="3260" title="Cardiff Grange Harlequins A.F.C." label="Cardiff Grange Quins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526049" start="3292" end="3317" title="Gap Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay F.C." label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads"/>
<link wikidata="Q658273" start="3372" end="3379" title="Caersws F.C." label="Caersws"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="3453" end="3467" title="The New Saints F.C." label="The New Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="3524" end="3535" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q319756" start="3566" end="3582" title="Aberystwyth Town F.C." label="Aberystwyth Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610953" start="3614" end="3624" title="Ton Pentre F.C." label="Ton Pentre"/>
<link wikidata="Q941152" start="3656" end="3676" title="Haverfordwest County A.F.C." label="Haverfordwest County"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="3729" end="3743" title="The New Saints F.C." label="The New Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220880" start="3811" end="3823" title="Danny Thomas (Welsh footballer)" label="Danny Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526049" start="3913" end="3938" title="Gap Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay F.C." label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220880" start="3980" end="3992" title="Danny Thomas (Welsh footballer)" label="Danny Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478917" start="4171" end="4184" title="Longford Town F.C." label="Longford Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q205685" start="4236" end="4244" title="SK Brann" label="SK Brann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566153" start="4351" end="4389" title="List of Carmarthen Town A.F.C. seasons" label="List of Carmarthen Town A.F.C. seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="4453" end="4466" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="4509" end="4513" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="4580" end="4593" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095760" start="4631" end="4645" title="OpenCorporates" label="OpenCorporates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303719" wikidata="Q1881005" url="?curid=303719" title="M50 Ontos">
<text>Ontos, officially the Rifle, Multiple 106 mm, Self-propelled, M50, was an American light armored tracked anti-tank vehicle developed in the 1950s.

It mounted six 106 mm manually loaded M40 recoilless rifles as its main armament, which could be fired in rapid succession against single targets to increase the probability of a kill. Although the actual caliber of the main guns was 105 mm, it was designated 106 mm to prevent confusion with the ammunition for the 105 mm M27 recoilless rifle, which the M50 replaced.

It was produced in limited numbers for the United States Marine Corps after the United States Army cancelled the project. The Marines consistently reported excellent results when they used the Ontos for direct fire support against infantry in numerous battles and operations during the Vietnam War. The American stock of Ontos was largely expended towards the end of the conflict and the Ontos was removed from service in 1969.

== Development ==
The &quot;Ontos&quot; (Greek for &quot;thing&quot;) project was created to be an air transportable tank destroyer capable of being lifted by the cargo aircraft of the 1950s. This limited the vehicle to a weight between 10 and 20 metric tons. The Ontos also had to use the six-cylinder engine then widely used in the Army&#x27;s GMC trucks. After a number of design and engineering meetings from March through October 1951, manufacturer Allis-Chalmers was awarded an initial contract to produce 14 pilot vehicles, encompassing 6 variants.

Allis-Chalmers&#x27; first vehicle, completed in 1952, was based on the running gear of the M56 Scorpion light anti-tank vehicle. The vehicle mounted a cast steel turret with two arms holding three rifles each. This early model could traverse the turret only about 15 degrees. A second prototype used a new suspension system, new tracks, and a newer turret with about 40 degrees traverse. The vehicle could carry only eighteen rounds for the main guns inside the vehicle due to limited space. Its most prominent armament was its six M40 recoilless rifles. Four of the recoilless rifles also had .50 BAT (12.7x77mm) M8C spotting rifles attached, each of which fired a tracer round with the same trajectory as the 105 mm round, and which gave off a flash and puff of white smoke on impact. The spotting rifles were used to line up the 105 mm recoilless rifles with the target. The Ontos also carried a single .30 caliber (7.62 mm) M1919A4 machine gun for anti-infantry use.

The vehicle was taken to the Aberdeen Proving Ground where single rifles had been tested earlier. When all six weapons were fired at once, the back blast from the firing knocked bricks out of a nearby building and knocked the rear windows out of several cars. The prototype and testing stage was completed by 1955, at which point the Army canceled its order.

As an anti-tank vehicle the Ontos had several problems, including a small ammunition load, a very high profile for such a small vehicle, and the need for the crew to exit the vehicle in order to reload the guns, exposing them to enemy fire. Although the Army had canceled its order, the Marine Corps was desperate for any anti-tank vehicles it could get, and ordered 297. Production ran from 1955 through 1957. The Marine Corps accepted its first vehicle on 31 October 1956.

=== Variants and upgrades ===
Several variants were also studied. The Utility Vehicle, Tracked, Infantry, T55 was a light Armored personnel carrier (APC), but only two versions of the prototype were built. It proved impractical due to the limited room inside, carrying only five infantry and forcing the driver to lie prone. A &quot;stretched&quot; version known as the Utility Vehicle, Tracked, Infantry, T56 was also built, and while it held a complete eight-man team, their equipment had to be carried on the outside. Neither was considered very useful.

In 1960 there was a brief study made to replace the Ontos&#x27;s 106 mm rifles with a new 105 mm design that included a revolver-style autoloader. This project was not accepted.

Another proposed upgrade was replacing the GMC engine with a newer Chrysler V8 engine. This upgrade was implemented and the variant was named Rifle, Multiple 106 mm, Self-propelled, M50A1. However, of the 297 vehicles initially accepted by the Marines, only 176 were converted between 1963 and 1965 to this standard.

A mockup was built of an Ontos chassis with a Maxson M45 quadmount .50 BMG antiaircraft mount.

== Service ==
While the M50 was designed as a tank destroyer, during the Vietnam War most M50s did not engage enemy armor as the North Vietnamese Army deployed few tanks. The Ontos was therefore more widely used by the US Marines for direct fire support for the infantry in combat, a role that was never emphasized in training or doctrine. Its light armor was effective against small arms but vulnerable to mines and rocket-propelled grenades. Consequently, many Ontos were deployed in static defense positions.

The relatively light weight of the M50 made it exceptionally mobile for the amount of firepower it carried. In one operation, the Ontos was the only tracked vehicle light enough to cross a pontoon bridge. In the Battle of Huế, Colonel Stanley S. Hughes felt the Ontos was the most effective of all Marine supporting arms. At ranges of , its recoilless rifles could knock holes in or completely knock down walls. The appearance of an Ontos was sometimes enough to make the enemy break and run, and anecdotal accounts describe the enemy fleeing occupied buildings when an Ontos&#x27;s spotting round entered a window. In Operation Desoto, the introduction of the large CH-53 Sea Stallion helicopter made possible moving a platoon south of Quảng Ngãi City carrying Ontos in slings underneath the aircraft.

The Ontos was taken out of service in 1969, and by 1970 were removed entirely from service. Some of the vehicles were handed over to an Army light infantry brigade. They used them until they ran out of spare parts, and then removed the turrets and used them as fixed fortifications. Both these and the rest of the vehicles returned from Vietnam in 1970 and were cut up for scrap, with some of the chassis being sold off to be converted into construction vehicles. Some of the Ontos that were sold to construction companies were later acquired by collectors for restoration.

The Ontos did see use as an anti-tank weapon during the American involvement in the Dominican Civil War: on 29 April 1965 an M50 Ontos and an M48 Patton of the 6th MEU engaged and destroyed two rebel L/60L light tanks, each destroying one. In another instance, an Ontos destroyed an AMX-13.

== Preserved vehicles on display ==

Of the 297 built, only 14 remain, many of which are the M50A1 model.

There are Ontos on display at the following US locations:
* The Patton Museum of Cavalry &amp; Armor in Fort Knox, Kentucky (no longer on display, may have moved with the Armor school to Fort Benning).
* The Rock Island Arsenal Museum in Rock Island, Illinois.
* Camp Atterbury, Edinburgh, Indiana.
* The American Military Museum, in El Monte, California has an M50 that is missing its six recoilless rifles.The Aberdeen Proving Ground&#x27;s Museum in Aberdeen, Maryland has a T165E2, the 19th prototype, though it is not currently on display. The vehicle is currently undergoing a cosmetic restoration.
* Fred Ropkey, owner of the Ropkey Armor Museum in Crawfordsville, Indiana owns the first prototype T165, a later model Ontos, and a parts machine.
* The National Museum of the Marine Corps in Quantico, Virginia has completed the restoration of an M50A1 Ontos.
* The Museum of The Marine in Jacksonville, North Carolina has an operational M50A1 Ontos which is not on public display.
* There is an M50A1 Ontos on outside display at the Navy Facility at China Lake, California.
* The Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Twentynine Palms, California has an M50A1 Ontos on outside display.
* The Military Vehicle Technology Foundation in Portola Valley, California has a T165E1 prototype with the original GM 302ci engine which is currently undergoing a complete operational restoration, and a second prototype T165E2 Ontos.
* The U.S. Army Artillery Museum at Ft. Sill, Oklahoma.
* The Marine Corps Mechanized Museum, Camp Pendleton, displays a M50A1 Ontos that took part in the Battle of Hue.
* There is an M50 Ontos on display inside of the National Museum of Military Vehicles in the Vietnam exhibit, near Dubois, Wyoming
*Russell Military Museum in Zion, Illinois.
* The Museum of the American GI in College Station, Texas has one undergoing restoration.
* Indiana Military Museum, Vincennes, Indiana.

== See also ==
* List of artillery
* List of self-propelled anti-tank guns
* List of artillery of the United States
* G-numbers (SNL G288)

; Similar vehicles 
* Type 60 Self-propelled 106 mm Recoilless Gun

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* Crismon, Fred (1992). &quot;U.S. Military Tracked Vehicles&quot;

== External links ==

* Digger History page on the Ontos
* Ontos Anti-Tank Vehicle by Peter Brush</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1881005" start="0" end="5" title="M50 Ontos" label="Ontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881005" start="22" end="65" title="M50 Ontos" label="Rifle, Multiple 106 mm, Self-propelled, M50"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="105" end="114" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323988" start="186" end="206" title="M40 recoilless rifle" label="M40 recoilless rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="561" end="587" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="598" end="616" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="804" end="815" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="1194" end="1204" title="metric ton" label="metric ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806882" start="1401" end="1415" title="Allis-Chalmers" label="Allis-Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q542319" start="1596" end="1608" title="M56 Scorpion" label="M56 Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="1667" end="1673" title="gun turret" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323988" start="2037" end="2057" title="M40 recoilless rifle" label="M40 recoilless rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="2198" end="2208" title="trajectory" label="trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q484019" start="2433" end="2452" title="M1919 Browning machine gun" label="M1919A4 machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q319506" start="2506" end="2529" title="Aberdeen Proving Ground" label="Aberdeen Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="3124" end="3136" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="3435" end="3460" title="Armored personnel carrier" label="Armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="3991" end="3999" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275913" start="4006" end="4016" title="autoloader" label="autoloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q423027" start="4421" end="4434" title="M45 quadmount" label="M45 quadmount"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4537" end="4548" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="4593" end="4614" title="North Vietnamese Army" label="North Vietnamese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="4881" end="4905" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q697053" start="5189" end="5202" title="Battle of Huế" label="Battle of Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594651" start="5212" end="5229" title="Stanley S. Hughes" label="Stanley S. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303113" start="5596" end="5612" title="Operation Desoto" label="Operation Desoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q482538" start="5644" end="5662" title="CH-53 Sea Stallion" label="CH-53 Sea Stallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q955457" start="6440" end="6459" title="Dominican Civil War" label="Dominican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160327" start="6498" end="6508" title="M48 Patton" label="M48 Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q924417" start="6556" end="6561" title="Stridsvagn L-60" label="L/60L"/>
<link wikidata="Q295424" start="6639" end="6645" title="AMX-13" label="AMX-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q983650" start="6859" end="6868" title="Fort Knox" label="Fort Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="6870" end="6878" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396797" start="6963" end="6982" title="Rock Island Arsenal" label="Rock Island Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026987" start="7018" end="7032" title="Camp Atterbury" label="Camp Atterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617448" start="7034" end="7052" title="Edinburgh, Indiana" label="Edinburgh, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q595550" start="7089" end="7109" title="El Monte, California" label="El Monte, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q319506" start="7167" end="7190" title="Aberdeen Proving Ground" label="Aberdeen Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q319395" start="7208" end="7226" title="Aberdeen, Maryland" label="Aberdeen, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918610" start="7338" end="7358" title="Conservation and restoration of road vehicles" label="cosmetic restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366760" start="7388" end="7407" title="Ropkey Armor Museum" label="Ropkey Armor Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q986629" start="7411" end="7434" title="Crawfordsville, Indiana" label="Crawfordsville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974515" start="7514" end="7549" title="National Museum of the Marine Corps" label="National Museum of the Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q204315" start="7553" end="7571" title="Quantico, Virginia" label="Quantico, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986369" start="7651" end="7679" title="Jacksonville, North Carolina" label="Jacksonville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014558" start="7812" end="7822" title="China Lake" label="China Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="7824" end="7834" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800091" start="7842" end="7896" title="Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Twentynine Palms" label="Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Twentynine Palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="7898" end="7908" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852193" start="7954" end="7992" title="Military Vehicle Technology Foundation" label="Military Vehicle Technology Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011116" start="7996" end="8022" title="Portola Valley, California" label="Portola Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="8189" end="8215" title="U.S. Army Artillery Museum" label="U.S. Army Artillery Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="8219" end="8227" title="Ft. Sill" label="Ft. Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="8229" end="8237" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q195334" start="8277" end="8291" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton" label="Camp Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q106867113" start="8402" end="8438" title="National Museum of Military Vehicles" label="National Museum of Military Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272708" start="8683" end="8700" title="List of artillery" label="List of artillery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8703" end="8740" title="List of anti-tank guns#Self-propelled anti-tank guns" label="List of self-propelled anti-tank guns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8743" end="8781" title="List of artillery by country#United States" label="List of artillery of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600945" start="8784" end="8793" title="G-numbers" label="G-numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593044" start="8828" end="8872" title="Type 60 Self-propelled 106 mm Recoilless Gun" label="Type 60 Self-propelled 106 mm Recoilless Gun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303721" wikidata="Q223672" url="?curid=303721" title="Carolina Klüft">
<text>Carolina Evelyn Klüft (; born 2 February 1983) is a retired Swedish track and field athlete who competed in the heptathlon, pentathlon, long jump and triple jump. She was an Olympic Champion, having won the heptathlon title in 2004. She was also a three-time World heptathlon champion, World Indoor pentathlon champion, a two-time European heptathlon champion and a two-time European Indoor pentathlon champion. Klüft is the only athlete ever to win three consecutive world titles in the heptathlon (2003, 2005, 2007). She was unbeaten in 22 heptathlon and pentathlon competitions from 2002 to 2007, her entire combined events career as a senior athlete, winning nine consecutive gold medals in major championships.

Klüft first rose to prominence by winning the heptathlon at the 2002 European Championships and setting a new world junior record of 6,542 points. She then won the 2003 World Championships, becoming the third athlete ever to score over 7,000 points. She is the European record holder for heptathlon with a personal best of 7,032 points. This score ranks her second on the all-time heptathlon points score list, behind Jackie Joyner-Kersee who set the world record of 7,291 points.

Besides having been a world class heptathlete, Klüft also had international success in the long jump event. She won the bronze medal at the 2004 World Indoor Championships in Budapest and finished fourth at the 2011 World Championships in Daegu.

On 2 September 2012 at the Finland-Sweden Athletics International, Klüft officially ended her career and retired from sports.

==Personal life and profile==
Born in Sandhult, Västergötland, Klüft grew up in Växjö, where her father, mother and three sisters still live. She currently lives in Norrköping together with her husband Patrik Klüft, who is a former pole vaulter. They were married in September 2007 at Crichton Parish Church in Midlothian, Scotland.

Klüft comes from a family with sporting traditions: her father Johnny played professional football in the Swedish Allsvenskan and her mother was an international long jumper. She started out playing football herself but took up athletics at the age of twelve. She has described being subjected to bullying at school after moving to Växjö and subsequently using her athletic prowess to gain respect. Klüft took up the heptathlon in 2000 after coach Agne Bergvall suggested she had a future in it. Bergvall has been her main coach ever since.

Klüft is tall and weighs . Her physique was well-suited to multi-events: being tall and lean for the running and jumping events but also powerful enough to perform well in the shot put and javelin. She showed more natural ability in the jumping events, sprinting and hurdles, and steadily improved in the throwing events and 800 m and has been described as having no weaknesses across the seven events. This was demonstrated by her finishing in the top six in all disciplines of the 2007 World Championship heptathlon.

She was also a member of the Swedish 4 × 100 m relay team at international competitions, and was part of the team that set the national record.

She was particularly friendly with British rival Kelly Sotherton, and the two were often seen chatting during competitions. Klüft regularly lead the other heptathletes on a lap of honor after a major competition. She is often referred to by the nickname &#x27;Carro&#x27; by people who know her.

When not training or competing, Klüft was a student at the Linnaeus University, studying Peace and Development. She visited areas of Sri Lanka hit by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake to make a film for Swedish TV and also sponsors children in Africa.

She was part of Reebok&#x27;s &quot;I am what I am&quot; advertising campaign along with several other sports stars. She has been the focus of poster photography for Reebok, taken by celebrity photographer Jason Bell.

Klüft was nominated for four consecutive Laureus World Sportswoman of the Year awards from 2005 to 2008.

She had a mascot, a small stuffed toy representing Eeyore, that she took everywhere. Klüft claims that this was not for luck, but to remind her of her philosophy that sport is for fun.

She is one of very few athletes to at some time hold all five available international titles: Olympic, World Outdoor, Continental (Europe in her case) Outdoor, World Indoor and Continental Indoor.

==Career==
===2002: First European heptathlon title===
Klüft was an exceptional junior athlete. During the 2002 World Junior Championships in Athletics, at the age of 19, she set a world junior record by scoring 6,470 points. She captured her first major championship title at the 2002 European Championships in Munich with a score of 6,542 points, improving the world junior record in the process.

===2003: First world heptathlon title===
A score of 4933 points secured the pentathlon title at the 2003 World Indoor Championships. Klüft followed this with personal bests and victories in the heptathlons in Götzis and Tallinn.

She won her first major outdoor title, the heptathlon at the 2003 World Championships in Paris with a score of 7,001 points, ahead of Eunice Barber, who had 6,755 points. Klüft thus became the third woman ever to break the 7,000-point barrier in the heptathlon. She set six personal bests in the seven disciplines including a 1.94 m high jump and a 200 m run of 22.98 s. At one stage she was on the brink of elimination from the competition after overstepping on the first two of her three long jump attempts but ended up recording the best jump of the competition with 6.68 m. She was later awarded the Waterford Crystal European Athlete of the Year Trophy 2003. That same year, Klüft also received the Svenska Dagbladet Gold Medal.

===2004: Athens Olympic champion===
Klüft competed in the long jump at the 2004 World Indoor Championships, winning a bronze medal with a national record of 6.92 m. She warmed up for the 2004 Olympics by winning heptathlons in Götzis and Tallinn.

She won the heptathlon gold medal at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens with a score of 6,952 points. She took the lead after the high jump and extended her lead after every event from then on. With Eunice Barber absent through injury, Klüft won by an Olympic record margin of 517 points, ahead of Austra Skujytė. She also entered the long jump, qualifying for the final but finishing 11th.

===2005: Second world heptathlon title===

She began 2005 by winning the pentathlon at the European Indoor Championships with a new personal best of 4948 points. A third consecutive victory at Götzis and another in Jyväskylä set Klüft up for the defense of her heptathlon world title.

The day before the 2005 World Championships in Athletics in Helsinki, Klüft injured her foot. The injury affected her performance, particularly in the high jump which was a clearance of only 1.82 m. Klüft fell well behind Eunice Barber but made a comeback with a personal best shot put of 15.02 m and then took the lead after the 200 m. She then stretched her lead with a long jump effort of 6.87 m, and held on to an advantage of only 18 points after the javelin. She overtook Barber at the end of the 800 m to retain the title. Klüft totaled 6,887 points, finishing ahead of Barber who took the silver medal with 6,824 points.

===2006: Second European heptathlon title===
Klüft chose not to compete at the 2006 World Indoor Championships in order to prepare for the European Championships, to be staged on home soil in Sweden. Klüft won again in Götzis and in Arles.

She defended her title at the 2006 European Athletics Championships with a score of 6,740 points, despite having been hampered by injuries throughout her preparation. She performed well below her best but still won comfortably following the withdrawal of her rival Barber after the high jump. Klüft went on to compete in the individual long jump but finished 6th.

===2007: Third world heptathlon title===

Her victory in the 2007 European Indoor Championships in Birmingham was by a margin of only 17 points over home favorite Kelly Sotherton. Klüft again narrowly missed the world pentathlon record, with a score of 4944 points.

Still recovering from her fitness problems of the previous year, she did only one heptathlon before the World Championships, a fifth victory in Götzis.

At the World Championships in Osaka, Klüft had the opportunity to become the only woman to win three world titles in the heptathlon. However, she faced strong competition from Lyudmila Blonska of Ukraine, who had, earlier in the year, set the world best heptathlon score of 2007. Klüft started the first day by equaling her personal best of 13.15s in the 100 m hurdles and a new personal best of 1.95 m in the high jump. Solid performances of 14.81 in the shot put and 23.38 in the 200 m followed, for Klüft to hold the lead from Blonska after day one, with 4162 points. On the second day, Klüft recorded a long jump of 6.85 m, threw 47.98 m in the javelin and ran 2:12.56 in the 800 metres to claim her third World Championship gold. She posted a personal best points score of 7,032, putting her second on the all-time list, and beating Larisa Turchinskaya&#x27;s 18-year-old European record.

===2008: Injury and switch to long &amp; triple jump===
She competed in an indoor triathlon (60 m hurdles, long jump and 400 m) in the Birmingham Indoor Grand Prix. Klüft narrowly won the competition after setting an indoor personal best of 52.98 in the 400 m. Kelly Sotherton finished just 18 points behind Klüft, beating the Swede in both the hurdles and 400 m. On 22 February, Klüft announced that she had ruptured her hamstring and that, as a result, she would not compete at the World Indoor Championships on 7 March.

Klüft announced on 19 March that she would not contest any heptathlons in 2008, including defending her title at the Olympics, stating that she was no longer motivated to train for and compete in heptathlons. Instead she decided to concentrate upon long jump and also train seriously for triple jump. Although Klüft was inexperienced in triple jump, she had worked with Yannick Tregaro (coach of Olympic champion Christian Olsson), who predicted that she could jump over 14.50 m.

She entered both the long jump and triple jump at the 2008 Olympics. Her best effort of 13.90 m did not qualify her for the triple jump final. She ended ninth in the long jump with a result of 6.49 m.

Although Klüft did not defend her heptathlon title at the Beijing Olympics, she stated that she might yet contest another heptathlon, after the 2008 season.

===2009: Injury and surgery===
Klüft missed the 2009 World Championships in Berlin as well as the rest of the season after suffering a hamstring injury she picked up in July in Sweden. She had surgery in the middle of July, after which she needed around six months rehabilitation.

===2010: European long jump finalist===
Klüft competed in the 2010 European Championships in Barcelona, reaching the long jump final but ultimately finishing 11th out of the twelve athletes that reached the final. She jumped 6.33 metres but was almost 60 centimetres behind gold medalist Ineta Radēviča of Latvia. Klüft said she &quot;didn&#x27;t have any power in my legs&quot; and &quot;my legs felt heavy today&quot; after qualifying for the final. She also stated that reaching the final had satisfied her.

===2011: Fourth world long jumper===
The long jump at the 2011 World Championships in Daegu would be Klüft&#x27;s last major championship start. After a qualifying 6.60 m jump, Klüft only managed 6.56 m in the final. The result was still enough to secure fourth place, but Klüft was 18 cm behind Belarusian Nastassia Mironchyk-Ivanova who claimed the bronze medal.

==Achievements==
===International competitions===
===Personal bests===



===Circuit wins and titles===
* IAAF Golden League
** 2006 Oslo Bislett Games (Long jump)
* IAAF Combined Events Challenge Overall winner: 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006
** Hypo-Meeting: 2003 (), 2004 (WL), 2005 (WL), 2006 (WL), 2007 (WL)

===National titles===
* Swedish Athletics Championships
** 100 metres: 2003, 2004, 2011
** 200 metres: 2005
** High jump: 2004
** Long jump: 2001, 2002, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2011
* Swedish Indoor Athletics Championships
** Long jump: 2002, 2003, 2004

==Other honours==
* Waterford Crystal European Athlete of the Year Trophy 2003 and 2006
* Jerring Award: 2002

==References==
==External links==
* SPIKES Hero profile on www.spikesmag.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223672" start="0" end="21" title="Carolina Klüft" label="Carolina Evelyn Klüft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="68" end="83" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q243264" start="112" end="122" title="heptathlon" label="heptathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q983987" start="124" end="134" title="women&amp;#x27;s pentathlon" label="pentathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="136" end="145" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q187204" start="150" end="161" title="triple jump" label="triple jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="174" end="190" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558525" start="199" end="223" title="Athletics at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s heptathlon" label="won the heptathlon title"/>
<link wikidata="Q339283" start="227" end="231" title="Athletics at the 2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="259" end="264" title="IAAF World Championships in Athletics" label="World"/>
<link wikidata="Q725169" start="286" end="298" title="IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="World Indoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210707" start="331" end="339" title="European Athletics Championships" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q772787" start="375" end="390" title="European Athletics Indoor Championships" label="European Indoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924425" start="611" end="626" title="Combined track and field events" label="combined events"/>
<link wikidata="Q623388" start="781" end="808" title="2002 European Championships in Athletics" label="2002 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q263403" start="881" end="905" title="2003 World Championships in Athletics" label="2003 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445200" start="978" end="993" title="European records in athletics" label="European record"/>
<link wikidata="Q209390" start="1135" end="1155" title="Jackie Joyner-Kersee" label="Jackie Joyner-Kersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q608863" start="1339" end="1370" title="2004 World Indoor Championships in Athletics" label="2004 World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="1374" end="1382" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q208675" start="1410" end="1434" title="2011 World Championships in Athletics" label="2011 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q20927" start="1438" end="1443" title="Daegu" label="Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418201" start="1473" end="1511" title="Finland-Sweden Athletics International" label="Finland-Sweden Athletics International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188202" start="1611" end="1619" title="Sandhult" label="Sandhult"/>
<link wikidata="Q213551" start="1621" end="1634" title="Västergötland" label="Västergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26152" start="1653" end="1658" title="Växjö" label="Växjö"/>
<link wikidata="Q25724" start="1738" end="1748" title="Norrköping" label="Norrköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389640" start="1775" end="1787" title="Patrik Klüft" label="Patrik Klüft"/>
<link wikidata="Q185027" start="1805" end="1815" title="pole vault" label="pole vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q206934" start="1884" end="1894" title="Midlothian" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1896" end="1904" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202243" start="2021" end="2032" title="Allsvenskan" label="Allsvenskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692975" start="2355" end="2368" title="Agne Bergvall" label="Agne Bergvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q466878" start="3163" end="3178" title="Kelly Sotherton" label="Kelly Sotherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751928" start="3470" end="3489" title="Linnaeus University" label="Linnaeus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="3544" end="3553" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="3565" end="3593" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="3679" end="3685" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="3829" end="3835" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q900341" start="3923" end="3930" title="Laureus World Sports Awards" label="Laureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799013" start="4039" end="4045" title="Eeyore" label="Eeyore"/>
<link wikidata="Q968074" start="4479" end="4523" title="2002 World Junior Championships in Athletics" label="2002 World Junior Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q592883" start="4553" end="4572" title="Junior world records in athletics" label="world junior record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="4684" end="4690" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q698573" start="4981" end="4987" title="Götzis" label="Götzis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="4992" end="4999" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q243264" start="5045" end="5055" title="heptathlon" label="heptathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q238191" start="5136" end="5149" title="Eunice Barber" label="Eunice Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="5335" end="5344" title="high jump" label="high jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="5492" end="5501" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337699" start="5606" end="5664" title="Waterford Crystal European Athlete of the Year Trophy" label="Waterford Crystal European Athlete of the Year Trophy 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297250" start="5706" end="5734" title="Svenska Dagbladet Gold Medal" label="Svenska Dagbladet Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="5924" end="5937" title="2004 Olympics" label="2004 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q243264" start="5997" end="6007" title="heptathlon" label="heptathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="6050" end="6056" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q238191" start="6184" end="6197" title="Eunice Barber" label="Eunice Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q242117" start="6283" end="6297" title="Austra Skujytė" label="Austra Skujytė"/>
<link wikidata="Q134620" start="6592" end="6601" title="Jyväskylä" label="Jyväskylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q630307" start="6682" end="6719" title="2005 World Championships in Athletics" label="2005 World Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="6723" end="6731" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="6814" end="6823" title="high jump" label="high jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q238191" start="6885" end="6898" title="Eunice Barber" label="Eunice Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q180935" start="6940" end="6948" title="shot put" label="shot put"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="7035" end="7044" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="7526" end="7531" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q623563" start="7564" end="7601" title="2006 European Athletics Championships" label="2006 European Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="7998" end="8008" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="8349" end="8354" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q466916" start="8495" end="8511" title="Lyudmila Blonska" label="Lyudmila Blonska"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="8515" end="8522" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q445831" start="9157" end="9176" title="Larisa Turchinskaya" label="Larisa Turchinskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q466878" start="9475" end="9490" title="Kelly Sotherton" label="Kelly Sotherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q196002" start="9636" end="9645" title="hamstring" label="hamstring"/>
<link wikidata="Q836635" start="9698" end="9724" title="2008 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="9855" end="9863" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="9987" end="9996" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q187204" start="10026" end="10037" title="triple jump" label="triple jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395703" start="10108" end="10123" title="Yannick Tregaro" label="Yannick Tregaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q313636" start="10151" end="10167" title="Christian Olsson" label="Christian Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="10479" end="10495" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="Beijing Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q152772" start="10627" end="10651" title="2009 World Championships in Athletics" label="2009 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="10655" end="10661" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210666" start="10923" end="10950" title="2010 European Athletics Championships" label="2010 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="10954" end="10963" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q233524" start="11149" end="11163" title="Ineta Radēviča" label="Ineta Radēviča"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="11167" end="11173" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208675" start="11431" end="11455" title="2011 World Championships in Athletics" label="2011 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q20927" start="11459" end="11464" title="Daegu" label="Daegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q454864" start="11680" end="11707" title="Nastassia Mironchyk-Ivanova" label="Nastassia Mironchyk-Ivanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q727164" start="11845" end="11863" title="IAAF Golden League" label="IAAF Golden League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11867" end="11871" title="2006 IAAF Golden League#Women" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q866398" start="11872" end="11890" title="Bislett Games" label="Oslo Bislett Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130941" start="11905" end="11935" title="IAAF Combined Events Challenge" label="IAAF Combined Events Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q694874" start="11978" end="11990" title="Hypo-Meeting" label="Hypo-Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601439" start="11992" end="11996" title="2003 Hypo-Meeting" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602859" start="12001" end="12005" title="2004 Hypo-Meeting" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604395" start="12012" end="12016" title="2005 Hypo-Meeting" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606369" start="12023" end="12027" title="2006 Hypo-Meeting" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608617" start="12034" end="12038" title="2007 Hypo-Meeting" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q10685482" start="12069" end="12100" title="Swedish Athletics Championships" label="Swedish Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="12104" end="12114" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="12136" end="12146" title="200 metres" label="200 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="12156" end="12165" title="High jump" label="High jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="12175" end="12184" title="Long jump" label="Long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q10685395" start="12223" end="12261" title="Swedish Indoor Athletics Championships" label="Swedish Indoor Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337699" start="12314" end="12381" title="Waterford Crystal European Athlete of the Year Trophy" label="Waterford Crystal European Athlete of the Year Trophy 2003 and 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q663431" start="12384" end="12397" title="Jerring Award" label="Jerring Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303722" wikidata="Q6935153" url="?curid=303722" title="Multiverser">
<text>Multiverser is a tabletop multi-genre role-playing game, published by Valdron Inc., in which the player character is typically an alternate version of the player themselves. The player character travels to a new dimension every time they die. Each dimension is governed by rules called &#x27;biases&#x27; which determine what actions are possible or not possible in any given dimension. The dimensions, more commonly called &#x27;worlds&#x27;, may feature any setting and plot the referee can think up from swords-and-sorcery to sci-fi.

== Scriff ==

When a new player begins a game for the first time, the referee describes an imagined scenario in which the player himself dies in some sort of accident typically involving electronics. From this event, the player character is inadvertently infused with &quot;scriff&quot;. This fictional substance gets into player characters, with the result that death is not the end, but merely the perhaps painful step to the next world and the next adventure. The player begins the game controlling his alternate self in a new dimension just as he does every time his character dies. In this way, Multiverser uses death as a means of continuing the story, rather than ending it. The act of interdimensional travel, most typically upon death, as an effect of a scriff infusion is called &quot;versing out&quot;. Any character who travels through dimensions in this manner, NPC or player-controlled, is called a &quot;verser&quot;.

== Biases ==
Reality within individual dimensions is governed by four different &quot;bias&quot; categories: Body, Technology, Psionics, and Magic. Every skill has a score, or &quot;bias level&quot;, organized under one of the four bias categories, and every world has a bias level in each of the bias categories. The interactions of these biases play multiple roles: modifiers on the chance of skill success, a limiter on what is possible in the current universe, a definition of what is known by the locals, a bonus or penalty to the chance to learn something new, et al. The four bias categories defined below.

*&quot;Body&quot; (a.k.a. &#x27;bod&#x27;) refers to bio-chemistry and organics (this includes inorganic life-forms as well), defining what is possible for organic life in a given world. Skills of this bias include grapples, acrobatics, Iron Shirt, bioluminescence, regeneration, etc. A given world&#x27;s Bod bias governs the presence and complexity of the world&#x27;s chemical and/or organic inhabitants as well as the success rate of any attempted bod skills.
*&quot;Technology&quot; (a.k.a. &#x27;tech&#x27;) refers primarily to traditional physics and the behavior of equipment and machines. This bias governs a character&#x27;s ability to operate simple machines, watches, guns, lighters, power tools, mechanical vehicles, robots, etc. A world&#x27;s Tech bias governs the success rate and presence of these devices in the world.
*&quot;Psionics&quot; (a.k.a. &#x27;psi&#x27;) refers to mental feats and psychic phenomena. Lower level examples are language, decoding, standard cognition, and metacognition. Higher level psi skills include ESP, telepathy, pyrokinetics, telekinesis, etc. A world&#x27;s Psi bias level affects the level of common psi skills the world&#x27;s inhabitants practice as well as the chance of success of psi skills.
*&quot;Magic&quot; (a.k.a. &#x27;mag&#x27;) covers not just spells, but the supernatural world at large, using the explanation that the ritual of a spell (a spell being anything from a prayer to alchemy) channels expectation of the spell-caster into a desired effect. Mag skills include summoning spirits, incantations to create fireballs, rain dances, ritualistic curses or blessings, etc. A world&#x27;s Mag bias indicates the level of ritualistic magic practiced by inhabitants as well as the presence of supernatural beings and phenomena.

The higher score of a particular world bias, the easier related tasks are. For example, in a universe with a high magic bias and a low technology bias (compared with modern-day Earth), players could expect to see a world similar to medieval Europe, but with wizards and dragons abound. A moderately high Technology bias, in conjunction with a slightly higher Psionic bias could put the character into a world very similar to the 2002 TV show &quot;Firefly&quot;.

== Worlds ==
The book of referee&#x27;s rules provides all the tools a referee needs to create complete Multiverser worlds. Nearly any sort of universe, ranging from almost normal to bizarre beyond imagining, can be modeled with the system, allowing referees great freedom in creating new places to take their players. This means that the worlds can feature original settings with unique stories, or the referees are free to choose to adapt a world from a favorite book or movie for their player to experience.

=== Books of Worlds ===
While they aren&#x27;t necessary for game-play, there are also two published Multiverser books with completed worlds with all the details required to be used in a campaign. Each book contains a total of 7 worlds. One world in each book is designed as a &#x27;gather world&#x27;--a place with vast possibilities, where many players can be brought together and either work together or find their own goals and objectives independently. Also, one world in each book is a &#x27;twin scenario&#x27; world which features two different universes whose similarities enable telling two very different settings in one description.

==== First Book of Worlds ====
*NagaWorld, a &quot;Gather World&quot; - A decidedly alien world; intentionally unearthly in several ways, hosting orange grass and moving stone bushes in a vast alien landscape. There are more secrets than any one player is expected to ever uncover. Multiverser recommends that referees start all players in NagaWorld because it veritably screams, &quot;You&#x27;re not in Kansas anymore&quot; in ways that cannot be ignored.
*Tristan&#x27;s Labyrinth - This world is all about the dungeon crawl—the unending inescapable dungeon crawl. The corridors go on forever and the monsters keep coming. There&#x27;s an explanation for all this, but the player probably will never find it.
*Dancing Princess - This is a fantasy world with a fairy-tale theme. It involves a story of the rescue of three princesses from three demons, and the player character can be the hero who does it. He can even marry the princess of his choice when it&#x27;s all over.
*Mary Piper, &quot;Twin Scenarios&quot; - The player character finds himself a stowaway on a merchant ship, and if he doesn&#x27;t get tossed overboard he becomes a member of the crew, fighting pirates, moving cargo, dealing with adventures on the voyage, and otherwise buckling swashes. However, these events may take place either across the ocean blue between continents or in a spaceship between planets, depending on the referee&#x27;s choice.
*Sherwood Forest - There is enough history of the age of King Richard to give the fables of Robin Hood a solid grounding in the realities of the day. Whether the player joins the Merry Men or takes his own stand, there are plenty of adventures to be had here.
*The Most Dangerous Game - A hunter who is bored of animals decides to hunt people. The player character becomes the person, and for three days has to elude his brilliant stalker, or find a way to turn the tables on him.
*The Zygote Experience - The player character is reborn—literally. The chapter on this world provides the referee with sufficient medical and social material to start the character at the moment of conception and convey much of the experience of going through gestation and birth, and then gives well-researched developmental materials for following the newborn to adulthood.

==== Second Book of Worlds ====
*Bah Ke&#x27;gehn, a &quot;Gather World&quot; - A masterpiece of misdirection, this world has all the well-known trappings of hell, yet the demonic-looking locals are in some ways more humane than humans, and once they are understood. The potential for player character confusion here is complicated by the fact that to the locals, he looks like their myths of demons; that in this world magic is normal and technology is feared; and that there are a few other humans here who are quite certain (and incorrect) of where they are.
*Prisoner of Zenda - Based on the classic book in which the hero has to be the substitute for the king while striving to rescue the hostage king from his evil half-brother. Combining elements of the book with various translations to the screen, this version provides an adventure in which the player character is the duplicate, and faces the difficult choices presented.
*Farmland, &quot;Twin Scenarios&quot;- Both scenarios take place in a quiet agrarian society with pre-gunpowder levels of technology which welcome the player character readily. In one scenario, a misstep is likely to have the character tried for witchcraft and burned at the stake to attempt to save his soul. In the other, there is no threat of that, but there is a threat. Instead, alien space ships have been scouting the planet, reported by the locals as apparitions, demons, and signs in the skies, and when they invade only the player character understands what they are and how to stop them.
*New Ice Age - The player character is on Earth as it might be in the survival setting of the frozen wasteland of a modern-day ice age. The chapter expands on various events and human settlements the player character may find, and it also includes information on techniques for living in such a setting.
*Post-Sympathetic Man - This is a world in which &quot;survival of the fittest&quot; is taken as a religious doctrine and human competition for power, wealth, and breeding rights have been driven by modern levels of technology. Even the player who does not throw himself into the competition to survive and prosper may find his character dragged into the fray by those seeking advantage.
*Industrial Complex - As mankind gives all its labor to machines and its land to agriculture, moving into leisurely lives in underground complexes connected by automated subways, it loses all understanding of the world in which it exists. The machines become the gods, and those who can still direct them through the correct ritual sequence of button-pushing are the priests. However, even utopia cannot last forever, and the control systems of the world may be on the verge of collapse. The player character may have to save humanity from its new destruction.
*The Perpetual Barbeque - The player character enters the scene on the morning of a town-wide picnic; but every day seems to be the morning of the picnic, and remains so until he can figure out why and undo the problem. To complicate matters, the day alternates between the most wonderful picnic in memory and an unmitigated disaster in which several people die in tragic accidents.

== Skills ==
Multiverser is designed to allow the player to attempt to take any action in and out of combat. The skills are categorized into the four bias areas tech, mag, psi, and bod, discussed above; just as each world has a bias level in each category, each skill has a certain bias level in its respective category. A mag skill with a high bias level, such as summoning a horde of guardian angels, would have odds stacked against success in a world without a high mag bias. Likewise, a moderate tech skill, such as operating a laser gun, might have a huge success rate in one tech-savvy world but would be near impossible in a low-tech dragons-and-deities world.

When a character attempts to perform a skill, the player rolls one standard percentile dice roll which determines whether the skill failed or succeeded as well as the amplitude of success. For instance, one roll would determine whether an attack connects and how much damage is dealt.

== Reception ==
Multiverser has been described as original and thought-provoking and has received acclaim for its ability to run multiple original campaigns in one game session. Reviewers have been impressed with the thoroughness of the rules and the diversity of the world books, going so far as to say that the books, particularly the books of worlds, could provide valuable information even for other gaming purposes. One reviewer contently cites the &quot;Appendix 3: Basic Dicing Curves&quot; in the rule book which explains the distribution of probabilities of various common dice rolls.

Critics have expressed disappointment with the complexity of the game mechanics, explaining that the depth and ubiquitous coverage causes the rules to be more cumbersome than many other tabletop RPGs; even reviewers who appreciate Multiverser&#x27;s thoroughness explain that it comes with an unfortunate level of complexity. Some say that compounded with complexity is unclear, vague, or hard to follow explanations in some places. It has also been said that some rules laid out by the authors are unnecessary and take away from the potential quality of the game; a couple such cited rules is that the player character must be an alternate version of the player himself and that NagaWorld must be the first world a verser visits. The books do strongly suggest these two parameters, but they do state that they aren&#x27;t definitive requirements—perhaps this misunderstanding stands as a testament to the complaint of ambiguity.

== References ==
== External links ==
*Books by the Author: M. Joseph Young. Discourse about books related to Multiverser.
*The Way, The Truth &amp; The Dice. Co-author M. Joseph Young reveals details on early development of the game.
*The Alexandrian A positive review of Multiverser.
*RPG Net a critic&#x27;s review of Multiverser.
*IndieRPGs.com Simple to Complex Combat in Multiverser
*Gaming Outpost Forum hosting live online Multiverser games</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q336377" start="26" end="55" title="multi-genre role-playing game" label="multi-genre role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70" end="82" title="Valdron Inc." label="Valdron Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6073038" start="2324" end="2334" title="Iron Shirt" label="Iron Shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179924" start="2336" end="2351" title="bioluminescence" label="bioluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q193119" start="2353" end="2365" title="Regeneration (biology)" label="regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q186713" start="2741" end="2756" title="simple machines" label="simple machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q790024" start="3133" end="3136" title="Extrasensory perception" label="ESP"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="3138" end="3147" title="telepathy" label="telepathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069787" start="3149" end="3160" title="pyrokinetic" label="pyrokinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="3163" end="3174" title="telekinesis" label="telekinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q477738" start="3676" end="3687" title="Rainmaking (ritual)" label="rain dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4112" end="4127" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11622" start="4322" end="4341" title="Firefly (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Firefly&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843874" start="11700" end="11715" title="percentile dice" label="percentile dice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303724" wikidata="Q1263629" url="?curid=303724" title="Thoracic duct">
<text>In human anatomy, the thoracic duct (also known as the &quot;left lymphatic duct&quot;, &quot;alimentary duct&quot;, &quot;chyliferous duct&quot;, and &quot;Van Hoorne&#x27;s canal&quot;) is the larger of the two lymph ducts of the lymphatic system (the other being the right lymphatic duct). The thoracic duct usually begins from the upper aspect of the cisterna chyli, passing out of the abdomen through the aortic hiatus into first the posterior mediastinum and then the superior mediastinum, extending as high up as the root of the neck before descending to drain into the systemic (blood) circulation at the venous angle.

The thoracic duct carries chyle, a liquid containing both lymph and emulsified fats, rather than pure lymph. It also collects most of the lymph in the body other than from the right thorax, arm, head, and neck (which are drained by the right lymphatic duct).

When the duct ruptures, the resulting flood of liquid into the pleural cavity is known as chylothorax.

==Structure==
In adults, the thoracic duct is typically 38–45 cm in length and has an average diameter of about 5 mm. The vessel usually commences at the level of the twelfth thoracic vertebra (T12) and extends to the root of the neck before descending to terminate at the venous angle.

=== Origin ===
The thoracic duct commences at the upper extremity of the cisterna chyli at the level of the T12 vertebra.

=== Course and relations ===
Abdomen

From its origin at the cisterna chyli, the thoracic duct ascends anterior to and to the right of the vertebral column, situated in between the aorta, and the azygos vein. The thoracic duct traverses the diaphragm at the aortic hiatus to enter the posterior mediastinum.

Posterior mediastinum

It ascends the posterior mediastinum between the descending thoracic aorta (to its left) and the azygos vein (to its right), and is situated posterior to the esophagus at the T7 vertebral level. It crosses the midline to the left side at about the T5 level, continuing to ascend. It then passes posterior to the aorta, and to the left of the oesophagus.

Superior mediastinum

The thoracic ducts ascends into the superior mediastinum, reaching 2-3cm superior to the clavicle, as high up as the C7 vertebral level.

In the superior mediastinum, the thoracic duct is situated posterior to and to the left of the esophagus. It is situated between the visceral and alar fascia. It passes posterior to the left common carotid artery, vagus nerve (CN X), and internal jugular vein. At C7 level, it lies posterolaterally to the carotid sheath. From here, it passes anteroinferiorly to the thyrocervical trunk, and phrenic nerve. It descends until reaching and draining at the venous angle.

=== Fate ===
The thoracic duct usually drains into the systemic (blood) circulation at the left venous angle where left subclavian and left internal jugular veins unite to form the left brachiocephalic vein.

=== Variation ===
The characteristic anatomy of the thoracic duct is present in only about half of individuals.

Origin

A cisterna chyli is absent in about half of individuals; the cisterna chyli fails to develop when the fusion of lumbar trunk during embryologic development occurs above the vertebral level of T12. In such cases, dilation of the lumbar trunks may be present instead.

Number of ducts

A bifid inferior portion of the thoracic duct (due to a failure of fusion during embryonic development) is not uncommonly observed; a plexus of lymphatic vessels replacing the thoracic duct inferiorly and only coalescing into a single duct in the mediastinum may also occur. Rarely, the thoracic duct may be entirely bilaterally paired.

Termination

In over 95% of individuals, the thoracic duct ends by draining either at the venous angle, or into the internal jugular vein, or the subclavian vein, but - in the minority of cases - empties into either the brachiocephalic vein, external jugular vein, suprascapular vein, transverse cervical vein, or vertebral vein.

In a vast majority of cases, the thoracic duct terminates on the left side, but may rarely terminate on the right side of the body, or bilaterally. It usually terminates as a single vessel, but it sometimes ends in bilateral vessels or as several terminal branches. Rarely, the thoracic duct terminates &quot;prematurely&quot; by emptying into the azygous system.

==Function==
The thoracic duct collects most of the lymph in the body other than from the right thorax, arm, head, and neck. These are drained by the right lymphatic duct.

The lymph transport, in the thoracic duct, is mainly caused by the action of breathing, aided by the duct&#x27;s smooth muscle and by internal valves which prevent the lymph from flowing back down again. There are also two valves at the junction of the duct with the left subclavian vein, to prevent the flow of venous blood into the duct. In adults, the thoracic duct transports up to 4 L of lymph per day.

==Clinical significance==
The thoracic duct becomes adaptively dilated in the presence of certain pathological conditions (congestive heart failure, portal hypertension, and malignancy).

The first sign of a malignancy, especially an intra-abdominal one, may be an enlarged Virchow&#x27;s node, a lymph node in the left supraclavicular area, in the vicinity where the thoracic duct empties into the left brachiocephalic vein, right between where the left subclavian vein and left internal jugular join (i.e., the left Pirogoff angle). When the thoracic duct is blocked or damaged a large amount of lymph can quickly accumulate in the pleural cavity, this situation is called chylothorax.

==Additional images==
==See also==

* Lymph duct
* Lymphatic system

==References==
==External links==
* — &quot;The thoracic duct and azygos venous network&quot;
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="9" end="16" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263629" start="22" end="35" title="Thoracic duct" label="thoracic duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708222" start="213" end="223" title="lymph duct" label="lymph duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q712604" start="232" end="248" title="lymphatic system" label="lymphatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263586" start="270" end="290" title="right lymphatic duct" label="right lymphatic duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093272" start="355" end="369" title="cisterna chyli" label="cisterna chyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778758" start="410" end="423" title="aortic hiatus" label="aortic hiatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337247" start="439" end="460" title="Posterior mediastinal" label="posterior mediastinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q337247" start="474" end="494" title="superior mediastinum" label="superior mediastinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="577" end="605" title="circulatory system" label="systemic (blood) circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668394" start="613" end="625" title="venous angle" label="venous angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q509244" start="654" end="659" title="chyle" label="chyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179422" start="730" end="735" title="lymph" label="lymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q179422" start="766" end="771" title="lymph" label="lymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263586" start="864" end="884" title="right lymphatic duct" label="right lymphatic duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q192398" start="951" end="965" title="pleural cavity" label="pleural cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090224" start="978" end="989" title="chylothorax" label="chylothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q9633" start="1222" end="1226" title="neck" label="neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668394" start="1265" end="1277" title="venous angle" label="venous angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093272" start="1353" end="1367" title="cisterna chyli" label="cisterna chyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="1542" end="1558" title="vertebral column" label="vertebral column"/>
<link wikidata="Q591137" start="1599" end="1610" title="azygos vein" label="azygos vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="1644" end="1653" title="diaphragm (anatomy)" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778758" start="1661" end="1674" title="aortic hiatus" label="aortic hiatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337247" start="1688" end="1709" title="Posterior mediastinal" label="posterior mediastinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q337247" start="1750" end="1771" title="posterior mediastinum" label="posterior mediastinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q615993" start="1795" end="1809" title="thoracic aorta" label="thoracic aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q591137" start="1832" end="1843" title="azygos vein" label="azygos vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q337247" start="2148" end="2168" title="superior mediastinum" label="superior mediastinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708353" start="2396" end="2407" title="alar fascia" label="alar fascia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214275" start="2441" end="2462" title="common carotid artery" label="common carotid artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q190140" start="2464" end="2482" title="Vagus nerve" label="vagus nerve (CN X)"/>
<link wikidata="Q540598" start="2488" end="2509" title="internal jugular vein" label="internal jugular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045547" start="2556" end="2570" title="carotid sheath" label="carotid sheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456456" start="2617" end="2636" title="thyrocervical trunk" label="thyrocervical trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q737313" start="2642" end="2655" title="phrenic nerve" label="phrenic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668394" start="2704" end="2716" title="venous angle" label="venous angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="2774" end="2802" title="circulatory system" label="systemic (blood) circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668394" start="2815" end="2827" title="venous angle" label="venous angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456429" start="3161" end="3173" title="lumbar trunk" label="lumbar trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q540598" start="3787" end="3808" title="internal jugular vein" label="internal jugular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q493430" start="3817" end="3832" title="subclavian vein" label="subclavian vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341350" start="3891" end="3911" title="brachiocephalic vein" label="brachiocephalic vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512768" start="3913" end="3934" title="external jugular vein" label="external jugular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644751" start="3936" end="3954" title="suprascapular vein" label="suprascapular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971384" start="3956" end="3980" title="Transverse cervical veins" label="transverse cervical vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306004" start="3985" end="3999" title="vertebral vein" label="vertebral vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q179422" start="4419" end="4424" title="lymph" label="lymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="4617" end="4623" title="breath" label="breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="4653" end="4666" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4683" end="4688" title="lymphatic_vessel#Structure" label="valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644667" start="5223" end="5242" title="Virchow&amp;#x27;s node" label="Virchow&amp;#x27;s node"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="5246" end="5256" title="lymph node" label="lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341350" start="5353" end="5373" title="brachiocephalic vein" label="brachiocephalic vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q192398" start="5583" end="5597" title="pleural cavity" label="pleural cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090224" start="5624" end="5635" title="chylothorax" label="chylothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708222" start="5676" end="5686" title="Lymph duct" label="Lymph duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q712604" start="5689" end="5705" title="Lymphatic system" label="Lymphatic system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303726" wikidata="Q191974" url="?curid=303726" title="Raymond Poincaré">
<text>Raymond Nicolas Landry Poincaré (; 20 August 1860 – 15 October 1934) was a French statesman who served as President of France from 1913 to 1920, and three times as Prime Minister of France. He was a conservative leader, primarily committed to political and social stability.

Trained in law, Poincaré was elected as a Deputy in 1887 and served in the cabinets of Dupuy and Ribot. In 1902, he co-founded the Democratic Republican Alliance, the most important centre-right party under the Third Republic, becoming prime minister in 1912 and serving as President of the Republic for 1913-20. He attempted to wield influence from what was normally a figurehead role, being noted for his strongly anti-German attitudes, visiting Russia in 1912 and 1914 to repair Franco-Russian relations, which had become strained over the Bosnian Crisis of 1908 and the Agadir Crisis of 1911, and playing an important role in the July Crisis of 1914. From 1917, he exercised less influence as his political rival Georges Clemenceau had become prime minister. At the Paris Peace Conference, he favoured Allied occupation of the Rhineland.

In 1922 Poincaré returned to power as prime minister. In 1923 he ordered the Occupation of the Ruhr to enforce payment of German reparations. By this time Poincaré was seen, especially in the English-speaking world, as an aggressive figure (&quot;Poincaré-la-Guerre&quot;) who had helped to cause the war in 1914 and who now favoured punitive anti-German policies. His government was defeated by the &quot;Cartel des Gauches&quot; at the elections of 1924. He served a third term as prime minister in 1926–1929.

Poincaré was an International Member of both the American Philosophical Society and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Nicknamed &quot;Le Lion&quot; (&quot;the Lion&quot;), Poincaré is an honored as a victorious wartime leader in France.

==Early years==

Born in Bar-le-Duc, Meuse, France, Raymond Poincaré was the son of Nanine Marie Ficatier, who was deeply religious and Nicolas Antonin Hélène Poincaré, a distinguished civil servant and meteorologist. Raymond was also the cousin of Henri Poincaré, the famous mathematician. Educated at the University of Paris, Raymond was called to the Paris Bar, and was for some time law editor of the &quot;Voltaire&quot;. He became at the age of 20 the youngest lawyer in France. and was appointed Secrétaire de la Conférence du Barreau de Paris. As a lawyer, he successfully defended Jules Verne in a libel suit presented against the famous author by the chemist, Eugène Turpin, inventor of the explosive melinite, who claimed that the &quot;mad scientist&quot; character in Verne&#x27;s book &quot;Facing the Flag&quot; was based on him. At the age of 26, Poincaré was elected to the Chamber of Deputies, making him the youngest deputy in the chamber.

==Early political career==

Poincaré had served for over a year in the Department of Agriculture when in 1887 he was elected deputy for the Meuse département. He made a great reputation in the Chamber as an economist, and sat on the budget commissions of 1890–1891 and 1892. He was minister of education, fine arts and religion in the first cabinet (AprilNovember 1893) of Charles Dupuy, and minister of finance in the second and third (May 1894January 1895). In Alexandre Ribot&#x27;s cabinet, Poincaré became minister of public instruction. Although he was excluded from the Radical cabinet which followed, the revised scheme of death duties proposed by the new ministry was based upon his proposals of the previous year. He became vice-president of the chamber in the autumn of 1895 and, in spite of the bitter hostility of the Radicals, retained his position in 1896 and 1897.

Along with other followers of &quot;Opportunist&quot; Léon Gambetta, Poincaré founded the Democratic Republican Alliance (ARD) in 1902, which became the most important centre-right party under the Third Republic.
In 1906, he returned to the ministry of finance in the short-lived Sarrien ministry. Poincaré had retained his practice at the Bar during his political career, and he published several volumes of essays on literary and political subjects.

&quot;Poincarism&quot; was a political movement over the period 1902–20. In 1902, the term was used by Georges Clemenceau to define a young generation of conservative politicians who had lost the idealism of the founders of the republic. After 1911, the term was used to mean &quot;national renewal&quot; when faced with the German threat. After the First World War, &quot;Poincarism&quot; refers to his support of business and financial interests. Poincaré was noted for his lifelong feud with Georges Clemenceau. Clemenceau and Poincaré absolutely detested one another and engaged in one of the longest running feuds in French politics. The British historian, Anthony Adamthwaite, described Poincaré as having an &quot;obsession with Clemenceau verging on paranoia&quot; and as a &quot;cold fish whose one passion was cats&quot;.

==First premiership==
Poincaré became Prime Minister in January 1912, and began a policy meant to block Germany&#x27;s ambitions for &quot;world power status&quot;, and worked to restore ties with France&#x27;s ally, Russia. During the Bosnian Crisis of 1908-1909, the Franco-Russian alliance had been badly strained when France refused to support Russia after Austria-Hungary, supported by Germany, threatened war. During the Second Moroccan Crisis in 1911, Russia refused to support France when Germany threatened war. The lack of French interest in supporting Russia during the Bosnia crisis was the nadir of Franco-Russian relations with Tsar Nicholas II making no effort to hide his displeasure at the lack of support from what was supposed to be his number one ally. At the time, Nicholas seriously considered abrogating the alliance, and was only stopped by the lack of an alternative. Russia&#x27;s refusal to support France during the Second Moroccan Crisis in 1911 reflected the enduring bitterness caused in St. Petersburg by France&#x27;s refusal to support Russia during the Bosnia crisis which ended with humiliation. Poincaré believed a rift in the Franco-Russian alliance could only benefit Germany. Germany would be encouraged to think that it was possible to threaten war with France as the Russians might not honour the alliance. In August 1912, Poincaré visited Russia to meet Tsar Nicholas in order to strengthen diplomatic ties. Poincaré believed the &quot;rapprochement&quot; would deter Germany from risking a &quot;demarche&quot; to war, and thus avoid a repeat of the Second Moroccan crisis. Tsarist Russia, despite its Francophilia, was generally disdainful of most of the leaders of the Third Republic, but Poincaré was an exception, regarded in St. Petersburg as a strong leader who meant what he said. The Russian Foreign Minister, Sergey Sazonov, in a report to Nicholas wrote that, after meeting Poincaré: &quot;Russia possesses a sure and faithful friend, endowed with a political spirit above the line and an inflexible will.&quot;.

At the same time, Poincaré favoured hoped to pursue an expansionist policy at the expense of Germany&#x27;s unofficial ally, the Ottoman Empire. For historical, economic and religious reasons, the French had traditionally been very interested in the Levant region of the Middle East. France had for centuries been the protector of the Maronite Christians, most recently in 1860, when France had threatened war following the massacres of the Maronites by local Muslims and Druze, while the Ottoman authorities did nothing. In the early years of the 20th century, there was an influential Levantine lobby within France to argue that it was France&#x27;s mission to take over Ottoman Syria (roughly what is now modern Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, the West Bank and the Gaza strip). Poincaré was a leading member of the &quot;Comité de l&#x27;Orient&quot;, the main group that advocated French expansionism in the Middle East. Poincaré&#x27;s willingness to begin a &quot;rapprochement&quot; with Imperial Germany in order to allow France to pursue its ambitions in the Middle East was strengthened by the outcome of the First Balkan War, where Bulgaria - whose army had been trained by a French military mission - rapidly defeated the Sultan&#x27;s army - whose forces had been trained by the German military. Bulgaria&#x27;s swift victory over the Ottomans was a great blow to German prestige, and correspondingly boosted French confidence, something that allowed Poincaré to approach Berlin from a position of strength.

Poincaré believed that the best policy was one of &quot;firmness&quot; where France would assert its interests forcefully while not excluding the possibility of better foreign relations. After defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71, French elites concluded that France could never hope to defeat Germany on its own, and the only way to defeat Germany would be with the help of another great power. Besides its military superiority, Germany had demographic superiority with 70 million people compared with France&#x27;s 40 million people (not including the colonies) together with economic superiority as the German economy was three times larger than France&#x27;s. Poincaré therefore rejected Caillaux&#x27;s proposal for a Franco-German alliance, arguing that Paris would be the junior partner, thus tantamount to ending France&#x27;s status as a great power. By contrast, the Treaty powers known as the Triple Entente being between two more or less equal powers, would preserve the current &quot;status quo ante bellum&quot;. Poincaré&#x27;s foreign policy was essentially defensive as he wished to maintain France as a great power in face of Germany&#x27;s demands for &quot;Weltpolitik&quot; (&quot;World politics&quot;) under which Germany sought to become the world&#x27;s dominant power. Poincaré&#x27;s entire foreign policy was based on the old Roman saying &quot;si vis pacem, para bellum&quot; (&quot;if you want peace, prepare for war&quot;). He wanted to strengthen both France and Russia to such a point that they presented such a decisive margin of superiority as to deter Germany from going to war with either power, but at same time his foreign policy was not relentlessly anti-German. Although he rejected Caillaux&#x27;s ideas, he was prepared to improve Franco-German relations on specific issues. A fiscal conservative, Poincaré was deeply concerned about the financial effects of an ever more costly arms race. Being from Lorraine, whether he was a &quot;revanchard&quot; (revanchist) is disputed. His family house was requisitioned for three years during the war. His speeches warned of the &quot;German menace&quot; and believed Caillaux&#x27;s policy of rapprochement with Berlin would create an impression of French weakness in Wilhelm II&#x27;s mind, being a man who only respected the strong. The Canadian historians, Holger Herwig and Richard Hamilton, described Poincaré as: &quot;Typically for a man on the right side of the republican center, Poincaré was anti-clerical, but not anti-religious, nationalist, but not bellicose, a defender of property rights, free markets and small government. No ideologue, he was a practical politician willing to work with any true Frenchmen but adamant in defending France from the Socialist Left, the Catholic Right and, of course, Germany&quot;.

==Presidency==
===Pre-war===
Poincaré won election as President of the Republic in 1913, in succession to Armand Fallières. The strong-willed Poincaré was the first president of the Third Republic since MacMahon in the 1870s to attempt to make that office into a site of power rather than an empty ceremonial role. He asserted his personality and took a special interest in foreign policy. On 20 January 1914, he became the first French president to visit the German embassy in Paris, a gesture clearly meant to show that he wanted to continue a policy of trying to improve German understanding of French aims.

In early 1914, Poincaré found himself caught up in scandal when the leftish politician Joseph Caillaux threatened to publish letters showing that Poincaré was engaged in secret talks with the Vatican using the Italian government as an intermediary, which would have outraged anti-clerical opinion in France. Caillaux refrained from publishing the documents after the President pressured Gaston Calmette, editor of &quot;Le Figaro&quot;, not to publish documents showing that Caillaux had been unfaithful to his first wife, was involved in questionable financial dealings implicating a pro-German foreign policy. The matter might have remained settled had not the second Madame Caillaux, upset that Calmette might publish love letters written to her while her husband was still married to her predecessor, gone to Calmette&#x27;s office on 16 March 1914 and shot him dead. The resulting scandal known as the Caillaux affair was the major French news story of the first half of 1914 causing Poincaré to joke that from now on he might send out Madame Poincaré to murder his political enemies since this method was working so well for Caillaux

===July Crisis===
On 28 June 1914, Poincaré was at the Longchamps racetrack when he received news of the assassination of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo,at 17:30 by his assistance. The President remarked that the assassination was a tragedy, ordered an aide to draft a message of condolence to the people of Austria-Hungary and stayed on to enjoy the rest of the races. The American historian, David Fromkin, has noted that the term &quot;July Crisis&quot; is actually a misnomer as it suggests that Europe was plunged into a crisis with the assassination of Franz Ferdinand on 28 June, but in fact the July crisis &quot;only&quot; began with the Austro-Hungarian ultimatum to Serbia, containing terms patently intended to inspire rejection, on 23 July 1914. The crisis was caused not by the assassination but rather by the decision in Vienna to &quot;use&quot; it as a pretext for a war with Serbia that many in the Austro-Hungarian government had long advocated.

In 1913, it had been announced that Poincaré would visit St. Petersburg in July 1914 to meet Tsar Nicholas II. The Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister, Count Leopold von Berchtold, decided it was too dangerous for Austria-Hungary to present the ultimatum while the Franco-Russian summit was in progress and decided to wait until Poincaré was on board the battleship &quot;France&quot; that would take him home. Accompanied by Premier René Viviani, Poincaré went to Russia for the second time (but for the first time as president) to reinforce the Franco-Russian Alliance. The transcripts of the St. Petersburg summit have been lost, but the surviving documentary evidence suggests that neither Nicholas nor Poincaré were particularly concerned about the situation in the Balkans. At the time of the St. Petersburg summit, there were rumours, but little hard evidence, that Vienna might use the assassination to start a war with Serbia. When the Austro-Hungarian ultimatum was presented to Serbia on 23 July, the French government was in the hands of Jean-Baptiste Bienvenu-Martin, Minister of Justice and acting Premier. Bienvenu-Martin&#x27;s inability to make decisions was especially exasperating to Philippe Berthelot, the most senior man in the Quai d&#x27;Orsay present in Paris, who complained that France was doing nothing while Europe was threatened with the prospect of war. Furthermore, Poincaré&#x27;s attempts to communicate with Paris were blocked by the Germans who jammed the radio messages between his ship and Paris.

It was not until Poincaré had arrived back in Paris on 30 July 1914 that he finally learned of the crisis, and immediately attempted to stop matters from escalating into war. With Poincaré&#x27;s full approval, Viviani sent a telegram to Nicholas affirming that:

in the precautionary measures and defensive measures to which Russia believes herself obliged to resort, she should not immediately proceed to any measure which might offer Germany a pretext for a total or partial mobilization of her forces. 

Additionally, orders were given for French forces to pull back six miles from the frontier with Germany.

The next day, 31 July, the German ambassador in Paris, Count Wilhelm von Schoen, presented to Viviani an ultimatum warning that, if Russian mobilisation continued, Germany would attack both France and Russia within the next 12 hours. The ultimatum also demanded that France abrogate at once the alliance with Russia, allow German troops to march into France unopposed and turn over the fortresses in Verdun and Toul to the Germans to be occupied as long as Germany was at war with Russia. In response, the French government ordered its ambassador in St. Petersburg, Maurice Paléologue, to find what was going on in Russia while refusing a request from General Joseph Joffre to order French mobilisation.

However, the German ultimatum of 31 July 1914 left the French with two options: either to accept the humiliation of accepting the ultimatum, which would be the effective end of France as an independent nation, or go to war with Germany. The American historian, Leonard Smith, together with the French historians, Annette Becker and Steéphane Audoin-Rouzeau, wrote that France had no option but to go to war as the prospect of accepting Schoen&#x27;s ultimatum was too humiliating for the vast majority of the French people. After Germany declared war on France following the rejection of the ultimatum, Poincaré appeared before the National Assembly to announce that France was now at war forming the doctrine of the &quot;union sacrée&quot; in which he announced that: &quot;nothing will break the &quot;union sacrée&quot; in the face of the enemy.&quot; « Dans la guerre qui s&#x27;engage, la France […] sera héroïquement défendue par tous ses fils, dont rien ne brisera devant l&#x27;ennemi l&#x27;union sacrée »
(&quot;In the coming war, France will be heroically defended by all its sons, whose sacred union will not break in the face of the enemy&quot;).

===Later war===
Poincaré became increasingly sidelined after the accession to power of Georges Clemenceau as prime minister in 1917. He believed the Armistice happened too soon and that the French Army should have penetrated far deeper into Germany. At the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, negotiating the Treaty of Versailles, he wanted France to wrest the Rhineland from Germany to put it under Allied military control.

Ferdinand Foch urged Poincaré to invoke his powers as laid down in the constitution and take over the negotiations of the treaty due to worries that Clemenceau was not achieving France&#x27;s aims. He did not, and when the French Cabinet approved of the terms which Clemenceau obtained, Poincaré considered resigning, although again he refrained.

==Second premiership==

In 1920, Poincaré&#x27;s term as president came to an end, and two years later he returned to office as prime minister. Once again, his tenure was noted for its strong anti-German policies.

Frustrated at Germany&#x27;s unwillingness to pay reparations, Poincaré hoped for joint Anglo-French economic sanctions against it in 1922, while opposing military action. In April 1922, Poincaré was greatly alarmed by the Treaty of Rapallo, the beginning of a German-Soviet challenge to the international order established by the Treaty of Versailles. He was disturbed that British Prime Minister David Lloyd George did not share the French viewpoint, instead almost welcoming Rapallo as a chance to bring Soviet Russia into the international system. Poincaré came to believe by May 1922 that if Rapallo could not convince the British that Germany was out to undercut the Versailles system by whatever means necessary, then nothing would, in which case France would just have to act alone. Further adding to Poincaré&#x27;s fears was the worldwide propaganda campaign started in April 1922 blaming France for World War I as a means of disproving Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles, which would thereby undermine the French claim to reparations.
In the German-Soviet propaganda of the 1920s, the July Crisis of 1914 was portrayed as &quot;Poincaré-la-guerre&quot; (Poincaré&#x27;s war), in which Poincaré put into action the plans he had allegedly negotiated with Emperor Nicholas II in 1912 for the dismemberment of Germany. The French Communist newspaper &quot;L&#x27;Humanité&quot; ran a front-page cover-story accusing Poincaré and Nicholas II of being the two men who plunged the world into war in 1914. The &quot;Poincaré-la-guerre&quot; propaganda proved to be very effective in the 1920s.

Throughout the spring and summer of 1922, the British continued to spurn Poincaré&#x27;s offers of an alliance with Britain. Poincaré&#x27;s attempt to compromise with the British on German reparations failed in 1922. By December 1922 Poincaré was faced with British-American-German hostility and saw coal for French steel production and money for reconstructing the devastated industrial areas draining away.

Poincaré decided to occupy the Ruhr on 11 January 1923, to extract the reparations himself. This, according to historian Sally Marks, &quot;was profitable and caused neither the German hyperinflation, which began in 1922 and ballooned because of German responses to the Ruhr occupation, nor the franc&#x27;s 1924 collapse, which arose from French financial practices and the evaporation of reparations.&quot; The profits, after Ruhr-Rhineland occupation costs, were nearly 900 million gold marks. During the Ruhr crisis, Poincaré made a failed attempt to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. Poincaré lost the 1924 French legislative election &quot;more from the franc&#x27;s collapse and the ensuing taxation than from diplomatic isolation.&quot;

Hines H. Hall argues that Poincaré was not a vindictive nationalist. Despite his disagreements with Britain, he desired to preserve the Anglo-French entente. When he ordered the French occupation of the Ruhr valley in 1923, his aims were moderate. He did not try to revive Rhenish separatism. His major goal was the winning of German compliance with the Versailles treaty. Poincaré&#x27;s inflexible methods and authoritarian personality led to the failure of his diplomacy.

==Third premiership==

Financial crisis brought him back to power in 1926, and he once again became prime minister and finance minister until his retirement in 1929. As prime minister, he enacted a number of franc stabilization policies, retroactively known as the Poincaré Stabilization Law. His popularity as prime minister rose considerably following his return to the gold standard, so much so that his party won the April 1928 general election.

As early as 1915, Raymond Poincaré introduced a controversial denaturalization law which was applied to naturalized French citizens with &quot;enemy origins&quot; who had continued to maintain their original nationality. Through another law passed in 1927, the government could denaturalize any new citizen who committed acts contrary to French &quot;national interest&quot;.

==Resignation and death==

Due to his ill health, Poincaré resigned as prime minister in July 1929, refusing to serve another term as prime minister. He died in Paris on 15 October 1934 at the age of 74.

==Family==
His brother, Lucien Poincaré (1862–1920), a physicist, became inspector-general of public instruction in 1902. He is the author of &quot;La Physique moderne&quot; (1906) and &quot;L&#x27;Électricité&quot; (1907).

Jules Henri Poincaré (1854–1912), an even more distinguished physicist and mathematician, was his first cousin.

==See also==
* French entry into World War I
* Interwar France

==Citations==
==Sources==
* 
* Herwig, Holger &amp; Richard Hamilton. &quot;Decisions for War, 1914-1917&quot; (2004)
* , review
* Marks, Sally &#x27;1918 and After. The Postwar Era&#x27;, in Gordon Martel (ed.), &quot;The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered&quot; 2nd ed. (London: Routledge, 1999)
* 

==Further reading==
* Bernard, Philippe, Henri Dubief &amp; Thony Forster, &quot;The Decline of the Third Republic, 1914–1938&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985, oclc: &quot;894680106&quot;
* Clark, Christopher, &quot;The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914&quot;, New York: Harper Collins, 2012.
* Gooch, G.P. &quot;Before the war: studies in diplomacy&quot; (2 vol 1936, 1938) online vol 2 pp 137–199.
* Keiger, John F. V. &quot;Raymond Poincaré and the Ruhr crisis.&quot; &quot;French Foreign and Defence Policy, 1918-1940&quot; (Routledge, 2005) pp. 59-80.
* Keiger, John F. V. &quot;Raymond Poincaré&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2002).
* Mayeur, Jean-Marie, Madeleine Rebirioux &amp; J. R. Foster, &quot;The Third Republic from its Origins to the Great War, 1871-1914&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988
* Wright, Gordon, &quot;Raymond Poincare and the French Presidency&quot;, New York: Octagon Books, 1967, oclc: &quot;405223&quot;
* Huddleston, Sisley, &quot;Poincaré: A Biographical Portrait,&quot;, Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company, 1924

===Primary sources===
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;The Origins of the War&quot;, London: Cassell, 1922, online
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;The memoirs of Raymond Poincare 1912&quot; (1926) online

* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;The Memoirs Of Raymond Poincare 1913-1914&quot; (1928) online
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: The Day After Agadir, 1912&quot; (Vol. I) &quot;online , in French&quot;
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: The Balkans on Fire, 1912&quot; (Vol. II) &quot;online , in French&quot;
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: Europe Under Arms, 1913&quot; (Vol. III) &quot;online , in French&quot;
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: The Sacred Union, 1914&quot; (Vol. IV) &quot;online, in French&quot;
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: The Invasion, 1914&quot; (Vol. V)
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: The Trenches, 1915&quot; (Vol. VI)
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: Siege War, 1915&quot; (Vol. VII &quot; online, in French&quot;
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: Verdun, 1916&quot; (Vol. VIII)
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: The Troubled Year, 1917&quot; (Vol. IX)
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: Victory and Armistice, 1918&quot; (Vol. X)
* Poincaré, Raymond, &quot;In the Service of France: In Search of Peace, 1919&quot; (Vol. XI)

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="0" end="31" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Nicolas Landry Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="106" end="125" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="164" end="188" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q356032" start="363" end="368" title="Charles Dupuy" label="Dupuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q358387" start="373" end="378" title="Alexandre Ribot" label="Ribot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344776" start="407" end="437" title="Democratic Republican Alliance" label="Democratic Republican Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="487" end="501" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="692" end="703" title="Anti-German sentiment" label="anti-German"/>
<link wikidata="Q164771" start="850" end="863" title="Agadir Crisis" label="Agadir Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q917435" start="910" end="921" title="July Crisis" label="July Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="993" end="1011" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="1046" end="1068" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="1107" end="1116" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="1196" end="1218" title="Occupation of the Ruhr" label="Occupation of the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940552" start="1525" end="1543" title="Cartel des Gauches" label="Cartel des Gauches"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="1681" end="1711" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="1720" end="1757" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="1904" end="1914" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2015" end="2046" title="Nicolas Antonin Hélène Poincaré" label="Nicolas Antonin Hélène Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="2082" end="2095" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="2128" end="2142" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="2186" end="2205" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992888" start="2399" end="2429" title="Conférence du Barreau de Paris" label="Conférence du Barreau de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="2469" end="2480" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q907550" start="2549" end="2562" title="Eugène Turpin" label="Eugène Turpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189298" start="2590" end="2598" title="picric acid" label="melinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q221765" start="2684" end="2699" title="Facing the Flag" label="Facing the Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q320283" start="2770" end="2789" title="Chamber of Deputies (France)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631" start="2979" end="2984" title="Meuse (department)" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q356032" start="3212" end="3225" title="Charles Dupuy" label="Charles Dupuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q358387" start="3302" end="3317" title="Alexandre Ribot" label="Alexandre Ribot"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="3470" end="3482" title="Inheritance tax" label="death duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q334173" start="3757" end="3768" title="Opportunism" label="Opportunist"/>
<link wikidata="Q295090" start="3775" end="3788" title="Léon Gambetta" label="Léon Gambetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344776" start="3811" end="3841" title="Democratic Republican Alliance" label="Democratic Republican Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="3918" end="3932" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q718698" start="4001" end="4008" title="Ferdinand Sarrien" label="Sarrien"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="4277" end="4295" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="5045" end="5059" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="5224" end="5230" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167246" start="5243" end="5257" title="Bosnian crisis" label="Bosnian Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="5368" end="5383" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q164771" start="5434" end="5456" title="Second Moroccan Crisis" label="Second Moroccan Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="5649" end="5665" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q987363" start="6486" end="6499" title="rapprochement" label="rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q438489" start="6869" end="6883" title="Sergey Sazonov" label="Sergey Sazonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7204" end="7218" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="7325" end="7331" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191820" start="7410" end="7429" title="Lebanese Maronite Christians" label="Maronite Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="7547" end="7552" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076765" start="7748" end="7761" title="Ottoman Syria" label="Ottoman Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="7797" end="7804" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="7806" end="7812" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="7814" end="7820" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="7826" end="7835" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="7844" end="7854" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="8195" end="8211" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="8219" end="8227" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="8805" end="8824" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="9510" end="9524" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q752847" start="9603" end="9625" title="status quo ante bellum" label="status quo ante bellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q340202" start="9783" end="9794" title="Weltpolitik" label="Weltpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="10425" end="10444" title="Fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="10527" end="10536" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="10549" end="10557" title="Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136718" start="10600" end="10610" title="Revanchism" label="revanchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="10859" end="10869" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20172310" start="10951" end="10964" title="Holger Herwig" label="Holger Herwig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10969" end="10985" title="Richard Hamilton (historian)" label="Richard Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="11476" end="11501" title="President of France" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q296673" start="11528" end="11544" title="Armand Fallières" label="Armand Fallières"/>
<link wikidata="Q158838" start="11625" end="11633" title="Patrice MacMahon, duc de Magenta" label="MacMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q450463" start="12121" end="12136" title="Joseph Caillaux" label="Joseph Caillaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495566" start="12421" end="12436" title="Gaston Calmette" label="Gaston Calmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="12454" end="12463" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q508672" start="12941" end="12956" title="Caillaux affair" label="Caillaux affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132484" start="13075" end="13090" title="Henriette Poincaré" label="Madame Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542489" start="13230" end="13240" title="Longchamp Racecourse" label="Longchamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="13280" end="13293" title="Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="13301" end="13325" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="13329" end="13337" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528543" start="13579" end="13592" title="David Fromkin" label="David Fromkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q917435" start="13624" end="13635" title="July Crisis" label="July Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13849" end="13858" title="July Crisis#Austro-Hungarian ultimatum (23 July)" label="ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="13862" end="13868" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="14249" end="14260" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q93371" start="14301" end="14328" title="Count Leopold Berchtold" label="Count Leopold von Berchtold"/>
<link wikidata="Q49644" start="14515" end="14533" title="French battleship France" label="&amp;quot;France&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q431074" start="14583" end="14595" title="René Viviani" label="René Viviani"/>
<link wikidata="Q243799" start="14696" end="14719" title="Franco-Russian Alliance" label="Franco-Russian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q325552" start="15199" end="15228" title="Jean-Baptiste Bienvenu-Martin" label="Jean-Baptiste Bienvenu-Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069858" start="15352" end="15370" title="Philippe Berthelot" label="Philippe Berthelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q214018" start="16360" end="16378" title="Wilhelm von Schoen" label="Wilhelm von Schoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164102" start="16865" end="16883" title="Maurice Paléologue" label="Maurice Paléologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q207958" start="16959" end="16972" title="Joseph Joffre" label="Joseph Joffre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431580" start="17727" end="17739" title="union sacrée" label="union sacrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="18253" end="18271" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="18315" end="18324" title="Armistice with Germany (Compiègne)" label="Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="18423" end="18453" title="Paris Peace Conference of 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="18471" end="18491" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="18523" end="18532" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192615" start="18588" end="18602" title="Ferdinand Foch" label="Ferdinand Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q155796" start="19374" end="19391" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1922)" label="Treaty of Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="19549" end="19567" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q917435" start="20252" end="20263" title="July Crisis" label="July Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="20428" end="20439" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137404" start="20519" end="20534" title="L&amp;#x27;Humanité" label="L&amp;#x27;Humanité"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="21185" end="21200" title="Occupation of the Ruhr" label="occupy the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q775993" start="21792" end="21824" title="1924 French legislative election" label="1924 French legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q778223" start="22920" end="22936" title="denaturalization" label="denaturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164879" start="22974" end="22989" title="French citizens" label="French citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265678" start="23464" end="23479" title="Lucien Poincaré" label="Lucien Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="23665" end="23685" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Jules Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291991" start="23793" end="23822" title="French entry into World War I" label="French entry into World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788617" start="23825" end="23840" title="Interwar France" label="Interwar France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303727" wikidata="Q3498665" url="?curid=303727" title="Mitteleuropa">
<text> (), meaning Middle Europe, is one of the German terms for Central Europe. The term has acquired diverse cultural, political and historical connotations. 

The Prussian vision of was a pan-Germanist state-centric imperium, an idea that was later adopted in a modified form by Nazi geopoliticians.

== Basis ==
The German term &quot;Mitteleuropa&quot; is usually considered to have negative connotations attributed to German imperialism, and has been defined in various ways over time. In Austria, Czechia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Romania, Croatia and northern Italy, especially in Friuli and Trieste, the common understanding of Mitteleuropa is somewhat different from that in Germany: an imperial term primarily equated with the successor states of the former Habsburg monarchy. The Central European Order of St. George has its centers mainly in the area of the former Austrian Empire.

==Conceptual history==

===Medieval migrations===
By the mid-14th century, when the Black Death brought an end to the 500-year-long process, populations from Western Europe had moved into the &quot;Wendish&quot; Central European areas of far beyond the Elbe and Saale rivers. They had moved along the Baltic coast from Holstein to Farther Pomerania (in the Kingdom of Poland), up the Oder river to the Moravian Gate, down the Danube into the Kingdom of Hungary and into the Slovene lands of Carniola. From the mouth of the Vistula river and the Prussian region, the Teutonic Knights by force continued the migration through the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, up to the Estonian Reval (Tallinn) in the Livonian Confederation (encompassing the areas of present-day Estonia, Latvia and northern Lithuania). They had also settled the mountainous border regions of Bohemia and Moravia and formed a distinct social class of citizens in towns like Prague, Havlíčkův Brod (German Brod), Olomouc (Olmütz) and Brno (Brünn). They had moved into the Polish Kraków Voivodeship, the Western Carpathians and Transylvania (Siebenbürgen), introducing the practice of crop rotation and German town law.

===Different visions of ===
In the first half of the 19th century, ideas of a Central-European federation between the Russian Empire and the West European great powers arose, based on geographical, ethnic and economic considerations.

The term was formally introduced by Karl Ludwig von Bruck and Lorenz von Stein, a first theorization of the term attempted in 1848, with the aim of a series of interlocking economic confederations. However, plans advocated by the Austrian minister-president, Prince Felix of Schwarzenberg, foundered on the resistance of the German states. After the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 and the Prussian-led unification of Germany under Chancellor Otto von Bismarck in 1871, In Austria, the concept evolved as an alternative to the German question, equivalent to an amalgamation of the states of the German Confederation and the multi-ethnic Austrian Empire under the firm leadership of the Habsburg dynasty.

Political and ethnic visions of a began to dominate in Germany. After the Revolutions of 1848 liberal theorists like Friedrich List and Heinrich von Gagern, socialists and then later groups like the German National Liberal Party would adopt the idea. However, a distinct Pan-German notion accompanied by the concept of a renewed settler colonialism would become associated with the idea. In the German Empire, the concentrated on the achievements by ethnic Germans in Central Europe on the basis of ethnocentrism with significant anti-Slavic notions, as propagated by the Pan-German League. By 1914 and the , , meaning central Europe under the control of Germany, had become a part of German hegemonic policy.

===The Prussian Plan===
The plan was to achieve an economic and cultural hegemony over Central Europe by the German Empire and subsequent economic and financial exploitation of this region combined with direct annexations, making of puppet states, and the creation of puppet states for a buffer between Germany and Russia.
The issue of Central Europe was taken by German politician Friedrich Naumann in 1915 in his work . According to his thought, this part of Europe was to become a politically and economically integrated bloc subjected to German rule. In his program, Naumann also supported programs of Germanization and Hungarization as well. In his book, Naumann used imperialist rhetoric combined with praises to nature, and imperial condescension towards non-German people, while advising politicians to show some &quot;flexibility&quot; towards non-German languages to achieve &quot;harmony&quot;. Naumann wrote that it would stabilize the whole Central-European region. Some parts of the planning included designs on creating a new state in Crimea and have the Baltic states to be client states.

The ruling political elites of Germany accepted the plan during World War I while drawing out German war aims and plans for the new order of Europe. was to be created by establishing a series of puppet states whose political, economic and military aspects would be under the control of the German Reich. The entire region was to serve as an economic backyard of Germany, whose exploitation would enable the German sphere of influence to better compete against strategic rivals like Britain, the United States. Political, military and economic organization was to be based on German domination, with commercial treaties imposed on the newly-created states of Poland and Ukraine, working as German protectorates. It was believed that the German working classes could be appeased by German politicians through the economic benefits of territorial annexation, a new economic sphere of influence, and exploitation of conquered countries for the material benefit of Germany. Partial realization of these plans was reflected in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, where guarantees of economic and military domination over Ukraine by Germany were laid out. The plan was viewed as a threat by the British Empire, which concluded it would destroy British continental trade and diminish its military power.

===Other visions of ===
While describes a geographical location, it also is the word denoting a political concept of a German-dominated and exploited Central European union that was put into motion during the First World War. The historian Jörg Brechtefeld describes as the following:
Mitteleuropean literature of the period between the end of the 19th century and World War II has been the subject of renewed interest, starting in the 1960s. Pioneers in this revival have been Claudio Magris, Roberto Calasso, and the Italian publishing house Adelphi. In the 1920s, French scholar Pierre Renouvin published eleven volumes of documents explaining that Germany decided to bail out Austria which they believed was threatened with economic disintegration by Serbian and other nationalist movements. J Keiger maintained in the debate on the Fischer Controversy that confirmed this opinion rebutting revisionist arguments that Germany was looking for an excuse to occupy Austro-Hungary.

German Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg&#x27;s plan prepared for a Central European Economic Union. Published in September 1914, the program for interdependent development was designed to include France in a Central European Customs Federation. The German occupation of Belgium was the first phase in this process, which ultimately failed to come to fruition. Plans to create a Duchy of Flanders and a Grand Duchy of Warsaw were discussed as political units of future &quot;localized&quot; administration. The original economic plan was conceived pre-1914 by Walther Rathenau and Alfred von Gwinner, respectively, with the legal support of Hans Delbrück. It was a Customs Union consistent with a history of the and German Confederation of the 19th century, in which German philosophers believed in the wider sustainability of a Greater Europe. There were concerns from Schoenbeck and others that it would make Germany too inward-looking, but gained the support of von Hertling, later a Chancellor and Kurt Kuhlmann, the diplomat. The major sticking point was continued and exclusive German access to Austrian markets, while in the mind of others, like von Falkenhausen, mastery of competition was not possible before military mastery of Europe.

An extension of was the Longwy-Briey basin. Capturing this mining area west of Alsace-Lorraine, already annexed since 1871, was a major part of the Plan and Germany&#x27;s war aims. The high plateau dominated the French interior, giving the German army a wide range of fire. But the area also contained immensely prized deposits of iron. These were essential to both France and German war efforts. The development of heavy industry was a central feature of economic policy &quot;under Imperial Protective Administration.&quot; Initially, Roedern, the treasurer, was deeply skeptical that a plan to &quot;incorporate&quot; French assets into a customs union and federation would succeed, but civilian doubts were overcome by January 1915, and by 26 August 1916, it was official German policy.

The first port of was Antwerp: Belgium&#x27;s occupation in August 1914 was suggestive of partition. Anglophile Albert Ballin, therefore, set up a &quot;German–Belgian trading company&quot; to transfer assets and people from the occupied territories back to the Reich. The Post Office was to become German, and so too the railways, and the banks, all overseen by an Economics Committee, which would be a liaison group between private enterprise and the public sector. Belgian capital markets were absorbed into Karl von Lumm&#x27;s Report, and all currency issued was backed by the . German obsession with the &quot;Race to the Sea&quot; and right to Belgian seaports continued to be a major policy initiative in the Memorandum of &quot;Attachement&quot; maritime security persisted in the German-Luxembourg Customs Association finally completed on 25 November 1915. Much of the theoretical work would be carried out by Six Economic Associations discussed in memoranda from Spring 1915 designated so as to set Germany free from British tutelage.

 also had its opponents inside Germany. Erich Marcks, a historian from Magdeburg and a member of SPD, had referred to &quot;that great European idea&quot; before the war. And then, in March 1916, he urged the Chancellor to renew calls in the for a public debate on the war&#x27;s aims.

==Culture==
Mitteleuropa is also used in a cultural sense to denote a fertile region whose thought has brought many fruits, artistic and cultural. It is also sometimes denote with the expression &quot;Habsburg thought and culture.&quot; Polish poet Zbigniew Herbert wrote the poem , included in his 1992 book &quot;Rovigo&quot; (Wrocław).

Among the main writers of the literary are Joseph Roth (1894–1939), Stefan Zweig (1881–1942), Arnold Zweig (1887–1968) and Lion Feuchtwanger (1884–1958). Roth&#x27;s novel &quot;Radetzky March&quot; is a study of the decline and fall of the Habsburg Monarchy, via the story of a family’s elevation to the nobility. Outside of fiction, eccentric scholars of Old Austria include Eugen Heinrich Schmitt and Josef Popper-Lynkeus.

==See also==

* Central Europe
* 
* Geographical centre of Europe
* Germans of Romania
* for a plan by Polish leaders after World War I to create a similar political structure across the same region, but for the benefit and security of Poland.
* Judeopolonia
* League of East European States
* for the governing authority that actually governed much of this region after Russian surrender in WWI
* Puppet state for a list of nations founded by Germany for the purpose of creating this block
* Ukrainian State for the Ukrainian government Germany supported for this purpose.
* , the closest the Germans came for a plan for .
*Maciej Górny: Concept of Mitteleuropa, in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.

==References==
===Bibliography===
* JFV Keiger, &quot;The Fischer Controversy, the War Origins Debate and France: A non-history of Cambridge, Journal of Contemporary History&quot; (London 2010), pp. 363–375
* Fritz Fischer, &quot;The War Aims of Germany&quot;, 1914–1918, (1967)
* J. Brechtefeld, &quot;Mitteleuropa and German politics. 1848 to the present&quot; (London 1996)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3498665" start="0" end="0" title="Mitteleuropa" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3498665" start="13" end="26" title="Mitteleuropa" label="Middle Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="42" end="48" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="59" end="73" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="160" end="167" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155812" start="185" end="198" title="Pan-Germanism" label="pan-Germanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="213" end="221" title="imperium" label="imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="276" end="280" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="424" end="435" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27921407" start="797" end="816" title="Order of St. George (Habsburg-Lorraine)" label="Order of St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="968" end="979" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q158281" start="1082" end="1089" title="Wends" label="Wendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="1137" end="1141" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678" start="1146" end="1151" title="Saale" label="Saale"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="1203" end="1211" title="Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q262269" start="1215" end="1232" title="Farther Pomerania" label="Farther Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="1268" end="1272" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q765881" start="1286" end="1299" title="Moravian Gate" label="Moravian Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1310" end="1316" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="1326" end="1344" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="1358" end="1365" title="Slovenes" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="1375" end="1383" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="1407" end="1414" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q918723" start="1429" end="1437" title="Prussia (region)" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="1450" end="1466" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="1512" end="1536" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="1564" end="1571" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458532" start="1580" end="1602" title="Livonian Confederation" label="Livonian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="1739" end="1746" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="1751" end="1758" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1820" end="1826" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q954596" start="1828" end="1842" title="Havlíčkův Brod" label="Havlíčkův Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q81137" start="1858" end="1865" title="Olomouc" label="Olomouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="1879" end="1883" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q94449" start="1924" end="1942" title="Kraków Voivodeship (14th century – 1795)" label="Kraków Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q927233" start="1948" end="1967" title="Western Carpathians" label="Western Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="1972" end="1984" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q191258" start="2029" end="2042" title="crop rotation" label="crop rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981896" start="2047" end="2062" title="German town law" label="German town law"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="2160" end="2170" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="2220" end="2231" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q87194" start="2336" end="2357" title="Karl Ludwig von Bruck" label="Karl Ludwig von Bruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q61956" start="2362" end="2378" title="Lorenz von Stein" label="Lorenz von Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q547074" start="2559" end="2588" title="Prince Felix of Schwarzenberg" label="Prince Felix of Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="2650" end="2669" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="2699" end="2721" title="unification of Germany" label="unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="2739" end="2756" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522713" start="2823" end="2838" title="German question" label="German question"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="2891" end="2911" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="2933" end="2948" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2982" end="2998" title="House of Lorraine" label="Habsburg dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="3075" end="3094" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="3095" end="3102" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159917" start="3118" end="3132" title="Friedrich List" label="Friedrich List"/>
<link wikidata="Q65230" start="3137" end="3156" title="Heinrich von Gagern" label="Heinrich von Gagern"/>
<link wikidata="Q694299" start="3207" end="3229" title="National Liberal Party (Germany)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q155812" start="3272" end="3282" title="Pan-Germanism" label="Pan-German"/>
<link wikidata="Q716815" start="3330" end="3349" title="settler colonialism" label="settler colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3396" end="3409" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="3451" end="3465" title="ethnic Germans" label="ethnic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="3500" end="3513" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406911" start="3531" end="3542" title="anti-Slavism" label="anti-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q559398" start="3573" end="3590" title="Pan-German League" label="Pan-German League"/>
<link wikidata="Q54427" start="3776" end="3793" title="cultural hegemony" label="cultural hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="3799" end="3813" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3821" end="3834" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853443" start="3873" end="3885" title="exploitation of labour" label="exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4027" end="4033" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76811" start="4094" end="4111" title="Friedrich Naumann" label="Friedrich Naumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="4318" end="4331" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="4336" end="4349" title="Hungarization" label="Hungarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="4762" end="4768" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="4782" end="4795" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q510684" start="4912" end="4927" title="Septemberprogramm" label="German war aims"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5300" end="5307" title="British Empire" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5313" end="5326" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="5514" end="5527" title="protectorates" label="protectorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="5561" end="5576" title="working classes" label="working classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="5680" end="5688" title="economic" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853443" start="5714" end="5726" title="exploitation of labour" label="exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="5843" end="5866" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="6227" end="6233" title="German Empire" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6317" end="6332" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q274404" start="6586" end="6600" title="Claudio Magris" label="Claudio Magris"/>
<link wikidata="Q669956" start="6602" end="6617" title="Roberto Calasso" label="Roberto Calasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q355301" start="6652" end="6659" title="Adelphi Edizioni" label="Adelphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098448" start="6690" end="6705" title="Pierre Renouvin" label="Pierre Renouvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77113" start="7109" end="7138" title="Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg" label="Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7166" end="7197" title="Central European Economic Union" label="Central European Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7307" end="7342" title="Central European Customs Federation" label="Central European Customs Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18108964" start="7348" end="7376" title="German occupation of Belgium during World War I" label="German occupation of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200776" start="7573" end="7582" title="Indigenization" label="localized"/>
<link wikidata="Q135645" start="7658" end="7674" title="Walther Rathenau" label="Walther Rathenau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7679" end="7697" title="Alfred von Gwinner" label="Alfred von Gwinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q76575" start="7739" end="7752" title="Hans Delbrück" label="Hans Delbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="7814" end="7834" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="8424" end="8439" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152468" start="8493" end="8497" title="Schlieffen Plan" label="Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="8918" end="8927" title="skeptical" label="skeptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q66133" start="9250" end="9263" title="Albert Ballin" label="Albert Ballin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9504" end="9523" title="Economics Committee" label="Economics Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9928" end="9965" title="German-Luxembourg Customs Association" label="German-Luxembourg Customs Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10058" end="10083" title="Six Economic Associations" label="Six Economic Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q96023" start="10225" end="10237" title="Erich Marcks (historian)" label="Erich Marcks"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="10282" end="10285" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q161363" start="10721" end="10737" title="Zbigniew Herbert" label="Zbigniew Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q78509" start="10855" end="10866" title="Joseph Roth" label="Joseph Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q78491" start="10880" end="10892" title="Stefan Zweig" label="Stefan Zweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q75868" start="10906" end="10918" title="Arnold Zweig" label="Arnold Zweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q77024" start="10935" end="10952" title="Lion Feuchtwanger" label="Lion Feuchtwanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q610428" start="10990" end="11004" title="Radetzky March (novel)" label="Radetzky March"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="11053" end="11070" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11189" end="11211" title="Eugen Heinrich Schmitt" label="Eugen Heinrich Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78903" start="11216" end="11236" title="Josef Popper-Lynkeus" label="Josef Popper-Lynkeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="11255" end="11269" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133467" start="11275" end="11304" title="Geographical centre of Europe" label="Geographical centre of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q700469" start="11307" end="11325" title="Germans of Romania" label="Germans of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205372" start="11485" end="11497" title="Judeopolonia" label="Judeopolonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509039" start="11500" end="11530" title="League of East European States" label="League of East European States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11637" end="11649" title="Puppet state#Established by the German Empire" label="Puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508143" start="11732" end="11747" title="Ukrainian State" label="Ukrainian State"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303729" wikidata="Q1526049" url="?curid=303729" title="Connah's Quay Nomads F.C.">
<text>Connah&#x27;s Quay Nomads Football Club () is a Welsh professional football club based in Connah&#x27;s Quay, Flintshire. They play in the .

The club was founded in 1946 as Connah&#x27;s Quay Juniors and adopted the Connah&#x27;s Quay Nomads F.C. name in 1951. From 2008 to 2017, naming rights were controlled by Gap Personnel, a recruitment firm, and the club was consequently known as Gap Connah&#x27;s Quay. The club&#x27;s home ground is at Cae y Castell in Flint, and accommodates 1,000 spectators.

For the 2006–07 season, they temporarily played their home games in Flint due to drainage problems with the Deeside Stadium pitch.

In April 2013, the club announced that starting with the 2013–14 season, they would be using an all red home kit, accompanied by an all yellow away kit to complement the new logo which includes the traditional colours used in the Connah&#x27;s Quay Town crest.

On 2 March 2023 it was announced that from the 2023–24 season, they will play their home games in Flint due to behind the scenes tenancy problems with the owners of the Deeside Stadium.

==History==
===Early years===
Before the Nomads, two clubs represented the town. The first was Connah&#x27;s Quay, founded in 1890 and playing in the Golftyn area of the town. The club reached the Welsh Cup finals of 1908 and 1911, losing both times to Chester and Wrexham, respectively, but was disbanded soon after. A new club, Connah&#x27;s Quay &amp; Shotton, was formed in 1920, renting land at the rear of the Halfway House Hotel from the Northgate Brewery, and become members of the Welsh National League (North) as a fully professional outfit in 1922.

In 1928, the club moved to Dee Park, Shotton and won both the Welsh National League (North) championship and the prestigious Welsh Cup in 1929. In the final they defeated First Division Cardiff City 3–0 at Wrexham&#x27;s Racecourse Ground. Cardiff&#x27;s team contained several players who had beaten Arsenal in the 1927 FA Cup Final. Six months later Connah&#x27;s Quay &amp; Shotton folded with debts totalling more than £1,000, leaving Connah&#x27;s Quay Albion to carry the town&#x27;s football banner through the second war.

Formed in July 1946 as Connah&#x27;s Quay Juniors, the present-day club was the brainchild of the Everton and Wales centre-half T. G. Jones, a native of the town. Attracted by the reputation of the famous international, the Deeside youngsters flocked to join the new team which quickly became a major force in North Wales youth soccer, winning the Welsh Youth Cup in 1948.

By natural progression a senior team was formed and joined the Flintshire League in 1948. Success soon followed and Connah&#x27;s Quay Juniors reached the final of the Welsh Amateur Cup in 1950–51. Prior to the 1952–53 season, the club&#x27;s suffix was changed to Nomads and the team ventured into the Welsh League (North). Though unsuccessful in their challenge for the league title, Connah&#x27;s Quay once again contested the final of the Welsh Amateur Cup, this time winning the trophy against Caersws Amateurs. The club also reached the semi-final of the Welsh Senior Cup before going down to Football League side Chester at Wrexham&#x27;s Racecourse ground. Despite winning the North Wales Amateur Cup three times in the 1950s, Nomads moved into local football for seven years prior to rejoining the Welsh League in 1966, twice finishing as runners-up at the start of the 1970s.

In 1974, however, the club joined the newly formed Clwyd League and spent more than a dozen seasons at this level, winning the championship twice. Without doubt, Nomads&#x27; most successful season was 1980–81 when they won seven trophies including the Welsh Intermediate Cup, beating Newport YMCA in the final, and the Clwyd League without losing a game. Following three successful seasons in the Welsh Alliance, Connah&#x27;s Quay became founder members of the Cymru Alliance in 1990 and the League of Wales two seasons later.

Finishing 8th in the new national competition in 1992–93 was a fine achievement after a poor start as was Nomads&#x27; appearance in the semi-final of the Welsh Cup despite the disappointment of a 2–1 aggregate defeat against Clwyd rivals Rhyl. Neville Powell joined the club as player/manager in the summer of 1993 though he suffered a bad injury very early in his career at Connah&#x27;s Quay that would end his playing career. Nevertheless, he steadily built his team into one capable of challenging for a European place. Within twelve months of Powell&#x27;s arrival, Nomads won the North Wales Coast F.A. Cup and, in 1995–96, won the League of Wales League Cup, beating Ebbw Vale in the final at Caersws.

During the 1997–98 season the club finished seventh in the League of Wales, thus gaining entry into the FAW Premier Cup, and also reached the final of the Welsh Cup for the first time as Connah&#x27;s Quay Nomads. In the final, played at Wrexham&#x27;s Racecourse Ground, Bangor City scored a last-minute equaliser and won the cup in a penalty shoot-out when the teams finished level after extra time. The club&#x27;s home had remained at the Halfway Ground since its formation in 1946, but in July 1998 Nomads moved into the newly constructed athletics stadium at nearby Deeside College in Kelsterton after playing the previous season&#x27;s home matches 25 miles from Connah&#x27;s Quay at Rhyl&#x27;s Belle Vue Stadium. The Halfway Ground has since been demolished and is now the site of a residential development.

===Emergence===
Eighteen league victories during 2002–03 saw Nomads reach fifth place in the table, just a point short of a qualifying position for the UEFA Cup. The following season failed to live up to expectations and they finished in 12th place – a feat repeated a year later despite a poor start to that season.

In 2006–07, following protracted problems with drainage at the new ground that had caused numerous postponements and a consequent backlog of fixtures at the end of consecutive seasons, the club played at neighbouring Flint Town United&#x27;s Cae Y Castell ground whilst extensive reconstruction of the Deeside Stadium drainage system was undertaken. Nomads enjoyed a successful season, eventually finishing in fifth place after a disappointing late run of defeats.

During the following close season manager Neville Powell left to become Bangor City manager, followed by other members of the coaching staff and several senior players. Powell had previously captained Bangor for a number of years before moving to Connah&#x27;s Quay. Londoner Jim Hackett, formerly a youth coach at Chester City, was appointed manager and he was soon joined by Congleton Town manager Andy Lee as his assistant. Between them they assembled a fresh squad from scratch, including a number of players with previous associations with the two new men and only three players from the previous season, two of whom (Adam Dickinson and Christopher Williams) were under contract. The third, Gary Pinch, was made club captain. The changes were to continue the next close season though, when following the bereavement and retirement of several directors in a twelve-month period, Nomads were taken over in June 2008 and former Caernarfon Town boss Steve O&#x27;Shaughnessy was appointed manager.

After only one season, in which the club finished in ninth place, the club replaced O&#x27;Shaughnessy. First Hackett was re-appointed as an interim measure before moving to take up a coaching position in Hong Kong, whereupon Nomads appointed Chester born Mark McGregor player/manager at the start of season 2009–10. McGregor previously played in The Football League for Wrexham, where he began his career before transfers to Burnley, Blackpool and Port Vale, making more than 500 senior appearances in total.

Nomads narrowly missed out on the cut off for the Super 12 League, and began the 2010–11 league in the Cymru Alliance, which they subsequently won following a successful season including a Golden Boot award for striker Gary O&#x27;Toole, however the team was denied promotion to the Cymru Premier after failing to gain a domestic licence. Nomads won the league again in the 2011–12 season, becoming the first team to win back-to-back Championship titles in the history of the HGA Cymru Alliance League. Striker Gary O&#x27;Toole also won the Golden Boot award again and with The Nomads having successfully obtained a domestic licence, promotion back to the Welsh Premier League was secured for season 2012–13.

The 2012–13 season saw a good start for The Nomads with early victories over Port Talbot Town, Llanelli and Newtown. A string of poor results left The Nomads in the lower half of the Welsh Premier League, and prior to the split, they were still in contention to qualify for the championship conference phase of the league season, and with a 6–3 away victory at Bala Town appeared to have secured a place in the top six championship conference, but a controversial decision saw The Nomads deducted a point for the brief fielding of mid-season signing Lee Davey, who was ineligible to play for the Nomads having already played for two other teams in the 2012–13 season. The Nomads were deducted one point, which saw Carmarthen Town elevated to sixth place and The Nomads left in the play-off conference to fight against relegation and attempt to secure a lucrative UEFA Europa League place. The Nomads reached the play-off, having finished eighth in the league, but were beaten 1–0 by eventual Europa League qualifiers Bala Town.

The 2012–13 season also saw the rise to fame of The Nomads Academy&#x27;s best product thus far, as Rhys Healey scored 14 goals in 21 appearances in all competitions, catching the eye of Cardiff City, signing for the side, who at the time were in the English Premier League. Healey went on to make his Cardiff City debut in the final game of the season against Chelsea.

In January 2015 it was announced that Mark McGregor had left the club by mutual consent after five and a half years at the club and First Team Coach Allan Bickerstaff and Assistant Manager Jay Catton would take charge of the team for the remainder of the 2014–15 Welsh Premier League season. The remainder of the season saw a good run for The Nomads which resulted in finishing seventh in the league, placing the team in the UEFA Europa League playoffs, only to lose 3–2 to Aberystwyth Town F.C. Following the conclusion of the 2014–15 season, Nomads winger, Sean Miller was named as the Welsh Premier League Young Player of the season.

Ahead of the 2015–16 season, Manager, Allan Bickerstaff signed a new three-year deal with the club. However, after winning just 3 of the first 11 games of the 2015–16 season, Bickerstaff parted ways with the club. Former Manchester City captain, Andy Morrison was appointed as first team manager on 2 November 2015.

Morrison turned The Nomads&#x27; season around following his appointment, and led the club to a record highest league position, finishing fourth behind Champions, The New Saints, Bala Town and MBi Llandudno respectively. The fourth-placed finish ensured The Nomads place in the Welsh Premier League&#x27;s Europa League Play-offs, with the benefit of home advantage having finished the highest in the league out of the qualifying teams. In their semi-final, The Nomads defeated Carmarthen Town 2–0. This secured a final fixture with Airbus UK Broughton, which The Nomads won 1–0 thanks to a late Wes Baynes strike, thus securing the club&#x27;s first place in European football as they secured a spot in the 2016–17 UEFA Europa League First Qualifying Round.

The 2016–17 season started early due to the UEFA Europa League qualification, with a two legged first qualifying round clash with Norwegian side, Stabæk. The Nomads held Stabæk to a 0–0 draw at Rhyl before traveling to Fredrikstad, Norway where an early Callum Morris strike secured an historic 1–0 victory for The Nomads. The result marked the first time in 24 years and 214 games that a Welsh side involved in European competition had kept two clean sheets across the two legs of a European tie. The Nomads would go on to lose 3–1 on aggregate to Serbian side FK Vojvodina in the second qualifying round. This would not be the end of the success for the club in the 2016–17 campaign however as the side went on to finish a record high position in the league, finishing second behind champions, TNS. The Nomads boasted the best defensive record in the league and as a result qualified for both the UEFA Europa League qualifying round as well as the Scottish Challenge Cup for the 2017–18 season.

===League and cup success===
The Nomads again achieved surprise success in the UEFA Europa League in the 2017–18 campaign as they defeated Finnish side, HJK Helsinki 1–0 at Bangor City Stadium before losing out 3–1 on aggregate. The 2017–18 season was one of special occasion for the club however, as for the first time under the guise of Connah&#x27;s Quay Nomads, the club lifted the Welsh Cup thanks to a 4–1 victory over Aberystwyth Town in the final held at Newtown. The club also finished third in the league behind champions TNS and second-placed Bangor City, who however, were relegated as a result of non-compliance of the Welsh Premier League Licensing requirements.

In the 2018–19 season, the Nomads made history as they beat Edinburgh City 5–4 on penalties in the Scottish Challenge Cup semi-finals, and became the first non-Scottish side to reach the finals, despite many non-Scottish sides reaching the semi-final stage in previous seasons. The Nomads lost the final 3–1 to Ross County at the Caledonian Stadium in Inverness on 23 March 2019, with Michael Bakare scoring the lone goal for the Nomads.

In the 2019–20 season, the Nomads beat Scottish Premiership side Kilmarnock 2–0 in Ayrshire, for a Europa League first qualifying round aggregate win. They also won the Welsh League Cup for the second time in their history with a 3–0 win over STM Sports on 1 February 2020 and made it a domestic double by being crowned champions of the Cymru Premier for the first time, qualifying for the UEFA Champions League, after the season was cut short by the COVID-19 pandemic in Wales.

In the 2020–21 season, the Nomads won the Cymru Premier for a second successive season with a title clinching 2–0 win away at Penybont on the final day of the season.

The 2021–22 season would be a transitional and eventful one for the Nomads, although the club still continued to win silverware. Firstly, Andy Morrison resigned from the club in September 2021 and was replaced by the six-time Cymru Premier winning manager, and Nomads first-team coach, Craig Harrison. The club then suffered an 18-point deduction following the conclusion of the first phase of the 2021-22 Cymru Premier season after being found guilty of fielding an ineligible player in six of their Cymru Premier matches. As a result, the club was placed in the Play-off Group (bottom six) of the league for the second phase of the season, eventually overcoming the huge threat of relegation to conclude their league campaign in ninth position. Nonetheless, the Nomads managed to win their third Welsh League Cup trophy in the club&#x27;s history when they defeated Cardiff Met University on penalties after a goalless draw in the 2022 final played at Penybont&#x27;s ground.

== Honours ==
Cymru Premier
*Champions: 2019–20, 2020–21
Welsh Cup
*Winners: 2017–18, 2023–24
Welsh League Cup
*Winners: 1995–96, 2019–20, 2021–22
Cymru Alliance League
*Winners: 2010–11, 2011–12
Scottish Challenge Cup
*Runners-up: 2018–19

==European record==
Due to Connah&#x27;s Quay Nomads home ground not meeting Uefa ground requirements, their European home games have been played at different venues across Wales: most recently, Aberystwyth&#x27;s Park Avenue (2021/22) and Park Hall in Oswestry (2023/24).
;Notes
* 1Q: First qualifying round
* 2Q: Second qualifying round

==Biggest victories and losses==
*Biggest League of Wales win: 10–0 v Cemaes Bay in 1998.
*Biggest League of Wales defeat: 0–8 at Bangor City in 1995.

==Current squad==









===Out on loan===




===Under 21 squad===






==Managers==
* Ray Jones (1992 – May 1993)
* Neville Powell / Phil Evans (May 1993 – May 1995)
* Neville Powell (May 1995 – May 2007)
* Jim Hackett (May 2007 – May 2008)
* Steve O&#x27;Shaughnessy (June 2008 – June 2009)
* Jim Hackett (June 2009 – July 2009)
* Mark McGregor (July 2009 – January 2015)
* Allan Bickerstaff (January 2015 – October 2015)
* Andy Morrison (November 2015 – September 2021)
* Craig Harrison (September 2021 – August 2022)
* Neil Gibson (August 2022 – August 2024)
* Billy Paynter (August 2024 –)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1526049" start="0" end="39" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads F.C." label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="67" end="75" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395452" start="90" end="108" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay" label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526049" start="174" end="200" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads F.C." label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Juniors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526049" start="217" end="247" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads F.C." label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1526049" start="388" end="410" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads F.C." label="Gap Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428848" start="463" end="468" title="Flint, Flintshire" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428848" start="574" end="579" title="Flint, Flintshire" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251009" start="614" end="629" title="Deeside Stadium" label="Deeside Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428848" start="998" end="1003" title="Flint, Flintshire" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030579" start="1182" end="1200" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay F.C." label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395452" start="1237" end="1244" title="Golftyn" label="Golftyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="1352" end="1359" title="Wrexham F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q25171337" start="1417" end="1449" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay &amp;amp; Shotton F.C." label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay &amp;amp; Shotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="1773" end="1782" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="1834" end="1846" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202579" start="1869" end="1886" title="Racecourse Ground" label="Racecourse Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="1949" end="1956" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484483" start="1964" end="1981" title="1927 FA Cup Final" label="1927 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438867" start="2307" end="2318" title="T. G. Jones" label="T. G. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="3934" end="3949" title="League of Wales" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004817" start="4215" end="4229" title="Neville Powell" label="Neville Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251005" start="5253" end="5268" title="Deeside College" label="Deeside College"/>
<link wikidata="Q595516" start="5373" end="5377" title="Rhyl F.C." label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073748" start="6035" end="6052" title="Flint Town United" label="Flint Town United"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613494" start="7235" end="7259" title="Steve O&amp;#x27;Shaughnessy (footballer)" label="Steve O&amp;#x27;Shaughnessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768810" start="7540" end="7553" title="Mark McGregor" label="Mark McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="7631" end="7650" title="The Football League" label="The Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557436" start="7898" end="7912" title="Cymru Alliance" label="Cymru Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="8078" end="8091" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q239241" start="8583" end="8599" title="Port Talbot Town F.C." label="Port Talbot Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q291848" start="8601" end="8609" title="Llanelli A.F.C." label="Llanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q856474" start="8614" end="8621" title="Newtown A.F.C." label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q280727" start="8867" end="8876" title="Bala Town F.C." label="Bala Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q856468" start="9220" end="9235" title="Carmarthen Town A.F.C." label="Carmarthen Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="9369" end="9387" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864098" start="9635" end="9646" title="Rhys Healey" label="Rhys Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="9722" end="9734" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="9786" end="9808" title="Premier League" label="English Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="9896" end="9903" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768810" start="9944" end="9957" title="Mark McGregor" label="Mark McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="10169" end="10189" title="Cymru Premier" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="10331" end="10349" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q319756" start="10380" end="10401" title="Aberystwyth Town F.C." label="Aberystwyth Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="10494" end="10514" title="Cymru Premier" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q610366" start="10790" end="10803" title="Andy Morrison" label="Andy Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983639" start="11457" end="11467" title="Wes Baynes" label="Wes Baynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18740965" start="11569" end="11595" title="2016–17 UEFA Europa League" label="2016–17 UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24664766" start="11665" end="11697" title="2016–17 UEFA Europa League qualifying phase and play-off round" label="UEFA Europa League qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q217233" start="11767" end="11773" title="Stabæk Fotball" label="Stabæk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207501" start="12183" end="12195" title="FK Vojvodina" label="FK Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327962" start="12520" end="12555" title="2017–18 UEFA Europa League qualifying phase and play-off round" label="UEFA Europa League qualifying round"/>
<link wikidata="Q30644172" start="12571" end="12593" title="2017–18 Scottish Challenge Cup" label="Scottish Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q208584" start="12772" end="12784" title="Helsingin Jalkapalloklubi" label="HJK Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="13005" end="13014" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283783" start="13357" end="13371" title="Edinburgh City F.C." label="Edinburgh City"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870842" start="13396" end="13418" title="2018–19 Scottish Challenge Cup" label="Scottish Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074052" start="13595" end="13600" title="2019 Scottish Challenge Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q180420" start="13608" end="13619" title="Ross County F.C." label="Ross County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026588" start="13627" end="13645" title="Caledonian Stadium" label="Caledonian Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828368" start="13682" end="13696" title="Michael Bakare" label="Michael Bakare"/>
<link wikidata="Q14377162" start="13775" end="13795" title="Scottish Premiership" label="Scottish Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q210961" start="13801" end="13811" title="Kilmarnock F.C." label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q53165589" start="13835" end="13848" title="2019–20 UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q647072" start="13905" end="13921" title="Welsh League Cup" label="Welsh League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641662" start="13979" end="13989" title="STM Sports F.C." label="STM Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q64138765" start="14073" end="14086" title="2019–20 Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q63088790" start="14126" end="14147" title="2020–21 UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q87743866" start="14187" end="14213" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Wales" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q96749377" start="14223" end="14237" title="2020–21 Cymru Premier" label="2020–21 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="14258" end="14271" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847437" start="14342" end="14350" title="Penybont F.C." label="Penybont"/>
<link wikidata="Q610366" start="14522" end="14535" title="Andy Morrison" label="Andy Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181013" start="14670" end="14684" title="Craig Harrison (footballer)" label="Craig Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q107409857" start="14782" end="14803" title="2021-22 Cymru Premier" label="2021-22 Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096167" start="15252" end="15274" title="Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C." label="Cardiff Met University"/>
<link wikidata="Q107477554" start="15317" end="15327" title="2021–22 Welsh League Cup" label="2022 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847437" start="15338" end="15346" title="Penybont F.C." label="Penybont"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="15377" end="15390" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q64138765" start="15403" end="15410" title="2019–20 Cymru Premier" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q96749377" start="15412" end="15419" title="2020–21 Cymru Premier" label="2020–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="15420" end="15429" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974076" start="15440" end="15447" title="2017–18 Welsh Cup" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q121774400" start="15449" end="15456" title="2023–24 Welsh Cup" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q647072" start="15457" end="15473" title="Welsh League Cup" label="Welsh League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q65198717" start="15493" end="15500" title="2019–20 Welsh League Cup" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q107477554" start="15502" end="15509" title="2021–22 Welsh League Cup" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350084" start="15559" end="15581" title="Scottish Challenge Cup" label="Scottish Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870842" start="15595" end="15602" title="2018–19 Scottish Challenge Cup" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944188" start="16014" end="16024" title="Cemaes Bay F.C." label="Cemaes Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="16074" end="16085" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297680" start="16187" end="16196" title="Ray Jones (footballer born 1944)" label="Ray Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004817" start="16217" end="16231" title="Neville Powell" label="Neville Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004817" start="16269" end="16283" title="Neville Powell" label="Neville Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613494" start="16344" end="16368" title="Steve O&amp;#x27;Shaughnessy (footballer)" label="Steve O&amp;#x27;Shaughnessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768810" start="16433" end="16446" title="Mark McGregor" label="Mark McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q610366" start="16526" end="16539" title="Andy Morrison" label="Andy Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181013" start="16575" end="16589" title="Craig Harrison (footballer)" label="Craig Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988618" start="16623" end="16634" title="Neil Gibson (footballer, born 1979)" label="Neil Gibson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303731" wikidata="Q203897" url="?curid=303731" title="Risso's dolphin">
<text>Risso&#x27;s dolphin (Grampus griseus) is a marine mammal and dolphin, the only species of the genus Grampus. Some of the most closely related species to these dolphins include: pilot whales (&quot;Globicephala&quot; spp.), pygmy killer whales (&quot;Feresa attenuata&quot;), melon-headed whales (&quot;Peponocephala electra&quot;), and false killer whales (&quot;Pseudorca crassidens&quot;). These dolphins grow to be about 10 ft in length and can be identified by heavy scarring that appears white. They are located worldwide in cold to temperate waters, but most typically found along continental shelves due to their eating habits. Risso&#x27;s dolphins have a diet that contains primarily cephalopods. They are able to search for prey at various depths due to their ability to reach depths of almost 600m. Individuals typically travel in pods ranging anywhere from 10 to 50 dolphins, with which they form tight social bonds.

Along with most marine species, the Risso&#x27;s dolphin suffers from anthropogenic disruptions to the environment. Pollution, both from noise and plastics, is a common cause of higher mortality rates. Many can be, or have been, affected by entanglement in fishing nets and whaling. Risso&#x27;s dolphins are currently protected in the United States; however, they are still hunted in other parts of the world. 

==Taxonomy==
Risso&#x27;s dolphin is named after Antoine Risso, whose study of the animal formed the basis of the recognized description by Georges Cuvier in 1812. The holotype referred to a specimen at the Muséum National d&#x27;Histoire Naturelle, an exhibit using preserved skin and skull obtained at Brest, France.

The type and sole species of the genus &quot;Grampus&quot; refers to Delphinus griseus Cuvier 1812. A proposition to name this genus Grampidelphis in 1933, when the taxonomic status of &#x27;blackfish&#x27; was uncertain, and conserving the extensive use of &quot;Grampus&quot; for the &#x27;killer&#x27; &quot;Orcinus orca&quot;&quot;, also suggested renaming this species (&quot;Grampidelphis exilis&quot; Iredale, T. &amp; Troughton, E. le G. 1933). These were recognised as synonyms after publication of the &quot;Catalog of Whales&quot; (Hershkovitz, 1966).

Another common name for the Risso&#x27;s dolphin is grampus (also the species&#x27; genus), although this common name was more often used for the orca. The etymology of the word &quot;grampus&quot; is unclear. It may be an agglomeration of the Latin &quot;&quot; or French , both meaning big fish. The specific epithet &quot;griseus&quot; refers to the mottled (almost scarred) grey colour of its body.

==Description==

Risso&#x27;s dolphin has a relatively large anterior body and dorsal fin, while the posterior tapers to a relatively narrow tail. The bulbous shape of the head has a vertical crease in front.
Infants are dorsally grey to brown and ventrally cream-colored, with a white anchor-shaped area between the pectorals and around the mouth. In older calves, the nonwhite areas darken to nearly black, and then lighten (except for the always dark dorsal fin). Linear scars mostly from social interaction eventually cover the bulk of the body; scarring is a common feature of male to male competition in toothed whales, but Risso&#x27;s dolphin tend to be unusually heavily scarred. The pronounced appearance of these scars results from the lack of repigmentation, which may be advantageous as a display that reduces further challenges from other males. Older individuals appear mostly white. Most individuals have two to seven pairs of teeth, all in the lower jaw.
Length is typically , although specimens may reach . Like most dolphins, males are typically slightly larger than females. This species weighs , making it the largest species called &quot;dolphin&quot;.

==Range and habitat==
Risso&#x27;s dolphins are found nearly worldwide, from cold and temperate to tropical waters, in the Indian, Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, as well as parts of the Baltic Sea, the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean, North and Red Seas (excepting the Black Sea; however, a rare stranding was recorded in the Sea of Marmara in 2012).). There have been several documented sightings in Roskilde Fjord, in the waters of Lejre Vig, just off of the coast of Skjoldungernes Land National Park, Denmark. Analysis of Risso&#x27;s dolphins found in the U.K. and in the Mediterranean display variations in mitochondrial DNA. It is possible that one reason for these differences could be the lack of interaction between individuals in the two locations. 

In the Pacific, they range from French Polynesia west to Samoa, north to the Hawaiian Islands, as far as the Gulf of Alaska. However, they are absent from the waters of the western Pacific (off of Asia) beyond Futuna. They are quite common along the western coasts of British Columbia, the United States and Mexico, continuing their range to the southern tip of Tierra Del Fuego. In the eastern Atlantic, they have been sighted as far south as the offshore waters of Liberia, Guinea and Western Africa north through the Canary Islands and the Azores to southern Greenland. On the western Atlantic side, Risso’s dolphins have been seen as far south as Guyana and Martinique; they can be found throughout much of the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico to Florida and the Bahamas, and all along the American Eastern Seaboard and the Canadian Maritime Provinces.

Their preferred environment is just off the continental shelf, on steep banks, with water depths varying from , and water temperatures at least and preferably . They have been recorded diving to depths of up to in pursuit of prey.

Since at least 2017, Risso&#x27;s dolphins have begun to appear off of the subarctic Norwegian coast, as far north as Bleik&#x27;s Canyon, off of Andøya. The repeated, regular sightings imply an expansion of their natural range. Possible explanations for this movement are a changing climate or varying water currents, as well as a northward migration of prey species or competition with other cetaceans, such as pilot whales.

Due to the low population density of the species, Risso&#x27;s dolphins are widely considered difficult to establish an accurate estimate of population size in any given area. 

==Ecology==

They feed almost exclusively on neritic and oceanic squid, mostly nocturnally. Predation does not appear significant. Mass strandings are infrequent. Analysis carried out on the stomach contents of stranded specimens in Scotland showed that the most important species preyed on in Scottish waters is the curled octopus (&quot;Eledone cirrhosa&quot;).

A population is found off Santa Catalina Island where they are sympatric with short-finned pilot whales (&quot;Globicephala macrorhynchus&quot;) and both species feed on the squid population. Although these species have not been seen to interact with each other, they take advantage of the commercial squid fishing that takes place at night. They have been seen by fishermen to feed around their boats. They also travel with other cetaceans. They surf the bow waves of gray whales, as well as ocean swells.

Risso&#x27;s dolphins have a stratified social organisation. These dolphins typically travel in groups of between 10 and 51, but can sometimes form &quot;super-pods&quot; reaching up to a few thousand individuals. Smaller, stable subgroups exist within larger groups. These groups tend to be similar in age or sex. Risso&#x27;s experience fidelity towards their groups. Long-term bonds are seen to correlate with adult males. Younger individuals experience less fidelity and can leave and join groups. Mothers show a high fidelity towards a group of mother and calves, but it is unclear whether or not these females stay together after their calves leave or remain in their natal pods.

== Behavior ==
===Feeding===
Like many dolphin species, they use echolocation to target cephalapods and fish that are feeding below. Tagging of a population in the Azores revealed that &quot;Grampus griseus&quot; plan whether to make a shallow or deep dive, with different strategies that create profitable foraging for the considerable expenditure in time and energy. Risso&#x27;s can achieve depths over by exhausting their lungs and using several spins to rapidly descend, almost vertically, and increase the time spent foraging. This allows the species to exploit a deep and dispersed layer of prey such as squid, those taking refuge during daylight when they become more vulnerable to predation. When feeding in shallow depths, however, Risso&#x27;s can experience competition from other cetaceans.

=== Social behavior===
Risso&#x27;s dolphins are known to have a very active surface presence, often either displaying their tail flukes and pectoral fins, or slapping the surface of the water. They have also been known to engage in a behavior called spy-hopping, a common behavior in cetaceans where an individual vertically pokes their head out of the water. Recent studies have discussed the possibilities of spy-hopping as a sexual behavior, as it is typically only done in the presence of other individuals. Risso&#x27;s dolphins do not require cutting teeth to process their cephalopod prey, which has allowed the species to evolve teeth as display weapons in mating conflicts.

===Reproduction===

Gestation requires an estimated 13–14 months, at intervals of 2.4 years. Calving reaches seasonal peaks in the winter in the eastern Pacific and in the summer and fall in the western Pacific. Females mature sexually at ages 8–10, and males at age 10–12. The oldest specimen reached 39.6 years.

Risso&#x27;s dolphins have successfully been taken into captivity in Japan and the United States, although not with the regularity of bottlenose dolphins or orcas. 

Recent studies have shown a possibility of hybridization occurrences between Risso&#x27;s dolphins and bottlenose dolphins. So far, there have been for possible hybrid individuals documented in United Kingdom waters. Hybridization is not something that is uncommon with cetaceans, so it is likely that these hybrids do not have any evolutionary advantage but instead are more likely an uncommon chance event. 

=== Human interactions ===
Like other dolphins and marine animals, there have been documentations of these dolphins getting caught in seine-nets and gillnets across the globe. Many of these incidents have resulted in death. Small whaling operations have also been cause of some of these deaths. Pollution has also affected many individuals who have ingested plastic. Samples from these animals shows contamination within their tissue.

Increasing oceanic noise due to human presence in the ocean threatens populations of Risso&#x27;s dolphins. The intensity of anthropogenic noise can push dolphins to strand themselves and to leave their typical habitats. Evidence shows that motorized vessels create a low-frequency noise that disrupt typical acoustic behavior. This behavior is measured by the regular click trains, buzzes, pulses, and barks. The click trains produced by Risso&#x27;s dolphins are necessary for Risso&#x27;s dolphins to navigate through their environment and identify prey. Barks are more often used in social settings. 

In Ireland, though not apparently in England, Risso&#x27;s Dolphin was one of the royal fish which by virtue of the royal prerogative were the exclusive property of the English Crown.

A famed individual named Pelorus Jack was widely reported between 1888 and 1912, travelling with ships navigating the Cook Strait in New Zealand. A law protecting the animal was passed after a public outcry, renewed twice more, but suggested be invalid by its reference to Fisheries acts that did not concern marine mammals.

==Conservation==
The Risso&#x27;s dolphin populations of the North, Baltic, and Mediterranean Seas are listed on Appendix II of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), since they have an unfavourable conservation status or would benefit significantly from international co-operation organised by tailored agreements.

In addition, Risso&#x27;s dolphin is covered by the Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic, North East Atlantic, Irish and North Seas (ASCOBANS), the Agreement on the Conservation of Cetaceans in the Black Sea, Mediterranean Sea and Contiguous Atlantic Area (ACCOBAMS), the Memorandum of Understanding for the Conservation of Cetaceans and Their Habitats in the Pacific Islands Region (Pacific Cetaceans MoU) and the Memorandum of Understanding Concerning the Conservation of the Manatee and Small Cetaceans of Western Africa and Macaronesia (Western African Aquatic Mammals MoU).

Risso&#x27;s dolphins are protected in the United States under the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1992. Currently, Japan, Indonesia, the Solomon Islands, and The Lesser Antilles hunt Risso&#x27;s dolphins.

==Strandings==
At least one case report of strandings in Japan&#x27;s Goto Islands has been associated with parasitic neuropathy of the eighth cranial nerve by a trematode in the genus &quot;Nasitrema&quot;. There was a recent reporting of a juvenile male Risso&#x27;s dolphin that was stranded alive on the coast of Gran Canaria on 26 April 2019. This was the first documented case of capture myopathy and stress cardiomyopathy in a male juvenile Risso&#x27;s dolphin that has received rehabilitation.

==References==
==Further reading==
*&quot;National Audubon Society Guide to Marine Mammals of the World&quot; 
*&quot;Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals&quot; 
*&quot;Whales, Dolphins and Porpoises&quot;, Mark Carwardine, 

==External links==

*Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society
*ARKive Photographs, video
*Voices in the Sea – Sound of the Risso&#x27;s Dolphin </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203897" start="0" end="20" title="Risso&amp;#x27;s dolphin" label="Risso&amp;#x27;s dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="62" end="69" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="80" end="87" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="95" end="100" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q459616" start="178" end="189" title="pilot whale" label="pilot whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q244172" start="224" end="242" title="pygmy killer whale" label="pygmy killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q724349" start="276" end="294" title="melon-headed whale" label="melon-headed whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q208132" start="337" end="355" title="false killer whale" label="false killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q368330" start="1393" end="1406" title="Antoine Risso" label="Antoine Risso"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="1484" end="1498" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q838691" start="1551" end="1592" title="Muséum national d&amp;#x27;histoire naturelle" label="Muséum National d&amp;#x27;Histoire Naturelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="1648" end="1661" title="Brest, France" label="Brest, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="2374" end="2378" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2472" end="2477" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568355" start="2711" end="2721" title="dorsal fin" label="dorsal fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="3931" end="3937" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="3939" end="3946" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="3951" end="3965" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="3992" end="4002" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="4008" end="4020" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4029" end="4042" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="4044" end="4049" title="North Sea" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="4054" end="4061" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="4078" end="4087" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="4135" end="4149" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432961" start="4210" end="4224" title="Roskilde Fjord" label="Roskilde Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="4314" end="4321" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="4603" end="4619" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="4628" end="4633" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="4648" end="4664" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="4680" end="4694" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q664321" start="4781" end="4787" title="Futuna (Wallis and Futuna)" label="Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="4839" end="4855" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4861" end="4874" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4879" end="4885" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="4933" end="4949" title="Tierra Del Fuego" label="Tierra Del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="5038" end="5045" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="5047" end="5053" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="5058" end="5072" title="Western Africa" label="Western Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="5091" end="5105" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="5114" end="5120" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="5133" end="5142" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="5222" end="5228" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="5233" end="5243" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="5286" end="5299" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="5308" end="5322" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="5326" end="5333" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="5342" end="5349" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="5378" end="5394" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Eastern Seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q731613" start="5412" end="5430" title="Maritime Provinces" label="Maritime Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="5477" end="5494" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q528409" start="5811" end="5817" title="Andøya" label="Andøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q459616" start="6078" end="6089" title="pilot whale" label="pilot whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q576725" start="6316" end="6323" title="neritic" label="neritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="6336" end="6341" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366544" start="6407" end="6417" title="whale beaching" label="strandings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201483" start="6588" end="6602" title="curled octopus" label="curled octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q845229" start="6662" end="6683" title="Santa Catalina Island (California)" label="Santa Catalina Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246431" start="6699" end="6708" title="sympatric" label="sympatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q735210" start="6714" end="6738" title="short-finned pilot whale" label="short-finned pilot whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413252" start="7092" end="7100" title="bow wave" label="bow wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="7105" end="7115" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685290" start="8887" end="8898" title="Cetacean surfacing behaviour" label="spy-hopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="9770" end="9788" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="9793" end="9797" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="9845" end="9858" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q600580" start="10347" end="10357" title="Seine fishing" label="seine-nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474920" start="10362" end="10370" title="Gillnetting" label="gillnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="10443" end="10450" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="11258" end="11265" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="11292" end="11299" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109436" start="11337" end="11347" title="royal fish" label="royal fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="11424" end="11437" title="English Crown" label="English Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068301" start="11465" end="11477" title="Pelorus Jack" label="Pelorus Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="11558" end="11569" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q125371" start="11967" end="11970" title="Bonn Convention" label="CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q370381" start="12282" end="12290" title="ASCOBANS" label="ASCOBANS"/>
<link wikidata="Q288118" start="12406" end="12414" title="ACCOBAMS" label="ACCOBAMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122514" start="12533" end="12554" title="Pacific Islands Cetaceans Memorandum of Understanding" label="Pacific Cetaceans MoU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984252" start="12690" end="12725" title="West African Aquatic Mammals Memorandum of Understanding" label="Western African Aquatic Mammals MoU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333790" start="13007" end="13019" title="Goto Islands" label="Goto Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="13045" end="13054" title="parasite" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="13055" end="13065" title="neuropathy" label="neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180454" start="13080" end="13093" title="cranial nerve" label="cranial nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q207547" start="13099" end="13108" title="trematode" label="trematode"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303734" wikidata="Q1883071" url="?curid=303734" title="Macsyma">
<text>Macsyma (; &quot;Project MAC&#x27;s SYmbolic MAnipulator&quot;) is one of the oldest general-purpose computer algebra systems still in wide use. It was originally developed from 1968 to 1982 at MIT&#x27;s Project MAC.

In 1982, Macsyma was licensed to Symbolics and became a commercial product. In 1992, Symbolics Macsyma was spun off to Macsyma, Inc., which continued to develop Macsyma until 1999. That version is still available for Microsoft&#x27;s Windows XP operating system.

The 1982 version of MIT Macsyma remained available to academics and US government agencies, and it is distributed by the US Department of Energy (DOE). That version, DOE Macsyma, was maintained by Bill Schelter. Under the name of Maxima, it was released under the GPL in 1999, and remains under active maintenance.

==Development==
The project was initiated in July, 1968 by Carl Engelman,
William A. Martin (front end, expression display, polynomial arithmetic) and Joel Moses (simplifier, indefinite integration: heuristic/Risch). Martin was in charge of the project until 1971, and Moses ran it for the next decade. Engelman and his staff left in 1969 to return to The MITRE Corporation. Some code came from earlier work, notably Knut Korsvold&#x27;s simplifier. Later major contributors to the core mathematics engine were:

Yannis Avgoustis (special functions),
David Barton (solving algebraic systems of equations),
Richard Bogen (special functions),
Bill Dubuque (indefinite integration, limits, power series, number theory, special functions, functional equations, pattern matching, sign queries, Gröbner, TriangSys),
Richard Fateman (rational functions, pattern matching, arbitrary precision floating-point),
Michael Genesereth (comparison, knowledge database),
Jeff Golden (simplifier, language, system),
R. W. Gosper (definite summation, special functions, simplification, number theory),
Carl Hoffman (general simplifier, macros, non-commutative simplifier, ports to Multics and LispM, system, visual equation editor),
Charles Karney (plotting),
John Kulp,
Ed Lafferty (ODE solution, special functions),
Stavros Macrakis (real/imaginary parts, compiler, system),
Richard Pavelle (indicial tensor calculus, general relativity package, ordinary and partial differential equations),
David A. Spear (Gröbner),
Barry Trager (algebraic integration, factoring, Gröbner),
Paul S. Wang (polynomial factorization and GCD, complex numbers, limits, definite integration, Fortran and LaTeX code generation),
David Y. Y. Yun (polynomial GCDs),
Gail Zacharias (Gröbner)
and
Rich Zippel (power series, polynomial factorization, number theory, combinatorics).

Macsyma was written in Maclisp, and was, in some cases, a key motivator for improving that dialect of Lisp in the areas of numerical computing, efficient compilation and language design. Maclisp itself ran primarily on PDP-6 and PDP-10 computers, but also on the Multics OS and on the Lisp Machine architectures. Macsyma was one of the largest Lisp programs of the time, and was possibly the largest.

===Commercialization===

In response to a request from Richard Fateman, then a professor at UC Berkeley, MIT provided a temporary license for Macsyma code in 1979. This was almost immediately brought up on the new VAX-11/780 computer using a dialect of Maclisp, Franz Lisp, written by Fateman&#x27;s group. MIT reluctantly licensed versions of VAX Macsyma from Berkeley to about 50 universities, starting with Caltech, under condition that the licenses would be revoked when negotiations for a proper license were complete. Indeed, this happened when the negotiation with Symbolics (see below) was complete. Symbolics was reluctant to license the VAX product, since VAX constituted competitive hardware to their own Lisp Machines and therefore suppressed the VAX software for five years. UC Berkeley also brought up copies of Macsyma on Motorola 68000-based systems, most notably Sun workstations. Symbolics suppressed those as well. At the same time Fateman worked to change the (now revoked) temporary license for Macsyma into something more permanent.

Ultimately, the United States Department of Energy imposed on MIT the requirement that they release a copy into the National Energy Software Center (NESC) library in 1982, while allowing MIT to assert restrictions in terms of high price and no redistribution. This was intended to protect the technology transfer to Symbolics. (Such restrictions have been since lifted, 2002 or so.) This so-called DOE Macsyma had been rewritten at MIT in a pre-Common Lisp dialect called NIL lisp, incompletely implemented on VAX/VMS, an unpopular system in academia, where Berkeley VAX Unix was common. DOE Macsyma formed the basis for the much-later open source Maxima system.

In 1981, Moses and Richard Pavelle, an MIT staff member and proponent of applying Macsyma to engineering and science, attempted to form a company to commercialize Macsyma. Pavelle had written many scientific papers using Macsyma. With the papers in hand, Pavelle and Moses approached several venture capital firms that showed interest in funding a Macsyma startup. With potential deals close to finalization, MIT suddenly decided that MIT personnel should not profit directly from MIT developments. In early 1982, Macsyma was licensed by MIT to Arthur D. Little, Inc. (ADL), which became the broker for Macsyma and soon licensed Macsyma to Symbolics in late 1982. Moses was forced out of the picture by ADL and Pavelle became the head of the Macsyma division at Symbolics. It was evident that Symbolics was not so much interested in the code as in keeping Macsyma out of the software catalog of its competitor in the Lisp Machine business, LMI. The business arrangement between Symbolics and Arthur D. Little required a royalty payment to ADL of 15% of Macsyma gross sales. This royalty led to speculation on the desire of MIT and ADL to see MACSYMA prosper. The development of Macsyma continued at Symbolics despite the fact that it was seen as a diversion from the sales of Lisp machines, which Symbolics considered to be their main business despite the fact that Macsyma sales and the leveraged sales of Lisp Machines reached 10% of overall sales at Symbolics within two years. Despite resistance from many in Symbolics, Macsyma was released for DEC VAX computers and Sun workstations using Berkeley&#x27;s Franz Lisp in the early to mid 80s.

However, problems at Symbolics over the sales of Macsyma on computers other than Symbolics&#x27; eventually led to the decline of Macsyma sales. In the first half of 1986, Macsyma revenues were lower than in the first half of 1985, in a growing industry. Wolfram&#x27;s SMP program and Waterloo Maple were growing at this time, although MACSYMA was easily superior to these other packages in symbolic math.

Pavelle ran the Macsyma division at Symbolics until early 1986. In the second half of 1986 Richard Petti became the manager of the Macsyma business to reduce the sales and avoid conflict with employees in Symbolics. Macsyma cut headcount but expanded its sales force and marketing, and focused its developers more on features that customers asked for. (For example, the Spear-Zacharias (Gröbner) basis algorithm implemented in the 1970s at MIT was not installed in a shipping Macsyma until 1987.) In 1987, Macsyma annual revenues roughly doubled. MACSYMA became more user friendly: documentation and on-line help were reorganized and expanded; some command names were changed to be more mnemonic. The system was ported to Common Lisp (by Kent M. Pitman). Petti argued to Symbolics management that Macsyma was a &#x27;strategic business unit&#x27; that should be funded based on its performance and potential, not based on the prospects of the main workstation business. However, Symbolics cut the Macsyma headcount after this period of sharp growth; Symbolics tried to use Macsyma as a tiny cash cow to fund the losses of the workstation business that was 30 times its size.

The greatest product weakness of Macsyma was its numerical analysis. Mastering symbolic math was a herculean task; but numerical capabilities were critical to get a piece of the much larger engineering and lower-end scientific markets. At MIT Macsyma had a link to the IMSL (now a product of Perforce Software) numerical libraries, but this link was severed when Macsyma moved to Symbolics. Lisp developers at Symbolics generally believed that numerical analysis was an old technology that was not important for Lisp applications, so they declined to invest in it. Double-precision arithmetic in Macsyma (on a PC version) was about six times slower than Fortran. Also Macsyma&#x27;s matrices were implemented as lists of lists, which cost another factor of perhaps 5–10 in speed for key algorithms. Macsyma did not have many of the basic algorithms of numerical linear algebra, such as LU decomposition.

In 1987-88, the Macsyma group tried to build a PC Macsyma with Gold Hill Lisp. (Earlier, Symbolics had killed its own project to build a Lisp compiler for standard computers to avoid competing with Lisp machine sales. This was a controversial move that, by some accounts, was undertaken without approval of senior management. Symbolics also declined to cooperate with Sun to make Lisp available on Sun workstations for the same reason.) Gold Hill Lisp was too unstable, and its weak architecture made it impossible for Gold Hill to eliminate the bugs. This was a crucial failure for Macsyma. It meant that Macsyma could not respond on PCs when Mathematica appeared on Apple computers in mid-1988. Macsyma appeared on Windows PCs in August 1989 using the CLOE Lisp from Symbolics. However, the Macsyma staff was too small and lacked the mix of skills needed to add the kind of graphics, notebook interface and better numerics that Mathematica had.

By 1989, it was clear to Petti that Symbolics would implode due to poor product strategy, and that it would take Macsyma with it. (Some product issues: (1) Symbolics&#x27; software was designed for MIT-class software developers without enough concessions to others. (2) Symbolics&#x27; world-class software was losing share in the market due to dependence on very high-cost hardware. (3) In moving to VLSI hardware in the mid-1980s, Symbolics converted from 36-bit word size to a 40-bit, without justification from the market for the enormous development cost of this change.) Macsyma could not assemble a buy-out team due to lack of cooperation from MIT. After keeping reasonably quiet since 1986 about the product issues, Petti tried in late 1988 to persuade Symbolics to adopt a software-only or board-level strategy; but the fourth president in four years would hear nothing of it. In 1990 Petti left Symbolics for a start-up.

===Macsyma, Inc.===
Macsyma, Inc., was founded in 1992 by Russell Noftsker (chairman, who had co-founded Symbolics) and Richard Petti (president, who had turned around Macsyma for a time at Symbolics) by raising funds and purchasing the rights to Macsyma from the ailing Symbolics. Although the market was growing fast, Macsyma sales in 1991 and early 1992 were still falling rapidly. Macsyma&#x27;s market share in symbolic math software had fallen from 70% in 1987 to 1% in 1992. By 1993, market growth had slowed and the market had standardized on Mathematica and Maple. The competitors had development staffs that were 4-8 times as large as that of Macsyma Inc. throughout the 1990s.

In early 1995 the company shipped Macsyma 2.0.5, with many improvements: On Wester&#x27;s large test of symbolic math, Macsyma 2.0.5 scored 10% better than Maple and 15% better than Mathematica. Although Macsyma 2.0.5 was still very slow at numerics, it had a greatly strengthened portfolio of numerical analysis and linear algebra routines. (In 1996 Macsyma added LAPACK which greatly increased the speed of most numerical linear algebra.) .

The development team, at this time, included Jeff Golden (language, compiler, etc.), Bill Gosper (special functions, summation), Howard Cannon (user interface, optimization), and several consultants. Bill Dubuque worked on integration, equation solving, database, and optimization. Christopher Stacy and David H. Wood added MATLAB&#x27;s language and matrix functionality. Other developers made major contributions in numerical analysis, graphics, and help systems.

The company could not continue indefinitely to outperform staffs 4-8 times as large and reverse the market momentum. Market share did not increase above 2%, because the competitors were entrenched in all key accounts, converting to a new product is very costly in learning time, and market growth declined. Also, starting in 1992 or 1993, Mathsoft engaged in a strategy of spending $10 million on direct mail at very low prices, which won much of the remaining growth in the symbolic math market, just when Macsyma Inc. was struggling to rebuild its world-class product.

In 1999, Macsyma were acquired by Tenedos LLC, a holding company that previously had purchased Symbolics. The holding company has not re-released or resold Macsyma, but Macsyma continues to be distributed by Symbolics for Microsoft Windows versions up to Windows XP.

==Available versions==
There is also a GPL-licensed version, called Maxima, based on the 1982 version of the DOE Macsyma, subsequently adapted for Common Lisp and enhanced by William Schelter. It is under active development, and can be compiled under several Common Lisp systems. Downloadable executables for Linux, Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X and other systems, including graphical user interfaces are available. Maxima does not include many of the numerous features added during the period of commercial development between 1982–1999, but is a current, free, open codebase that includes numerous additional features, several alternative front ends, and works with a number of Common Lisp engines. While this has resulted in some incompatibilities between Macsyma and Maxima, programs written in the Macsyma algebraic language can often be run, with only minor changes, in either system.

ITS Macsyma from around 1982 is available, with most files in a directory called .

==References==
==External links==
* Richard Petti&#x27;s summary of the history of commercial Macsyma 30 October 2003
* The Macsyma Saga Richard Petti, 2 November 2003
* Symbolics Macsyma</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1883071" start="0" end="7" title="Macsyma" label="Macsyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="101" end="124" title="computer algebra system" label="computer algebra system"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="194" end="197" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354917" start="205" end="216" title="Project MAC" label="Project MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034213" start="252" end="261" title="Symbolics" label="Symbolics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="436" end="445" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="453" end="463" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="607" end="627" title="USDOE" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568941" start="680" end="693" title="Bill Schelter" label="Bill Schelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q938304" start="713" end="719" title="Maxima (software)" label="Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="747" end="750" title="GPL" label="GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q107502057" start="858" end="871" title="Carl Engelman" label="Carl Engelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003999" start="873" end="890" title="William A. Martin" label="William A. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93129" start="950" end="960" title="Joel Moses" label="Joel Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q114326" start="974" end="996" title="indefinite integration" label="indefinite integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q627039" start="1151" end="1172" title="MITRE" label="The MITRE Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q867707" start="1330" end="1347" title="special functions" label="special functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q735660" start="1382" end="1402" title="systems of equations" label="systems of equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q867707" start="1420" end="1437" title="special functions" label="special functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q114326" start="1454" end="1476" title="indefinite integral" label="indefinite integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="1500" end="1513" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q867707" start="1515" end="1532" title="special functions" label="special functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503724" start="1556" end="1572" title="pattern matching" label="pattern matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="1588" end="1595" title="Gröbner basis" label="Gröbner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325629" start="1609" end="1624" title="Richard Fateman" label="Richard Fateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41237" start="1626" end="1643" title="rational function" label="rational function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503724" start="1646" end="1662" title="pattern matching" label="pattern matching"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1664" end="1698" title="Floating-point arithmetic#Alternatives to floating-point numbers" label="arbitrary precision floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q21191195" start="1701" end="1719" title="Michael Genesereth" label="Michael Genesereth"/>
<link wikidata="Q862150" start="1798" end="1810" title="Bill Gosper" label="R. W. Gosper"/>
<link wikidata="Q218005" start="1821" end="1830" title="summation" label="summation"/>
<link wikidata="Q867707" start="1832" end="1849" title="special functions" label="special functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="1867" end="1880" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="1925" end="1940" title="non-commutative" label="non-commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="1962" end="1969" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653376" start="1974" end="1979" title="LispM" label="LispM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345429" start="1996" end="2011" title="formula editor" label="equation editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q465274" start="2065" end="2068" title="ordinary differential equation" label="ODE"/>
<link wikidata="Q867707" start="2079" end="2096" title="special functions" label="special functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="2117" end="2137" title="complex number" label="real/imaginary parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700717" start="2175" end="2199" title="tensor software" label="indicial tensor calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="2201" end="2219" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="2242" end="2271" title="partial differential equation" label="partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="2291" end="2298" title="Gröbner basis" label="Gröbner"/>
<link wikidata="Q188804" start="2338" end="2347" title="factorization" label="factoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="2349" end="2356" title="Gröbner basis" label="Gröbner"/>
<link wikidata="Q95837546" start="2359" end="2371" title="Paul S. Wang" label="Paul S. Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188804" start="2384" end="2397" title="factorization" label="factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="2402" end="2405" title="greatest common divisor" label="GCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="2407" end="2421" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="2432" end="2452" title="definite integral" label="definite integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="2454" end="2461" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="2466" end="2471" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="2518" end="2521" title="greatest common divisor" label="GCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="2541" end="2548" title="Gröbner basis" label="Gröbner"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="2567" end="2579" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q188804" start="2592" end="2605" title="factorization" label="factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="2607" end="2620" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="2622" end="2635" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882973" start="2662" end="2669" title="Maclisp" label="Maclisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="2741" end="2745" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="2858" end="2874" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-6 and PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="2902" end="2909" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="2910" end="2912" title="Operating system" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653376" start="2924" end="2936" title="Lisp machine" label="Lisp Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="3133" end="3144" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154338" start="3255" end="3265" title="VAX-11/780" label="VAX-11/780"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492884" start="3303" end="3313" title="Franz Lisp" label="Franz Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="3878" end="3892" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="3921" end="3924" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="4113" end="4147" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4213" end="4244" title="National Energy Software Center" label="National Energy Software Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="4542" end="4553" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954329" start="4569" end="4577" title="NIL lisp" label="NIL lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="4607" end="4614" title="OpenVMS" label="VAX/VMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="4655" end="4672" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="Berkeley VAX Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q938304" start="4745" end="4751" title="Maxima (software)" label="Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4780" end="4795" title="Richard Pavelle" label="Richard Pavelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q709066" start="5306" end="5322" title="Arthur D. Little" label="Arthur D. Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034213" start="5401" end="5410" title="Symbolics" label="Symbolics"/>
<link wikidata="Q262903" start="5701" end="5704" title="Lisp Machines" label="LMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653376" start="6037" end="6049" title="Lisp machine" label="Lisp machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="6310" end="6313" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492884" start="6371" end="6381" title="Franz Lisp" label="Franz Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q310798" start="6663" end="6670" title="Stephen Wolfram" label="Wolfram"/>
<link wikidata="Q139380" start="6694" end="6708" title="Maple (software)" label="Waterloo Maple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6907" end="6920" title="Richard Petti" label="Richard Petti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="7203" end="7210" title="Gröbner basis" label="Gröbner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391859" start="7554" end="7568" title="Kent M. Pitman" label="Kent M. Pitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752211" start="7633" end="7656" title="strategic business unit" label="strategic business unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434706" start="8261" end="8265" title="IMSL Numerical Libraries" label="IMSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q20063746" start="8284" end="8301" title="Perforce Software" label="Perforce Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243369" start="8557" end="8573" title="Double-precision floating-point format" label="Double-precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="8602" end="8604" title="IBM PC compatible" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004891" start="8844" end="8868" title="numerical linear algebra" label="numerical linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q833089" start="8878" end="8894" title="LU decomposition" label="LU decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8960" end="8974" title="Gold Hill Lisp" label="Gold Hill Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="9614" end="9621" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="9827" end="9838" title="Mathematica" label="Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q876049" start="10246" end="10250" title="VLSI" label="VLSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="10310" end="10319" title="word size" label="word size"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381703" start="10835" end="10851" title="Russell Noftsker" label="Russell Noftsker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034213" start="10882" end="10891" title="Symbolics" label="Symbolics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="11328" end="11339" title="Mathematica" label="Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q642141" start="11831" end="11837" title="LAPACK" label="LAPACK"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12039" end="12052" title="Howard Cannon (technologist)" label="Howard Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169478" start="12234" end="12240" title="MATLAB" label="MATLAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043809" start="12716" end="12724" title="Mathsoft" label="Mathsoft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12983" end="12994" title="Tenedos LLC" label="Tenedos LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="13171" end="13188" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="13204" end="13214" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="13256" end="13259" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q938304" start="13285" end="13291" title="Maxima (software)" label="Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568941" start="13392" end="13408" title="William Schelter" label="William Schelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="13476" end="13487" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="13526" end="13531" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="13533" end="13550" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="13552" end="13560" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="13590" end="13614" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303738" wikidata="Q1094964" url="?curid=303738" title="Paul Déroulède">
<text>Paul Déroulède (2 September 1846 – 30 January 1914) was a French author and politician, one of the founders of the nationalist League of Patriots.

==Early life==
Déroulède was born in Paris. He was published first as a poet in the magazine &quot;Revue nationale&quot;, with the pseudonym &quot;Jean Rebel&quot;. In 1869 he produced, at the Théâtre Français, a one-act drama in verse named &quot;Juan Strenner&quot;.

===Military career===
At the beginning of the Franco-Prussian War he enlisted as a private, but was wounded and taken prisoner at the Battle of Sedan. He was sent to Breslau (now Wrocław), but escaped. He then served with generals Antoine Chanzy and Charles Denis Bourbaki, participated with the latter&#x27;s disastrous retreat to Switzerland, and fought against the Paris Commune. After being promoted to lieutenant, he was forced by an accident to retire from the army.

==Early publications==
In 1872, he published a collection of patriotic poems (&quot;Chants du soldat&quot;), which enjoyed great popularity. This was followed in 1875 by another collection, &quot;Nouveaux Chants du soldat&quot;. In 1877 he produced a drama in verse named &quot;L&#x27;Hetman&quot;, which derived a moderate success from the patriotic fervour of its sentiments. For the exhibition of 1878 he wrote a hymn, &quot;Vive la France&quot;, which was set to music by Charles Gounod. In 1880 his drama in verse, &quot;La Moabite&quot;, which had been accepted by the Théâtre Français, was censored for religious reasons.

==Political life==
In 1882 Déroulède, along with the historian Henri Martin and Félix Faure, founded the Ligue des patriotes, to promote France&#x27;s &quot;revanche&quot; against Germany. Déroulède served initially as the deputy to vice-president Faure, and the league quickly attained a membership of 182,000, a relatively large number for the time. Déroulède eventually became the president of the league, in March 1885. The league sought education reforms intended to increase patriotism among French students, but when those reforms were ignored by the French legislature Déroulède began to despair of &quot;parliamentarism&quot; as a method of reform.

After losing an election for the Chamber of Deputies in 1885, Déroulède decided that the parliamentary system adopted from Britain had sapped France of its vitality and virtue, and should be replaced by a presidential republic with the cabinet appointed by and responsible to a popularly elected president. Déroulède thus became a champion of constitutional revision and hoped to use the league as an organization to promote the cause among republican patriots. After the rise of General Georges Boulanger, Déroulède attempted to use the Ligue des Patriotes, until then a non-political organization, to assist his cause, but was deserted by many of the league&#x27;s members and forced to resign his presidency. Nevertheless, he used the section that remained faithful to him with such effect that the government found it necessary in 1889 to decree its suppression.

During the same year, he was elected to the chamber as member for Angoulême. He was expelled from the chamber in 1890 for interrupting debates. He did not campaign for the election of 1893, but was re-elected in 1898, and distinguished himself by his vehemence as a nationalist and anti-Dreyfusard. After the funeral of President Félix Faure, on 23 February 1899, he endeavoured to persuade General Gaudérique Roget to lead his troops to the presidential palace. After the general and his troops first ignored and then dismissed Déroulède, he demanded to be arrested for treason. During his trial, Déroulède declared that if released he would continue his insurrectionary activity. He was triumphantly acquitted on 31 May, and on 12 August was again arrested and accused, together with André Buffet, Jules Guérin and others, of conspiracy against the republic. After a long trial before the French Senate serving as the high court, he was sentenced, on 25 January 1900, to ten years&#x27; banishment from France, and retired to San Sebastián in Spain.

As a member of the chamber Paul Déroulède was an opponent of colonialism, believing that it distracted from more pressing foreign policy issues in Europe, especially German control of Alsace and Lorraine. As he stated; &#x27;I have lost two sisters and you offer me twenty servants.&quot;

Déroulède was also an Anglophile, believing that an alliance or agreement with Britain was essential for defending France against Germany and enabling the recapture of Alsace-Lorraine. His opposition to colonialism can also be seen as being associated with a desire for France not to alienate the British Empire by competing with it for foreign colonies.

Déroulède became a prominent presence in the annual Franco-Prussian War commemorations around Paris, most notably at Champigny. By keeping memories of the defeat alive, Déroulède hoped to keep up pressure upon the government to implement political reforms and ultimately to take back Alsace-Lorraine.

He was the principal proponent of the anti-Semitic nationalist movement and suffered the dilemma of trying to decrease the anti-Semitism of the league during the Dreyfus Affair. After his banishment to Spain, the league became thoroughly anti-Semitic.

During 1901, he was again publicized by a quarrel with his Royalist allies, which resulted in an abortive attempt to arrange a duel with Buffet in Switzerland. In November 1905, however, the law of amnesty enabled him to return to France.

When Déroulède died in January 1914 his funeral procession in Paris attracted the largest crowds since that of the national hero Victor Hugo.

Déroulède&#x27;s recommendation for a presidential republic with the cabinet appointed by and responsible to a popularly elected president was the basis of the French Fifth Republic introduced by Charles de Gaulle during the 1950s.

== Other publications ==

Besides the works already mentioned, he published the following:
*&quot;Le Sergent&quot;, in the &quot;Théâtre de campagne&quot; (1880)
*&quot;De l&#x27;éducation nationale&quot; (1882)
*&quot;Monsieur le Uhlan et les trois couleurs&quot; (1884)
*&quot;Le Premier grenadier de France&quot; (1886)
*&quot;La Tour d&#x27;auvergne&quot; (1886)
*&quot;Le Livre de Ia ligue des patriotes&quot; (1887)
*&quot;Refrains militaires&quot; (1888)
*&quot;Histoire d&#x27;amour&quot; (1890)
*a pamphlet entitled &quot;Désarmement?&quot; (1891)
*&quot;Chants du paysan&quot; (1894)
*&quot;Poésies Militaires&quot; (1896)
*&quot;Messire du Guesclin, drame en vers&quot; (1895)
*&quot;La mort de Hoche.&quot; (1897)
*&quot;La Plus belle fille du monde&quot; (1898).

==References==

==Further reading==
* Brogan, D.W. &quot;France under the Republic: The development of modern France (1870-1939)&quot; (1940) pp 188–91
* Byrd, Edward Leavell. &quot;Paul Deroulede: revanchist&quot; (PhD. Dissertation, Texas Tech University, 1969) online free.
*Fuller, Robert L., &quot;The Origins of the French Nationalist Movement, 1886-1914&quot;, Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2012.
* Hutton, Patrick H. &quot;Popular Boulangism and the Advent of Mass Politics in France, 1886-90.&quot; &quot;Journal of Contemporary History&quot; (1976): 85–106. in JSTOR
*Rutkoff, Peter M. &quot;Revanche and Revision, The Ligue des Patriotes and the Origins of the Radical Right in France, 1882-1900&quot;, Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1981.
*Seager, Fredric. &quot;The Boulanger Affair, Political Crossroads of France, 1886-1889&quot;, Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1969.
*Sternhell, Zeev. &quot;Paul Déroulède and the origins of modern French nationalism,&quot; &quot;Journal of Contemporary History&quot;, (1971). 6(4), 46–70.
*Tombs, Robert and Isabelle. (2006). &quot;That Sweet Enemy: The French and the British From the Sun King to the Present.&quot; London: William Heinemann 
* Varley, Karine. &quot;Under the Shadow of Defeat: The War of 1870-71 in French Memory&quot;, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2008.

===In French===
*Jacques Chastenet, &quot;Histoire de la Troisième République&quot;, vol. 2, &quot;La République des Républicains, 1879-1893&quot;, Paris: Hachette, 1954.
*Adrien Dansette, &quot;Le Boulangisme, De Boulanger à la Révolution Dreyfusienne, 1886-1890&quot;, Paris: Libraire Academique Perrin, 1938.
*Bertrand Joly, &quot;Déroulède, L&#x27;inventeur du nationalisme français&quot; n.p.: Perrin, 1998.
*Raoul Girardet, &quot;Le Nationalisme français, 1871-1914&quot;, Paris: A. Colin, 1966.
*Odile Rudelle, &quot;La République Absolue, Aux origines de l&#x27;instabilité constitutionelle de la France républicaine, 1870-1889&quot;, Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne, 1982.
*Zeev Sternhell, &quot;La Droite Révolutionnaire, 1885-1914; Les Origines Françaises du Fascisme&quot;, Paris: Seuil, 1978.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1094964" start="0" end="14" title="Paul Déroulède" label="Paul Déroulède"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="76" end="86" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q846469" start="127" end="145" title="League of Patriots" label="League of Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q61460498" start="341" end="357" title="Théâtre Français" label="Théâtre Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="464" end="483" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156681" start="552" end="567" title="Battle of Sedan" label="Battle of Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="584" end="591" title="Breslau" label="Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q239760" start="649" end="663" title="Antoine Chanzy" label="Antoine Chanzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q249976" start="668" end="690" title="Charles Denis Bourbaki" label="Charles Denis Bourbaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="786" end="799" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q180278" start="1368" end="1382" title="Charles Gounod" label="Charles Gounod"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="1489" end="1497" title="Censorship" label="censored"/>
<link wikidata="Q954657" start="1585" end="1597" title="Henri Martin (historian)" label="Henri Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q296076" start="1602" end="1613" title="Félix Faure" label="Félix Faure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136718" start="1679" end="1687" title="revanchism" label="revanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q315747" start="2661" end="2686" title="Georges Ernest Jean Marie Boulanger" label="General Georges Boulanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q134346" start="3115" end="3124" title="Angoulême" label="Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="3336" end="3346" title="Dreyfus affair" label="Dreyfusard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3448" end="3464" title="Gaudérique Roget" label="Gaudérique Roget"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="3620" end="3627" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3835" end="3847" title="André Buffet" label="André Buffet"/>
<link wikidata="Q983162" start="3849" end="3861" title="Jules Guérin" label="Jules Guérin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="4077" end="4090" title="San Sebastián" label="San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="4163" end="4174" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="4286" end="4292" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="4297" end="4305" title="Lorraine (region)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q541557" start="4414" end="4424" title="Anglophile" label="Anglophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="4689" end="4703" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="5430" end="5434" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="5501" end="5508" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="5672" end="5683" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="5846" end="5867" title="French Fifth Republic" label="French Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="5882" end="5899" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q314905" start="6567" end="6578" title="Bertrand du Guesclin" label="du Guesclin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419175" start="8441" end="8455" title="Raoul Girardet" label="Raoul Girardet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407208" start="8530" end="8543" title="Odile Rudelle" label="Odile Rudelle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303739" wikidata="Q336377" url="?curid=303739" title="Generic role-playing game system">
<text>A generic or universal role-playing game system is a role-playing game system designed to be independent of campaign setting and genre. Its rules should, in theory, work the same way for any setting, world, environment or genre.

==History==
The term &quot;generic&quot; has been used since the earliest days of gaming to describe a system that can be used for any type or style of game. There is some dispute among role-playing enthusiasts on when the concept of a generic system originated and which was the first one published.

According to Shannon Appelcline, Chaosium&#x27;s &quot;Basic Role-Playing&quot; (&quot;BRP&quot;, 1980), was the first generic role-playing system. &quot;BRP&quot; was a &quot;cut-down&quot; version of Chaosium&#x27;s &quot;RuneQuest&quot; role-playing game and formed the foundation for the &quot;Stormbringer&quot; RPG, and was also adopted for &quot;Call of Cthulhu&quot;, the first horror role-playing game. The publication of &quot;GURPS&quot; (&quot;Generic Universal Role-Playing System&quot;, 1986) as a completely setting-independent game and its commercial and creative success added credence to the movement. The development of the &quot;Hero System&quot; (1989) from the superhero role-playing game &quot;Champions&quot; also had a profound influence in popularizing the concept.

It truly became a dominant subject in RPG design with the release of the Third Edition of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; (2000) and the &quot;d20 System&quot; along with the creation of the Open Gaming License (OGL).

== Definition ==
The &quot;Fuzion&quot; 5.02 rules uses the term &quot;generic&quot; to describe its basic ruleset as separate from its &quot;Champions&quot; and &quot;Interlock&quot; forerunners. 
In the second paragraph of the introduction to &quot;GURPS&quot; 3rd Edition the authors define &quot;generic&quot; as a means to satisfy players and game masters of many styles of play and feel for rules. 
This is repeated in the updated 4th edition rules along with acknowledgments to &quot;Champions&quot; as the first truly flexible character creation system.

Some &quot;d20&quot; derivative, such as Green Ronin Publishing&#x27;s Mutants &amp; Masterminds and &quot;True20 Adventure Roleplaying&quot;, are presented as fully generic systems.

== Other influential generic systems ==
* Blacksburg Tactical Research Center&#x27;s &quot;EABA&quot;
* Eden Studios&#x27; &quot;Unisystem&quot;
* Evil Hat Productions&#x27; FATE rpg
* Grey Ghost Press&#x27; &quot;FUDGE&quot;
* Guardians of Order&#x27;s &quot;Tri-Stat System&quot;
* Pinnacle Entertainment Group&#x27;s &quot;Savage Worlds&quot;
* R. Talsorian Games&#x27;s &quot;Fuzion&quot; and &quot;Interlock System&quot;
* West End Games&#x27;s &quot;D6&quot; and &quot;Masterbook&quot; systems

== References ==
== External links ==
* Reviews of Generic RPGs at RPGnet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q336377" start="23" end="47" title="Generic role-playing game system" label="role-playing game system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418079" start="108" end="124" title="campaign setting" label="campaign setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="129" end="134" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062574" start="565" end="573" title="Chaosium" label="Chaosium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633765" start="587" end="605" title="Basic Role-Playing" label="Basic Role-Playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q681338" start="756" end="765" title="RuneQuest" label="RuneQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q682309" start="830" end="842" title="Stormbringer (role-playing game)" label="Stormbringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027121" start="885" end="900" title="Call of Cthulhu (role-playing game)" label="Call of Cthulhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047814" start="969" end="974" title="GURPS" label="GURPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613765" start="1181" end="1192" title="Hero System" label="Hero System"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="1215" end="1224" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q281056" start="1249" end="1258" title="Champions (role-playing game)" label="Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="1421" end="1443" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q284471" start="1471" end="1481" title="d20 System" label="d20 System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752744" start="1519" end="1538" title="Open Gaming License" label="Open Gaming License"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378658" start="1574" end="1580" title="Fuzion" label="Fuzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703461" start="1715" end="1724" title="Interlock System" label="Interlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603155" start="2151" end="2173" title="Green Ronin Publishing" label="Green Ronin Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q502527" start="2181" end="2206" title="Mutants &amp;amp; Masterminds" label="Mutants &amp;amp; Masterminds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999819" start="2217" end="2223" title="True20" label="True20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923340" start="2336" end="2371" title="Blacksburg Tactical Research Center" label="Blacksburg Tactical Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322481" start="2385" end="2389" title="EABA" label="EABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719011" start="2398" end="2410" title="Eden Studios, Inc." label="Eden Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005625" start="2423" end="2432" title="Unisystem" label="Unisystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418429" start="2441" end="2461" title="Evil Hat Productions" label="Evil Hat Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350935" start="2468" end="2476" title="FATE (role-playing game system)" label="FATE rpg"/>
<link wikidata="Q940304" start="2508" end="2513" title="FUDGE" label="FUDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614104" start="2522" end="2540" title="Guardians of Order" label="Guardians of Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614104" start="2554" end="2569" title="Tri-Stat System" label="Tri-Stat System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196293" start="2578" end="2606" title="Pinnacle Entertainment Group" label="Pinnacle Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q916623" start="2620" end="2633" title="Savage Worlds" label="Savage Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q762106" start="2642" end="2660" title="R. Talsorian Games" label="R. Talsorian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378658" start="2674" end="2680" title="Fuzion" label="Fuzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703461" start="2697" end="2713" title="Interlock System" label="Interlock System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095106" start="2722" end="2736" title="West End Games" label="West End Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138697" start="2750" end="2752" title="D6 System" label="D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119411" start="2769" end="2779" title="Masterbook" label="Masterbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415291" start="2862" end="2868" title="RPGnet" label="RPGnet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303741" wikidata="Q56951" url="?curid=303741" title="Raphael (archangel)">
<text>Raphael ( , ; &quot;God has healed&quot;) is an archangel first mentioned in the Book of Tobit and in 1 Enoch, both estimated to date from between the 3rd and 2nd century BCE. In later Jewish tradition, he became identified as one of the three heavenly visitors entertained by Abraham at the Oak of Mamre. He is not named in either the New Testament or the Quran, but later Christian tradition identified him with healing and as the angel who stirred waters in the Pool of Bethesda in John 5:2–4, and in Islam, where his name is Israfil, he is understood to be the unnamed angel of Quran 6:73, standing eternally with a trumpet to his lips, ready to announce the Day of Judgment. In Gnostic tradition, Raphael is represented on the Ophite Diagram.

==Origins in post-exilic literature==

In the Hebrew Bible, the word () means messenger or representative; either human or supernatural in nature. When used in the latter sense it is translated as &quot;angel&quot;. The original mal&#x27;akh lacked both individuality and hierarchy, but after the Babylonian exile they were graded into a Babylonian-style hierarchy and the word &quot;archangelos&quot;, archangel, first appears in the Greek text of 1 Enoch. At the same time the angels and archangels began to be given names, as attested in the Talmudic statement that &quot;the names of the angels were brought by the Jews from Babylonia&quot;, attributed to Shimon ben Lakish or Rabbi Hanina respectively.

Raphael first appears in two works of this period, 1 Enoch, a collection of originally independent texts from the 3rd century BCE, and the Book of Tobit, from the early 2nd century BCE. In the oldest stratum of 1 Enoch (1 Enoch 9:1) he is one of the four named archangels, and in Tobit 12:11–15 he is one of seven. 

His name derives from the Hebrew root רפא (&quot;r-p-ʾ&quot;) meaning &quot;to heal&quot;, and can be translated as &quot;God has healed&quot;. In Tobit he goes by the name Azariah (Hebrew: עֲזַרְיָה/עֲזַרְיָהוּ &quot;ʿĂzaryāh/ʿĂzaryāhū, &quot;&quot;Yah/Yahu has helped&quot;) while disguising himself as a human. In the text he acts as a physician and expels demons, using an extraordinary fish to bind the demon Asmodeus and to heal Tobit&#x27;s eyes, while in 1 Enoch he is &quot;set over all disease and every wound of the children of the people&quot;, and binds the armies of Azazel and throws them into the valley of fire.

==In post-biblical Judaism==
According to the Babylonian Talmud, Raphael ( &quot;Rəfāʾēl&quot;, Tiberian: &quot;Răp̄āʾēl&quot;) was one of the three angels who appeared to Abraham in the oak grove of Mamre in the region of Hebron (Genesis 18; Bava Metzia 86b); Michael, as the greatest, walked in the middle, with Gabriel to his right, and Raphael to his left (Yoma 37a). Each was commanded to carry out a specific mission, Gabriel to destroy Sodom, Michael to inform Sarah that she would give birth to Isaac, Raphael to heal Abraham from his recent circumcision and save Lot. Rashi writes, &quot;Although Raphael&#x27;s mission included two tasks, they were considered a single mission since they were both acts that saved people.&quot; The &quot;Life of Adam and Eve&quot; lists him with the archangels Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and Joel, and the medieval Jewish philosopher Maimonides included his name in his Jewish angelic hierarchy.

In Midrash Konen, it is revealed that Raphael was originally once named Libbiel (Hebrew: לִבִּיאֵל &quot;Lībbīʾēl;&quot; Meaning: &quot;God is my heart&quot;). In the Midrash, God takes council with His Angels before he creates Adam the first Man. The Angels were not all of one opinion however, with differing views and reasons. The Angel of Love and Angel of Justice both favoured Man&#x27;s creation as he would be affectionate and loving, alongside practicing Justice. The Angel of Truth and the Angel of Peace opposed his creation however, as he would be full of lies and be quarrelsome. To invalidate his protest, God cast the Angel of Truth down from Heaven to Earth, and when the others cried out against the treatment of their companion, He said, &quot;Truth will spring back out of the earth.&quot; Before their objections, God had only told the Angels of the good there would be among Humans, but not of the evil too. Despite not knowing the whole truth, the Angels were nevertheless prompted to cry out: &quot;What is man, that Thou art mindful of him? And the son of man, that Thou visitest him?&quot; God replied: &quot;The fowl of the air and the fish of the sea, what were they created for? Of what avail a larder full of appetizing dainties, and no guest to enjoy them?&quot; And the Angels could not but exclaim: &quot;O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is Thy name in all the earth! Do as is pleasing in Thy sight.&quot; For not a few of the Angels their opposition bore fatal consequences. When God summoned the band under the Archangel Michael, and asked their opinion on the creation of man, they answered scornfully: &quot;What is man, that Thou art mindful of him? And the son of man, that Thou visitest him?&quot; God thereupon stretched forth His little finger, and all were consumed by fire except their Chief Michael. And the same fate befell the band under the leadership of the Archangel Gabriel; he alone of all was saved from destruction. The third band consulted was commanded by the Archangel Libbiel. Taught by the horrible fate of his predecessors, he warned his troop: &quot;You have seen what misfortune overtook the Angels who said &#x27;What is man, that Thou art mindful of him?&#x27; Let us have a care not to do likewise, lest we suffer the same dire punishment. For God will not refrain from doing in the end what He has planned. Therefore it is advisable for us to yield to His wishes.&quot; Thus warned, the Angels spoke: &quot;Lord of the world, it is well that Thou hast thought of creating man. Do Thou create him according to Thy will. And as for us, we will be his attendants and his ministers, and reveal unto him all our secrets.&quot; Thereupon God changed the Archangel Libbiel&#x27;s name to Raphael, the Rescuer, because his Host of Angels had been rescued by his sage advice. He was appointed the Angelic Prince of Healing, who has in his safe-keeping all the celestial remedies, the types of the medical remedies used on Earth.

In the Midrash Tanhuma, Satan becomes envious of the righteous R. Matthew bar Heresh after seeing him sitting occupied in Torah study, without looking at anyone&#x27;s wife or any other woman. Believing it to be impossible for a righteous man to exist in the world without sin, Satan asks God how He views Rabbi Matthew; He sees him as completely righteous. Satan then asks for permission to test R. Matthew, which is granted to him. Satan then takes the form of a beautiful woman upon finding the Rabbi studying Torah. After seeing that Satan would continue to try and tempt him from all sides; he used hot pins to blind himself lest his evil inclination prevail. Satan then trembled in dismay and reported back to God. Immediately upon hearing this, God called Raphael, Prince of the Healing Arts, commanding him to heal the eyes of R. Matthew bar Heresh. When Raphael goes to R. Matthew and reveals his identity and mission, the Rabbi states that he does not wish to be healed. Raphael then returns to God informing Him of this. Upon hearing this God commands Raphael to tell the Rabbi not to fear, for his evil inclination will not prevail. When he heard this from the mouth of the angel, he accepted his healing and was not afraid.

In Rabbeinu Bahya, a commentary on the Torah written by Rabbi Bahya ben Asher (1255–1340), the Camp of Ephraim, situated to the west of the Tabernacle (Numbers 2:18), corresponded to the celestial camp headed by the archangel Raphael supported by the angels Zavdiel and Achziel. It is also said that this was the camp that Moses alluded to when he prayed that Miriam be healed from her tzaraath by saying &quot;please God heal her&quot; (Numbers 12:13). He appealed to the attribute represented by Raphael.

It is said in Kav HaYashar by Rabbi Tzvi Hirsch Kaidanover (1648–1712), that when the angels appointed to bring infirmity and sickness upon people behold the angel Raphael, they take fright and flee. Then Raphael extends healing to the invalid.

In the Beginning of Wisdom, an introduction to kabbalistic thought composed by Rabbi Aharon Meir Altshuler (1835–1905) in Warsaw between 1887–1893; Raphael is said to correspond to the Sephirah of Tiphereth (Beauty). He is said to act as an intermediate conduct between Chesed (Kindness) corresponding to Michael, and Din (Judgement) corresponding to Gabriel. Uriel (alternatively named Nuriel) is also said to act as an intermediate conduct alongside Raphael. It is further explained that when he inclines toward Chesed he is called Uriel, but when he inclines toward Din he is called Nuriel. In the same context, the Sefer HaBahir calls Raphael the &quot;Prince of Peace&quot; (Hebrew: שַׂר־שָׁלוֹם &quot;Śar Šālōm&quot;). The text states that his reconciliation between Michael, the prince to God&#x27;s right, and Gabriel, the prince to God&#x27;s left is the meaning of the verse, &quot;He imposes peace in His heights&quot; (Job 25:2). With Raphael being the Archangel of Air that establishes peace between Fire and Water.

In kabbalistic astrology, Raphael is most commonly associated with the Sun (alongside Michael) and the planet Mercury. The Zohar also associates him with the image of man in the tetramorph of the four holy living creatures of the Prophet Ezekiel&#x27;s vision, alongside the zodiac sign of Aquarius, and in relation to the image of man; the Sephirah of Malkhuth (Kingdom) and the Earth. As well as Tiphereth and Malkhuth, the Zohar also has Raphael corresponding to the Sephirah of Hod (Majesty), the Euphrates river (Hebrew: פְרָת &quot;Pərāt&quot;, Tiberian: &quot;Părāṯ;&quot; the fourth river of Eden in Genesis) the left leg of the body, and the Israelite Tribe of Ephraim. The text states: &quot;The fourth (river) is Hod (Majesty), the &quot;left leg&quot; (referred to in what was said of Jacob, that &quot;he halted on his left thigh&quot;), and from it shall drink the camp of Raphael, whose mission is to heal the ills of the captivity, and with it the tribe of Ephraim and his two accompanying tribes (Manasseh and Benjamin).&quot;

It is also customary in Judaism to invoke Raphael as one of the Four Archangels after one recites the Shema before going to bed; with Michael by your right side, Gabriel by your left side, Uriel before you, and Raphael behind you. This practice is also referred to in Rebbe Nachman of Breslov&#x27;s (1772–1810) Likutei Etzot. In this work, he refers to the invocation of the Four Archangels as &quot;binding the chariot&quot;.

==Christianity==
The New Testament names only two archangels, Michael and Gabriel (Luke 1:9–26; Jude 1:9; Revelation 12:7), but Raphael, because of his association with healing, became identified with the unnamed angel of John 5:1–4 who periodically stirred the pool of Bethesda &quot;[a]nd he that went down first into the pond after the motion of the water was made whole of whatsoever infirmity he lay under&quot;. The Catholic Church accordingly links Raphael with Michael and Gabriel as saints whose intercession can be sought through prayer.

===Patronage===

Due to his actions in the Book of Tobit and the Gospel of John, Raphael is considered a protector and healer, and so the patron of travelers, the blind, happy meetings, nurses, physicians, medical workers, matchmakers, Christian marriage, and Catholic studies. On a corner of the Doge&#x27;s Palace in Venice is a relief depicting Raphael holding a scroll on which is written: &quot;Efficia fretum quietum&quot; (&quot;Keep the Gulf quiet&quot;). On July 8, 1497, when Vasco da Gama set sail from Lisbon with his four-ship fleet to India, the flagship was named &quot;São Rafael&quot; at the insistence of King Manuel I of Portugal. When the flotilla reached the Cape of Good Hope on October 22, the sailors debarked and erected a column in the archangel&#x27;s honor. The little statue of Raphael that accompanied Da Gama on the voyage is now in the Naval Museum in Lisbon.

===Iconography===
He is perhaps most often seen in depictions of &quot;Tobias and the Angel&quot;, from the Book of Tobit, showing him walking with Tobias and his dog through a landscape. The subject became very popular in Italy from about 1450 for a century, as devotion to Raphael increased, at least partly though confraternities dedicated to him. In altarpieces and the like, Tobias, his fish and his dog may be used as identifying attributes of Raphael.

Raphael is said to guard pilgrims on their journeys, and when depicted as a single figure is often depicted holding a staff. He is also often depicted holding or standing on a fish, which alludes to his healing of Tobit with the fish&#x27;s gall. Early mosaics often show him and the other archangels in the clothing of a Byzantine courtier.

===Feast day===

The feast day of Raphael was included for the first time in the General Roman Calendar in 1921, for celebration on October 24. With the 1969 revision of the General Roman Calendar, the feast was transferred to September 29 for celebration together with archangels Saints Michael and Gabriel. Pope Benedict XVI&#x27;s &quot;Summorum Pontificum&quot; permitted, within certain limits for public use, the General Roman Calendar of 1960, which has October 24 as Raphael&#x27;s feast day.

He is commemorated in some Spanish dioceses on the old date and with a procession on 7 May in Cordoba, Spain.

In the Diocese of Warsaw-Praga he is commemorated on 3 October (with Michael and Gabriel); the feast was transferred from 29 September (Dedication of St. Florian&#x27;s Cathedral).

The archangel Raphael is commemorated by the Eastern Orthodox Church on 8 November in the Synaxis of the Archangel Michael and the Other Bodiless Powers.

In the Oriental Orthodox Churches dedication of church of Saint Raphael on the back of a whale is commemorated on 26 August (3 Pagumen).

The Coptic Orthodox Church celebrates Raphael&#x27;s feast on Kouji Nabot 3 and Koiak 13.

In the Antiochian Western Rite Vicariate Saint Raphael the Archangel is commemorated on 24 October.

===Apparitions===
The Archangel Raphael is said to have appeared in Cordoba, Spain, during the 16th century; in response to the city&#x27;s appeal, Pope Innocent X allowed the local celebration of a feast in the Archangel&#x27;s honor on May 7, the date of the principal apparition. Saint John of God, founder of the Hospital order that bears his name, is also said to have received visitations from Saint Raphael, who encouraged and instructed him. In tribute to this, many of the Brothers Hospitallers of St. John of God&#x27;s facilities are called &quot;Raphael Centers&quot; to this day. The 18th century Neapolitan nun, Saint Maria Francesca of the Five Wounds, is also said to have seen apparitions of Raphael.

==In Islam==
Raphael (, alternate spellings: &quot;Israfel&quot;, &quot;Esrafil&quot;) is a venerated archangel according to Islamic tradition. In Islamic eschatology, Israfil will blow the trumpet from a holy rock in Jerusalem to announce the Day of Judgment (&quot;Yawm al-Qiyāmah&quot;). The trumpet is constantly poised at his lips, ready to be blown when God so orders.

The name &quot;Israfil&quot; (or &quot;Israfel&quot;, &quot;Esrafil&quot;) is not specifically written in the Quran, although there is mention of an unnamed trumpet-angel assumed to identify this figure:

Certain Islamic sources indicate that, created at the beginning of time, Israfil possesses four wings, and is so tall as to be able to reach from the earth to the pillars of heaven. A beautiful angel who is a master of music, Israfil sings praises to God in a thousand different languages, the breath of which is used to inject life into hosts of angels who add to the songs themselves. Further he is probably the highest angel, since he also mediates between God and the other archangels, reading on the Preserved Tablet (&quot;al-lawh al-mahfooz&quot;) to transmit the commands of God. Although disputed, some reports assert he visited Muhammad prior to the archangel Gabriel.

According to Sufi traditions reported by Imam Rafa&#x27;il, the Ghawth or Qutb (&#x27;perfect human being&#x27;), is someone who has a heart that resembles that of the archangel Israfil, signifying the loftiness of this angel. The next in rank are the saints who are known as the Umdah or Awtad, amongst whom the highest ones have their hearts resembling that of archangel Mikhail (archangel Michael), and the rest of the lower ranking saints having the heart of Jibrail (archangel Gabriel), and that of the previous prophets before the Islamic prophet Muhammad. The earth is believed to always have one of the Qutb.

In another account, Rafāʾīl (Arabic: رفائيل) is mentioned by name in the Islamic tradition narrated by Ath-Tha&#x27;labi from Ali. He is said to have met Dhu al-Qarnayn who is mentioned in the last part of Surah 18 of the Quran, al-Kahf (&quot;The Cave&quot;). Dhu al-Qarnayn (The Two Horned One) is believed by some to be Alexander The Great.

The angel told Dhu al-Qarnayn about the Water of Life (Ayn al-Hayat). Hearing that there was such a spring, Dhu al-Qarnayn wanted to drink the Water of Life, but the only one who had succeeded in drinking it was his cousin, Khidr. In Islamic tradition, Khidr is the mystical guide popularly quoted especially in Sufi traditions who has attained a long life and appears to selected Islamic saints throughout the times.

==Places named for Raphael==

The following places have been named in honor of Raphael:

Saint Raphaël, France; Saint Raphaël, Quebec, Canada; and San Rafaels in Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, Peru, and the Philippines; also San Rafael de El Moján and San Rafael de Orituco in Venezuela.
* In the United States, patronages under the name San Rafael, inherited from Spanish tradition survive in California (where besides the city there are the San Rafael Mountains) and also:
* Mission San Rafael Arcángel in San Rafael, California.
* New Mexico, and Utah, where the San Rafael River flows seasonally in the San Rafael Desert.

More recent examples include:
* St. Raphael&#x27;s Cathedral, the seat of the Diocese of Madison, Wisconsin
* St. Raphael&#x27;s Cathedral, the seat of the Archdiocese of Dubuque
* St. Raphael&#x27;s Episcopal Church in Crossville, Tennessee, in the Episcopal Diocese of East Tennessee.
* St. Raphael the Archangel Catholic Church and School, Raleigh, North Carolina
* St. Raphael the Archangel Parish, Saint Louis, Missouri
* St. Raphael Hospital New Haven, Connecticut, USA

Elsewhere:
* St. Raphael&#x27;s Catholic Church, Yeading, Hayes, Middlesex, England
* St. Raphael&#x27;s Church, Huccaby, Hexworthy, Dartmoor National Park, Devon, England
* San Rafael, Vecindario, Santa Lucia de Tirajana Gran Canaria

The Arcangelo Raffaello youth confraternity functioned in Florence, Italy from its founding in 1411 to its suppression in 1785.

St. John of God Catholic Church in Chicago, Illinois, was disassembled, moved and reassembled as St. Raphael the Archangel Church in Mill Creek, Illinois.

==In popular culture==
Raphael, along with many other prominent angels, appears in John Milton&#x27;s &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;, in which he is assigned by God to re-warn Adam concerning the sin of eating of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. He also expounds to Adam the War in Heaven in which Lucifer and the demons fell, and the creation of the Earth.

In the Japanese light novel series Date A Live, Raphael is a spiritual weapon (referred to as angels within the series), belonging to Kaguya Yamai and Yuzuru Yamai. Raphael takes the form of a lance and a pendulum, becoming a bow and arrow when combined. It has the ability to manipulate wind.

In Joseph Haydn&#x27;s &quot;Creation&quot;, Raphael (bass) is one of the three angelic narrators, along with Gabriel (soprano) and Uriel (tenor).

Raphael features as one of the four archangels in the TV series &quot;Supernatural&quot;.

In season 2 of the TV series &quot;Criminal Minds,&quot; the archangel Raphael is brought up as being one of Tobias Hankel&#x27;s personalities.

In the Yogscast YouTube series &quot;Shadow of Israphel&quot;, the main antagonist and titular character derives his namesake from that of St. Raphael.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* List of angels in theology
* Angels in Judaism
* Feast of Saint Raphael, Ollur

== Notes ==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56951" start="0" end="7" title="Raphael (archangel)" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q178342" start="48" end="57" title="archangel" label="archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131737" start="81" end="94" title="Book of Tobit" label="Book of Tobit"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="102" end="109" title="1 Enoch" label="1 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="277" end="284" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473173" start="292" end="304" title="Oak of Mamre" label="Oak of Mamre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="336" end="349" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="357" end="362" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q831297" start="465" end="481" title="Pool of Bethesda" label="Pool of Bethesda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674747" start="529" end="536" title="Israfil" label="Israfil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="582" end="592" title="Sura 6#Notable verses" label="Quran 6:73"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="663" end="678" title="Day of Judgment" label="Day of Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="683" end="690" title="Gnostic" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098006" start="732" end="746" title="Ophite Diagrams" label="Ophite Diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="795" end="807" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="952" end="957" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="1046" end="1062" title="Babylonian exile" label="Babylonian exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q178342" start="1152" end="1161" title="archangel" label="archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391489" start="1409" end="1426" title="Shimon ben Lakish" label="Shimon ben Lakish"/>
<link wikidata="Q982179" start="1430" end="1442" title="Haninah ben Teradion" label="Rabbi Hanina"/>
<link wikidata="Q131737" start="1597" end="1610" title="Book of Tobit" label="Book of Tobit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329048" start="1766" end="1771" title="Seven Archangels" label="seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="1808" end="1812" title="Hebrew root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1957" end="1963" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="2025" end="2033" title="Yahweh" label="Yah/Yahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q733322" start="2189" end="2197" title="Asmodeus" label="Asmodeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q721135" start="2356" end="2362" title="Azazel" label="Azazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="2462" end="2468" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071345" start="2501" end="2509" title="Tiberian Hebrew" label="Tiberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="2577" end="2584" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143048" start="2605" end="2610" title="Mamre" label="Mamre"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="2628" end="2634" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="2666" end="2673" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="2719" end="2726" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="2848" end="2853" title="Sodom and Gomorrah" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q194808" start="2873" end="2878" title="Sarah" label="Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q671872" start="2908" end="2913" title="Isaac" label="Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="2955" end="2967" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q40574" start="2977" end="2980" title="Lot (biblical person)" label="Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456" start="2982" end="2987" title="Rashi" label="Rashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810885" start="3153" end="3173" title="Life of Adam and Eve" label="Life of Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q209378" start="3228" end="3233" title="Uriel" label="Uriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="3262" end="3280" title="Jewish philosopher" label="Jewish philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="3281" end="3291" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3317" end="3341" title="Angels in Judaism#Angelic hierarchy" label="Jewish angelic hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543645" start="3347" end="3360" title="Smaller midrashim" label="Midrash Konen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="3425" end="3431" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155501" start="3520" end="3523" title="God in Judaism" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q690175" start="3547" end="3553" title="Angels in Judaism" label="Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="3572" end="3576" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910304" start="6336" end="6351" title="Tanhuma" label="Midrash Tanhuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="6353" end="6358" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="6451" end="6456" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155501" start="6618" end="6621" title="God in Judaism" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="6827" end="6832" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262061" start="6968" end="6984" title="Yetzer hara" label="evil inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q458707" start="7623" end="7644" title="Bahya ben Asher" label="Rabbi Bahya ben Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329576" start="7670" end="7677" title="Tribe of Ephraim" label="Ephraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q255481" start="7707" end="7717" title="Tabernacle" label="Tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="7890" end="7895" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938388" start="7927" end="7933" title="Miriam" label="Miriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188961" start="7953" end="7961" title="tzaraath" label="tzaraath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378990" start="8089" end="8101" title="Kav ha-Yashar" label="Kav HaYashar"/>
<link wikidata="Q244520" start="8111" end="8133" title="Tzvi Hirsch Kaidanover" label="Tzvi Hirsch Kaidanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="8368" end="8379" title="Kabbalah" label="kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="8443" end="8449" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q660267" start="8506" end="8514" title="Sefirot" label="Sephirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305433" start="8518" end="8527" title="Tiferet" label="Tiphereth"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432953" start="8591" end="8597" title="Chesed (Kabbalah)" label="Chesed"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="8626" end="8633" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q513168" start="8639" end="8642" title="Gevurah" label="Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="8672" end="8679" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209378" start="8681" end="8686" title="Uriel" label="Uriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070127" start="8708" end="8714" title="Nuriel" label="Nuriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q742750" start="8940" end="8953" title="Sefer HaBahir" label="Sefer HaBahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="9001" end="9007" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="9366" end="9375" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="9422" end="9425" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="9461" end="9468" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="9474" end="9479" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010254" start="9529" end="9539" title="tetramorph" label="tetramorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659388" start="9557" end="9573" title="Living creatures (Bible)" label="living creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q194064" start="9589" end="9596" title="Ezekiel" label="Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="9626" end="9632" title="zodiac" label="zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q162119" start="9641" end="9649" title="Aquarius (astrology)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231686" start="9704" end="9712" title="Malkuth" label="Malkhuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="9731" end="9736" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306502" start="9833" end="9836" title="Hod (Kabbalah)" label="Hod"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="9852" end="9861" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="9869" end="9875" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071345" start="9902" end="9910" title="Tiberian Hebrew" label="Tiberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="9951" end="9955" title="Garden of Eden" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="9959" end="9966" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="10002" end="10011" title="Israelites" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605404" start="10012" end="10017" title="Twelve Tribes of Israel" label="Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329576" start="10021" end="10028" title="Tribe of Ephraim" label="Ephraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="10148" end="10153" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735753" start="10365" end="10373" title="Tribe of Manasseh" label="Manasseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812965" start="10378" end="10386" title="Tribe of Benjamin" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="10420" end="10427" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207607" start="10498" end="10503" title="Shema Yisrael" label="Shema"/>
<link wikidata="Q359351" start="10664" end="10669" title="Rebbe" label="Rebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q467182" start="10670" end="10688" title="Nachman of Breslov" label="Nachman of Breslov"/>
<link wikidata="Q178342" start="10777" end="10786" title="Archangel" label="Archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="10846" end="10859" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q831297" start="11087" end="11103" title="pool of Bethesda" label="pool of Bethesda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11247" end="11262" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q189883" start="11671" end="11689" title="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="11693" end="11699" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q194205" start="11819" end="11823" title="Gulf of Venice" label="Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="11860" end="11873" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="11888" end="11894" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="11997" end="12001" title="List of Portuguese monarchs" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="12002" end="12022" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="12054" end="12071" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530155" start="12338" end="12358" title="Tobias and the Angel" label="Tobias and the Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131737" start="12375" end="12388" title="Book of Tobit" label="Book of Tobit"/>
<link wikidata="Q992253" start="12584" end="12599" title="confraternity" label="confraternities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711026" start="12621" end="12631" title="altarpiece" label="altarpiece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12676" end="12713" title="Tobias and the Angel#Altarpieces and sacra conversazione compositions" label="may be used as identifying attributes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="13151" end="13173" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207301" start="13223" end="13236" title="Mysterii Paschalis" label="1969 revision"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="13244" end="13266" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="13379" end="13396" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q594673" start="13410" end="13429" title="Summorum Pontificum" label="Summorum Pontificum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532158" start="13489" end="13519" title="General Roman Calendar of 1960" label="General Roman Calendar of 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860646" start="13690" end="13713" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Warsaw-Praga" label="Diocese of Warsaw-Praga"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="13752" end="13759" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="13764" end="13771" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762010" start="13819" end="13829" title="Dedication (ritual)" label="Dedication"/>
<link wikidata="Q497026" start="13833" end="13861" title="St. Florian&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Florian&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="13890" end="13902" title="Calendar of saints" label="commemorated"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="13910" end="13933" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="14027" end="14053" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodox Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610070" start="14147" end="14153" title="Pagume" label="Pagume"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="14162" end="14184" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610070" start="14220" end="14231" title="Intercalary month (Egypt)" label="Kouji Nabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410257" start="14238" end="14243" title="Koiak" label="Koiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775057" start="14256" end="14289" title="Antiochian Western Rite Vicariate" label="Antiochian Western Rite Vicariate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="14418" end="14425" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="14498" end="14513" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Pope Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q320171" start="14639" end="14650" title="John of God" label="John of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q808386" start="14663" end="14701" title="Brothers Hospitallers of Saint John of God" label="the Hospital order that bears his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q455019" start="14982" end="15016" title="Mary Frances of the Five Wounds" label="Maria Francesca of the Five Wounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q178342" start="15171" end="15180" title="archangel" label="archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073559" start="15216" end="15235" title="Islamic eschatology" label="Islamic eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="15555" end="15560" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="15824" end="15830" title="heaven" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16155" end="16204" title="Tablet (religious)#In Islam" label="Preserved Tablet (&amp;quot;al-lawh al-mahfooz&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932888" start="16288" end="16296" title="Muhammad in Islam" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="16343" end="16347" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249459" start="16404" end="16408" title="Qutb" label="Qutb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="16875" end="16882" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="16883" end="16891" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="17074" end="17077" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207846" start="17102" end="17116" title="Dhu al-Qarnayn" label="Dhu al-Qarnayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q220706" start="17177" end="17184" title="al-Kahf" label="al-Kahf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207846" start="17209" end="17223" title="Dhu al-Qarnayn" label="Dhu al-Qarnayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="17271" end="17290" title="Alexander The Great" label="Alexander The Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207846" start="17308" end="17322" title="Dhu al-Qarnayn" label="Dhu al-Qarnayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207846" start="17401" end="17415" title="Dhu al-Qarnayn" label="Dhu al-Qarnayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q311577" start="17517" end="17522" title="Khidr" label="Khidr"/>
<link wikidata="Q311577" start="17546" end="17551" title="Khidr" label="Khidr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="17605" end="17609" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="18153" end="18163" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q631915" start="18179" end="18187" title="San Rafael, California" label="the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q599073" start="18202" end="18222" title="San Rafael Mountains" label="San Rafael Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q728990" start="18236" end="18263" title="Mission San Rafael Arcángel" label="Mission San Rafael Arcángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q631915" start="18267" end="18289" title="San Rafael, California" label="San Rafael, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="18293" end="18303" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="18309" end="18313" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711869" start="18325" end="18341" title="San Rafael River" label="San Rafael River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415223" start="18366" end="18383" title="San Rafael Desert" label="San Rafael Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q871665" start="18464" end="18482" title="Diocese of Madison" label="Diocese of Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591575" start="18496" end="18524" title="St. Raphael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Dubuque)" label="St. Raphael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364466" start="18542" end="18564" title="Archdiocese of Dubuque" label="Archdiocese of Dubuque"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="18939" end="18946" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749092" start="18976" end="18983" title="Huccaby" label="Huccaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="19027" end="19034" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9092770" start="19049" end="19059" title="Vecindario" label="Vecindario"/>
<link wikidata="Q178925" start="19085" end="19097" title="Gran Canaria" label="Gran Canaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="19467" end="19478" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="19492" end="19505" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q639789" start="19596" end="19634" title="tree of the knowledge of good and evil" label="tree of the knowledge of good and evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q185498" start="19688" end="19695" title="Lucifer" label="Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="19741" end="19746" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="19765" end="19776" title="light novel" label="light novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182548" start="19784" end="19795" title="Date A Live" label="Date A Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="20047" end="20059" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q163138" start="20073" end="20081" title="The Creation (Haydn)" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130585" start="20262" end="20274" title="Supernatural (U.S. TV series)" label="Supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q202141" start="20318" end="20332" title="Criminal Minds" label="Criminal Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776711" start="20436" end="20444" title="The Yogscast" label="Yogscast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522509" start="20609" end="20635" title="List of angels in theology" label="List of angels in theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q690175" start="20638" end="20655" title="Angels in Judaism" label="Angels in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439540" start="20658" end="20687" title="Feast of Saint Raphael, Ollur" label="Feast of Saint Raphael, Ollur"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303742" wikidata="Q239760" url="?curid=303742" title="Antoine Chanzy">
<text>Antoine Eugène Alfred Chanzy (; 18 March 18234 January 1883) was a French general, notable for his successes during the Franco-Prussian War and as a governor of Algeria.

==Biography==
Born in Nouart in the department of Ardennes, France, the son of a cavalry officer, Chanzy was educated at the naval school at Brest, but enlisted in the artillery. He subsequently attended the military academy Saint Cyr, and was commissioned in the &quot;Zouaves&quot; during 1843. He participated in a good deal of fighting in Algeria, and was promoted lieutenant in 1848, and to captain in 1851. He became &quot;chef de bataillon&quot; in 1856, and served in the Second Italian War of Independence, being present at the battles of Magenta and Solferino. He participated with the Syrian campaign of 1860–61 as a lieutenant-colonel, and as colonel commanded the 45th Regiment at Rome in 1864. He returned to Algeria as general of brigade, assisted to quell the Arab insurrection, and commanded the subdivisions of Bel Abbes and Tlemçen in 1868.

Although Chanzy had acquired a good professional reputation, he was in disfavor at the war office because of suspected contributions to the press, and when the war with Prussia began he was refused a brigade command. After the revolution, however, the government of national defence recalled him from Algeria, made him a general of division, and gave him command of the XVI Corps of the Army of the Loire.

The Loire army won the greatest success of the French during the entire war at Coulmiers, and followed this with another victorious action at Patay; in both engagements General Chanzy&#x27;s corps performed the best. After the Second Battle of Orléans and the separation of the two wings of the French army, Chanzy was appointed to command that of the west, designated the second army of the Loire. His enemies, Grand Duke Friedrich Franz II of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, Prince Frederick Charles of Prussia, and General von der Tann, all regarded Chanzy as their most formidable opponent.

Chanzy displayed conspicuous moral courage and constancy, not less than technical skill, in the fighting from the Battle of Beaugency to the Loire. Nevertheless, his army of badly armed conscripts suffered a great defeat at the Battle of Le Mans in January 1871. Chanzy successfully retired to Laval behind the Mayenne but his forces had been depleted severely.

He was made a grand officer of the Legion of Honour, and was elected to the National Assembly. At the beginning of the Commune rebellion, Chanzy, then in Paris, was captured by the insurgents, by whom he was forced to give his parole not to serve against them. It was said that he would otherwise have been appointed instead of Patrice MacMahon to command the army of Versailles. A ransom of £40,000 was also paid by the government for him.

In 1872, Chanzy became a member of the committee of defence and commander of the VII Corps, and in 1873 was appointed governor of Algeria and commander of XIX Corps, where he remained for six years. In 1875, he was elected a life senator, in 1878 received the grand cross of the Legion of Honour, and in 1879, without his consent, was nominated for the presidency of the republic, receiving a third of the total votes.

From 1879 to 1882 Chanzy was ambassador to Russia, during which time he received many tokens of respect, not only from the Russians, but also from the German emperor, William I, and Prince Bismarck. He died suddenly, while commanding the VI Corps (stationed nearest to the German frontier), at Châlons-sur-Marne now Châlons-en-Champagne, only a few days after Leon Gambetta, and he received a state funeral.

Chanzy was the author of &quot;La Deuxième Armée de la Loire&quot; (1872). Statues of General Chanzy have been erected at Nouart and Le Mans.

Chanzy was immortalized in Anatole France&#x27;s classic fiction The Wicker Work Woman.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239760" start="0" end="28" title="Antoine Chanzy" label="Antoine Eugène Alfred Chanzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="74" end="81" title="General officer" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="120" end="139" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="161" end="168" title="French Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q610039" start="193" end="199" title="Nouart" label="Nouart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164" start="221" end="229" title="Ardennes (département)" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="312" end="317" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132066" start="396" end="405" title="École Spéciale Militaire de Saint-Cyr" label="Saint Cyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638325" start="441" end="448" title="Zouaves" label="Zouaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q540978" start="651" end="685" title="Second Italian War of Independence" label="Second Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q681430" start="719" end="726" title="Battle of Magenta" label="Magenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q324916" start="731" end="740" title="Battle of Solferino" label="Solferino"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="767" end="772" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="1014" end="1021" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemçen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808894" start="1402" end="1411" title="16th Army Corps (France)" label="XVI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q833098" start="1419" end="1436" title="Army of the Loire" label="Army of the Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q570919" start="1518" end="1527" title="battle of Coulmiers" label="Coulmiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q551822" start="1666" end="1690" title="Second Battle of Orléans (1870)" label="Second Battle of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q57976" start="1862" end="1880" title="Friedrich Franz II, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin" label="Friedrich Franz II"/>
<link wikidata="Q158445" start="1884" end="1904" title="Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin" label="Mecklenburg-Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60505" start="1913" end="1930" title="Prince Frederick Charles of Prussia" label="Frederick Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1934" end="1941" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76454" start="1947" end="1967" title="Ludwig Freiherr von und zu der Tann-Rathsamhausen" label="General von der Tann"/>
<link wikidata="Q323372" start="2139" end="2158" title="Battle of Beaugency (1870)" label="Battle of Beaugency"/>
<link wikidata="Q40559" start="2253" end="2270" title="Battle of Le Mans" label="Battle of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184154" start="2319" end="2324" title="Laval, Mayenne" label="Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12620" start="2336" end="2343" title="Mayenne" label="Mayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="2423" end="2439" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="2464" end="2481" title="National Assembly of France" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="2507" end="2524" title="Paris Commune" label="Commune rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q158838" start="2716" end="2732" title="Patrice MacMahon, duc de Magenta" label="Patrice MacMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434892" start="2948" end="2967" title="governor of Algeria" label="governor of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813432" start="2985" end="2994" title="XIX Corps (France)" label="XIX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510904" start="3055" end="3067" title="Senator for life (France)" label="life senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078609" start="3279" end="3299" title="List of Ambassadors of France to Russia" label="ambassador to Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="3401" end="3426" title="Wilhelm I of Germany" label="German emperor, William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="3432" end="3447" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Prince Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q47135" start="3544" end="3561" title="Châlons-sur-Marne" label="Châlons-sur-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q295090" start="3610" end="3623" title="Leon Gambetta" label="Leon Gambetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q833098" start="3702" end="3719" title="Armée de la Loire" label="Armée de la Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="3829" end="3850" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3867" end="3888" title="The Wicker Work Woman" label="The Wicker Work Woman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303743" wikidata="Q1146848" url="?curid=303743" title="Cwmbrân Town A.F.C.">
<text>Cwmbrân Town Football Club is a Welsh football team based in Cwmbran, South Wales, that competes in the .

The Crows were formed in 1951 when Whiteheads AFC disbanded. After playing in junior leagues the club switched to the Welsh League in 1960, moving to Cwmbran Stadium in 1975.

In 1978 Cwmbrân Town finished bottom of the Welsh League Premier Division and were relegated, in 1981 the Crows finished 16th but in 1982 won promotion to the Premier Division. In 1986 Cwmbrân Town became full members of the FAW and were chosen as one of 14 Welsh clubs to participate in both the English FA Cup and FA Trophy.

==History==

Formed in 1951, Cwmbrân Town began in the Monmouthshire Senior League, playing their matches at Cwmbrân Park. In 1960 the club joined the &quot;Welsh Football League&quot; and they moved to their present home at the Cwmbran Stadium in 1975. Cwmbrân lost their place in the top division of the &quot;Welsh Football League&quot; in 1978 and it took them three years to return to the top level. Although they finished eighth in the 1981–82 season, they were invited to join the National Division of the restructured League. Cwmbrân finished third in 1986–87 and almost won the title in 1989–90. In 1992 they were invited to become founder members of the League of Wales. They took the title by five points from rivals and near-neighbours Inter Cardiff, conceding only 22 goals all season and losing only three games (all 1–0).

That inaugural championship brought European reward in the form of a UEFA Champions League tie against Cork City from the Republic of Ireland. In the preliminary round, Cwmbrân won the home leg 3–2, after being 3–0 in front but despite going a goal ahead early in the second match they lost 2–1 and went out on away goals. Cwmbrân had another taste of European football in 1997 in the European Cup Winners Cup, having lost 2–1 to newly crowned champions Barry Town in the Welsh Cup final.

Qualifying for Europe again in 1998 and 1999, Cwmbrân met FC Național București of Romania, and Celtic respectively.

In the 1999–2000 Welsh Cup final Cwmbrân lost to Bangor City, and in 2002–03 Barry Town defeated them in the final in a penalty shoot-out. In the 2003–04 UEFA Cup they lost 6–0 on aggregate to Maccabi Haifa of Israel, playing the away leg in İzmir, Turkey.

=== Financial problems (2006–2007) ===

The 2003–04 season saw the introduction of a new manager, Brian Coyne, who had previously managed Newtown. But his reign was short, and during the 2004–05 season after the resignation of long term chairman John Colley, Brian also decided to step down as manager due to financial reasons.
For the rest of that season Cwmbrân were managed by former player Sean Wharton. For the next two seasons, in difficult circumstances Wharton looked to local talent to try to avoid relegation. At the end of the 2005–06 season, Town were close to dropping out of the Welsh top flight for the first time since the League&#x27;s formation. Cwmbrân finished in the second relegation position, but were saved from relegation due to a lack of teams in the feeder leagues wishing to be promoted. But at the end of the 2006–07 season Cwmbrân were relegated for the first time from the Welsh Premier League into the Welsh Football League. They finished in 17th place and were ultimately relegated following a 5–1 defeat by Llanelli AFC on 20 April.

The season&#x27;s on-field performances were overshadowed by off-field financial problems. Towards the end of November 2006, reports surfaced that players were not being paid. The club initially denied this, but on 30 November the club announced officially that it was unable to pay its players. A few key players left, including top scorer Jody Jenkins, who joined Haverfordwest County.

Cwmbrân Town received some help from Newport County, who offered a friendly with all proceeds going to the club. Wharton resigned at the end of the season.

=== Post Welsh Premier League relegation and Welsh League Football (2007–2011) ===

Season 2007–08 saw the club install a new manager, Guillermo Ganet; but his reign was short: he only stayed with the club for one season and then left by mutual consent. A year later the experienced Gary Proctor became as manager, but relegation from Welsh Football League Division 1 followed.
For the 2009–10 season the club had a new management team of Barrie Hughes and Gareth Kedward. With a completely new squad, the team finished fifth from bottom in Division 2, and because of the league restructure, demotion to Division 3 followed. Another relegation followed at the end of the 2010–11 season, and Hughes resigned mid-season.

=== Gwent County League (2011–present) ===

Manager Mark Parfitt and assistant Jamie Jenkins built a new squad for 2011–12 using local players and managed a creditable third place in Division 1 of the Gwent County League. Season 2012–13 started in promising fashion but a few games into the season Parfitt stepped down and Jamie Jenkins took the hot seat, finishing the long hard season near the bottom.

The following season Jenkins was joined by his brother and ex-Crow Daniel Jenkins and the pair oversaw a good run of results: the team were fighting for the league championship until four defeats in the last five games resulted in a seventh-place finish.

The Crows appointed former Cwmbran Celtic FC manager Steve Morgan for the start of the 2014–15 season, but after a bad run of results with no wins in the first eight games, Morgan resigned. First team coach Andrew Howells stepped into the manager position and was joined by former PILCS manager Matthew Ryder with a third of the season remaining. Together they steered the team to the safety of 14th place. Howells left the club, and Ryder took over as manager for the 2015–16 season.

Season 2015–16 started so well on the new 3G pitch at Cwmbran Stadium winning more than usual; as the season ended, the Crows avoided another relegation, finishing in 12th place, with the league restructuring relegating 4 teams from the Gwent County League.

For 2016–17, Ryder brought in Gareth Hinwood as his assistant manager and a host of new players from Cwmbran Celtic FC, finishing the season in eight position, despite being the league&#x27;s leading goal scorers; it was the other end that let the team down.
In 2017–18 Ryder and Hinwood had added quality to the squad, with a real hope of achieving promotion to the Welsh Football League. Ryder hit a bad patch over the Christmas period losing three games in succession resulted in him resigning, leaving the Crows in sixth position and Hinwood taking over as caretaker manager for the final ten games, but Hinwood also stepped down with three games remaining.

In April 2018, at the end of the season, Nicky Church was appointed manager with Della Cheedy as his assistant. The club finished the season in 4th place.

The 2018–19 season proved to be the Crows&#x27; strongest of recent years. The squad was enhanced with experience and talented youth players and although the Crows cemented 4th place again in the league, the club won the Gwent Senior Cup for the fourth time, beating a very strong Ynysddu Welfare side in the final 1-0 and claiming their first trophy in over 13 years.

On top of this, the Club endured a very strong showing in the Welsh Cup getting to the 2nd round proper eliminating Afan Lido of the Welsh League First Division before eventually being knocked out by Ton Pentre, losing 2–1 at Cwmbran Stadium.

An unbeaten league run of 17 games topped off a very successful season for Cwmbran Town.

The 2019–2020 season was cut short due to the coronavirus pandemic bringing a premature end to Nicky Church&#x27;s reign as manager. Town secured a mid table finish due to a points per game outcome. Dean Taylor was appointed as Church&#x27;s replacement in May but only lasted a few weeks in the job leaving for Abergavenny Town.

Lee Waddon replaced Dean Taylor in June with Wayne Jepson stepping in as assistant manager.
Lee only lasted a few months then stepped down.

=== Dark Days ===
A lack of players and Lee stepping down week before the season started looked like the end of the crows, crises meeting led to the Appointment of former Newport County Defender Darren Jones. Not before the team played 2 games against Pill home and the worse result a 20–0 away loss.

Darren appointed Jon Mardon as his assistant and started to build a team, 2021/2022 was a long hard season surviving reliagation by just 3pts.

2022/23 New club President Dan O&#x27;Connell brought a new lease of life, so Darren bought in quality players and started winning games more regularly new hope of getting out of Gwent county seen them finishing in 4th position.

2023/24 Darren Jones stepped down with a host of people interested in taking the hot seat it was former Newport County coach Danny Elliott who got the job. Danny brought in Dominic Broad and Damien Broad former crows and Pontypridd players to help. 
With the league about to start, Danny left for Abergavenny. This was met with a swift appointment of Steve Davies, another Newport County coach taking the hot seat. At the end of the season, the team finished 5th with 20 wins, 1 draw, and 9 losses, just one place behind last season.

=== The Dale Clark Era ===
On the 30th May 2024, Dale Clark was appointed as the manager of Cwmbran Town, signifying the start of a new era for the football team. From his appointment, Dale has taken the team on a 22 match unbeaten run, breaking the team record set in 1992/93 season. During this period, the team became the subject of Sgorio, who made a short video summarising the history of Cwmbran Town, interviewing several key figures and fans.

On the 16th February 2025, Cwmbran Town announced that they had received planning permission for the instalment of a stand at Cwmbran Stadium, a huge step for the club from the position they were in 5 years ago.

==Honours==

=== Senior ===

*League of Wales (Welsh Premier League) Inaugural Winners: 1992–93
*Welsh Cup Runners-up: 1997, 2000, 2003
*Welsh Premier League Cup Runners-up: 2001
*Welsh Football League Division Two Champions: 1967–68
*Welsh Football League Cup Winners: 1990–91
*Gwent Senior Cup Winners: 1994–95, 1995–96, 2005–06, 2018–19
*Monmouthshire Challenge Cup Winners: 1954–55, 1955–56

=== Youth ===

*League of Wales (Welsh Premier League Under 21) inaugural Winners: 2005–06
*National MacWhirter Under-19s League Champions: 2002–03, 2004–05 
*National MacWhirter Under-19s League Runners-up: 2003–04 
*MacWhirter 7-a-side Champions: 2001/02
*Welsh League Under-19s East Division Champions: 2006–07 
*Welsh League Under-19s East Division Runners-up: 2005–06 
*Gwent County Under-14s Cup Champions: 2018–19
*Gwent County Under-18s League Champions: 2003–04, 2004–05, 2005–06, 2021–22, 2022–23
*Gwent County Under-18s League Runners-up: 2006–07
*Gwent County Under-18s Youth Cup Winners: 2006–07, 2022–23
*Astoria Cup Winners: 2002–03
*Torfaen League Under-16s League Runners up: 2015–16
*Torfaen League Under-14s League Winners: 2018–19
*Torfaen League Under-14s League Runners up: 2013–14
*Torfaen League Under-14s Cup Champions: 2018–19
*Torfaen League Under-12s League Champions: 2010–11, 2016–17
*Torfaen League Under-12s Cup Champions: 2010–11, 2016–17
*Torfaen League Under-12s Cup Runners up: 2011–12

=== League record ===
=== European record ===

==Stadium==

Cwmbran Stadium holds 10,500 people and the main outdoor arena consists of an international standard athletics track and field surrounding an artificial 3G football pitch. The complex has an outdoor floodlit artificial playing surface for football and hockey.

On 16th February 2025, Cwmbran Town announced they had obtained planning permission to install a stand at their home, Cwmbran Stadium.

==Squad==


=== Notable former players ===

* Darren Campbell
* Mark Aizlewood
* Danny Gabbidon
* Richard Hurlin
* Kenny Morgans (&quot;former player-manager&quot;)
* Kaid Mohamed
* Glyn Garner
* Jason Perry

==Coaching staff==

==Club officials==

== Youth set up ==

The club has a large and very successful youth structure at various age groups. All youth sides are based at Pen-y-Lan playing fields in Cwmbran, Torfaen. The Club holds a very popular mini festival tournament each year which is attended by many clubs around the Gwent area.

==Managerial history==

==Miscellaneous==

=== Club record appearances ===
=== Top scorers ===

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Crows in cash crisis again&quot;
*&quot;Takeover group could save Crows&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1146848" start="0" end="26" title="Cwmbrân Town A.F.C." label="Cwmbrân Town Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="38" end="46" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q990153" start="61" end="68" title="Cwmbran" label="Cwmbran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="70" end="81" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q177261" start="257" end="272" title="Cwmbran Stadium" label="Cwmbran Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q275173" start="508" end="511" title="Football Association of Wales" label="FAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="588" end="594" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="599" end="608" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="768" end="789" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q177261" start="840" end="855" title="Cwmbran Stadium" label="Cwmbran Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="923" end="944" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="1275" end="1290" title="League of Wales" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096167" start="1359" end="1372" title="UWIC Inter Cardiff F.C." label="Inter Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1518" end="1539" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q932284" start="1552" end="1561" title="Cork City Football Club" label="Cork City"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="1571" end="1590" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685107" start="1801" end="1818" title="European football" label="European football"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="1834" end="1858" title="European Cup Winners Cup" label="European Cup Winners Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q809114" start="1903" end="1913" title="Barry Town F.C." label="Barry Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="1921" end="1930" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195647" start="1997" end="2018" title="FC Național București" label="FC Național București"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="2022" end="2029" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="2035" end="2041" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="2074" end="2083" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="2106" end="2117" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q809114" start="2134" end="2144" title="Barry Town F.C." label="Barry Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q239660" start="2203" end="2219" title="2003–04 UEFA Cup" label="2003–04 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129100" start="2250" end="2263" title="Maccabi Haifa F.C." label="Maccabi Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2267" end="2273" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="2299" end="2304" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2306" end="2312" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10388472" start="2413" end="2424" title="Brian Coyne" label="Brian Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q50217554" start="2709" end="2721" title="Sean Wharton" label="Sean Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="3219" end="3239" title="Welsh Premier League" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="3249" end="3270" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q291848" start="3356" end="3368" title="Llanelli AFC" label="Llanelli AFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q941152" start="3749" end="3769" title="Haverfordwest County" label="Haverfordwest County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18523" start="3809" end="3823" title="Newport County A.F.C." label="Newport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="4264" end="4285" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623533" start="4850" end="4869" title="Gwent County League" label="Gwent County League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197229" start="5337" end="5354" title="Cwmbran Celtic FC" label="Cwmbran Celtic FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q177261" start="5850" end="5865" title="Cwmbran Stadium" label="Cwmbran Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623533" start="6033" end="6052" title="Gwent County League" label="Gwent County League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197229" start="6156" end="6173" title="Cwmbran Celtic FC" label="Cwmbran Celtic FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="6422" end="6443" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050607" start="6616" end="6633" title="caretaker manager" label="caretaker manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="7306" end="7315" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q177261" start="7470" end="7485" title="Cwmbran Stadium" label="Cwmbran Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146848" start="7563" end="7575" title="Cwmbran Town" label="Cwmbran Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459758" start="9597" end="9603" title="Sgorio" label="Sgorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="9956" end="9971" title="Welsh Premier League" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574638" start="10014" end="10021" title="1992–93 League of Wales" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="10023" end="10032" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10063" end="10087" title="Welsh Premier League Cup" label="Welsh Premier League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981899" start="10106" end="10140" title="Welsh Football League Division Three" label="Welsh Football League Division Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981896" start="10161" end="10186" title="Welsh Football League Cup" label="Welsh Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q109775891" start="10205" end="10221" title="Gwent County FA Senior Cup" label="Gwent Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10267" end="10294" title="Monmouthshire Challenge Cup" label="Monmouthshire Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="10338" end="10353" title="Welsh Premier League" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10414" end="10433" title="National MacWhirter" label="National MacWhirter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10481" end="10500" title="National MacWhirter" label="National MacWhirter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981935" start="10580" end="10592" title="Welsh League" label="Welsh League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981935" start="10638" end="10650" title="Welsh League" label="Welsh League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10697" end="10709" title="Gwent County" label="Gwent County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10744" end="10756" title="Gwent County" label="Gwent County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10830" end="10842" title="Gwent County" label="Gwent County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10881" end="10893" title="Gwent County" label="Gwent County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10971" end="10985" title="Torfaen League" label="Torfaen League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11024" end="11038" title="Torfaen League" label="Torfaen League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11074" end="11088" title="Torfaen League" label="Torfaen League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11127" end="11141" title="Torfaen League" label="Torfaen League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11176" end="11190" title="Torfaen League" label="Torfaen League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11237" end="11251" title="Torfaen League" label="Torfaen League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11295" end="11309" title="Torfaen League" label="Torfaen League"/>
<link wikidata="Q177261" start="11405" end="11420" title="Cwmbran Stadium" label="Cwmbran Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q549013" start="11848" end="11863" title="Darren Campbell" label="Darren Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766497" start="11866" end="11880" title="Mark Aizlewood" label="Mark Aizlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q312067" start="11883" end="11897" title="Danny Gabbidon" label="Danny Gabbidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10477308" start="11900" end="11914" title="Richard Hurlin" label="Richard Hurlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58331" start="11917" end="11930" title="Kenny Morgans" label="Kenny Morgans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10407045" start="11969" end="11981" title="Kaid Mohamed" label="Kaid Mohamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572840" start="11984" end="11995" title="Glyn Garner" label="Glyn Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163246" start="11998" end="12009" title="Jason Perry (footballer)" label="Jason Perry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303744" wikidata="Q1761492" url="?curid=303744" title="OpenZaurus">
<text>OpenZaurus is a defunct embedded operating system for the Sharp Zaurus personal mobile tool PDA.

== History ==
In its original form, the project was a repackaging of the SharpROM, the Zaurus&#x27;s factory supplied kernel and root filesystem image. In order to make the Zaurus&#x27;s OS closer to the needs of the developer community, the SharpROM was altered through the use of bugfixes, software additions, and even removals in order to make the package more open.

The OpenZaurus project was revamped completely, becoming Debian-based built from source, from the ground up. Due to the change in direction, OpenZaurus became quite similar to other embedded Debian-based distributions, such as Familiar for the iPAQ. OpenZaurus, in its current form, facilitates an easy method for users to build their own custom images. The efforts of Openzaurus, along with other embedded Linux projects, were integrated into the OpenEmbedded Project, which now provides the common framework for these projects.

== Variants ==
In addition to building a custom OpenZaurus image using OpenEmbedded metadata, The OpenZaurus distribution can be acquired in three variations for each version release.

* Bootstrap: A minimal, console based image with a working root filesystem, and networking over SSH, WLAN, Bluetooth, or USB. Suitable for bootstrapping a larger, X11 system.
* GPE: Everything the Bootstrap image contains, plus the X Window System and the GTK+ based GPE Palmtop Environment.
* OPIE: Everything the Bootstrap image contains and the Qt based OPIE Palmtop Integrated Environment.

== Status ==
On April 26, 2007, it was announced that the OpenZaurus project was over. Future development efforts are to focus on the Ångström distribution for embedded systems.

== See also ==

* Palm OS
* Pocket PC
* Windows Mobile

==References==
==External links==
* Hentges.net OZ with updated OPIE releases</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1761492" start="0" end="10" title="OpenZaurus" label="OpenZaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="33" end="49" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q166841" start="58" end="70" title="Sharp Zaurus" label="Sharp Zaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="92" end="95" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="216" end="222" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="315" end="324" title="Software developer" label="developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="380" end="386" title="bugfix" label="bugfix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992499" start="696" end="704" title="Familiar Linux" label="Familiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q284505" start="713" end="717" title="iPAQ" label="iPAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466576" start="917" end="929" title="OpenEmbedded" label="OpenEmbedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q170460" start="1281" end="1284" title="Secure Shell" label="SSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="1286" end="1290" title="Wireless LAN" label="WLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="1292" end="1301" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="1306" end="1309" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195936" start="1324" end="1337" title="bootstrapping" label="bootstrapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="1441" end="1445" title="GTK+" label="GTK+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486424" start="1452" end="1475" title="GPE Palmtop Environment" label="GPE Palmtop Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="1533" end="1535" title="Qt (framework)" label="Qt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130329" start="1714" end="1735" title="Ångström distribution" label="Ångström distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="1740" end="1755" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q274582" start="1777" end="1784" title="Palm OS" label="Palm OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q29758" start="1787" end="1796" title="Pocket PC" label="Pocket PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="1799" end="1813" title="Windows Mobile" label="Windows Mobile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303746" wikidata="Q76454" url="?curid=303746" title="Ludwig Freiherr von und zu der Tann-Rathsamhausen">
<text>Ludwig Samson Heinrich Arthur Freiherr von und zu der Tann-Rathsamhausen (18 June 181526 April 1881) was a Bavarian general.

==Early life==
Born in Darmstadt, on the day of Waterloo, Ludwig was a descendant from the old family of von der Tann, which had branches in Bavaria, the Alsace and the Rhine provinces, and attached his mother&#x27;s name (she being the daughter of an Alsatian nobleman, Freiherr von Rathsamhausen) to his father&#x27;s in 1868 by license of the king of Bavaria. Ludwig I, the second king of Bavaria, stood sponsor for the child, who received his name and also &quot;Arthur&quot;, in honour of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington. He received a careful education, and in 1827 became a page at the Bavarian court, where a great future was predicted for him.

==Military career==
Von der Tann entered the military under the artillery branch in 1833, and was after some years placed on the general staff. He attended the manoeuvres of the Austrian army in Italy under Field Marshal Radetzky and, in a spirit of adventure, joined a French military expedition operating in Algiers against the Tunisian frontier.

===First Schleswig War===
On his return he became a close personal friend of the Bavarian Crown Prince Maximilian (afterwards King Maximilian II). In 1848 he was promoted to major, and in that year he distinguished himself greatly as the leader of a Schleswig-Holstein light corps in the First Schleswig War between Denmark and a coalition of German states. At the close of the first campaign he was awarded the Order of the Red Eagle by the king of Prussia, and his own sovereign awarded him the Military Order of Max Joseph and promoted him to lieutenant-colonel. In 1849 he served as chief of staff to the Bavarian contingent at the front and distinguished himself at the lines of Dybbøl. He then visited Haynau&#x27;s headquarters in the Hungarian War before returning to Schleswig-Holstein to serve as von Willisen&#x27;s chief of staff in the Idstedt campaign.

===Austro-Prussian War===
Then came the threat of war between Prussia and Austria, and von der Tann was recalled to Bavaria. The crisis ended with the surrender of Olmütz (November 1850), and he saw no further active service until 1866, rising in the usual way of promotion to colonel (1851), major-general (1855), and lieutenant-general (1861). In the earlier years of this period he was the &quot;aide-de-camp&quot; and constant companion of King Maximilian. In the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 he served as chief of staff to Prince Karl Theodor of Bavaria, who commanded the South German contingents. The almost entirely unfavorable outcome of the military operations led to vehement attacks on him in the press, but the unreadiness and ineffectiveness of the troops and the general lack of interest in the war on the part of the soldiers had foredoomed the South Germans to failure in any case.

===Franco-Prussian War===
He continued to enjoy the favour of the king and was promoted to the rank of general of the infantry (1869), but the bitterness of his disappointment of 1866 never left him. He was grey-haired at forty-two, and his health was impaired. In 1869 von der Tann-Rathsamhausen, as he was now called, was appointed commander of the I. Bavarian Corps. This corps he commanded during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870/71, and it was in this war that he secured his reputation as one of the foremost of German soldiers. His gallantry was conspicuous at the battles of Wörth and Sedan. Transferred in the autumn to an independent command on the Loire, he conducted the operations against d&#x27;Aurelle de Paladines, at first with marked success, and forced the surrender of Orléans. He had, however, at Coulmiers to give way before a numerically larger French force; but reinforced, he fought several successful engagements under the Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin near Orléans.

After the end of the war he was reappointed commander-in-chief of the I. Bavarian Corps, a post which he held until his death in 1881 at Meran. He received the Grand Cross of the Bavarian Military Order, and from the King of Prussia the first class of the Iron Cross and the &quot;Pour le Mérite&quot;. In 1878 the German emperor named von der Tann honorary colonel of a Prussian infantry regiment, gave him a life pension, and named one of the new Strassburg forts after him.

==Honours and awards==
;Commemoration
*A gunboat of the Schleswig-Holstein navy, &quot;Von der Tann&quot;, named after him in 1849.
*The German World War I battlecruiser SMS &quot;Von der Tann&quot; was named after him.
*The 11th Royal Bavarian Infantry Regiment (part of the 6th Royal Bavarian Division formed in 1900 in Regensburg) was designated &quot;Von der Tann&quot; in his honor.
* Naming of &quot;Fort Tann&quot; Fort No. 8 at Strasbourg by emperor Wilhelm I (1873)
* Honorary Citizen of the City of Munich (1871)
* Monument on &quot;Marktplatz von Tann&quot; (Rhön) (1900)
* Naming of &quot;Von-der-Tann-Straße&quot; in Erlangen (1900), Munich, Dortmund, Wuppertal (1901), Hamburg, Nuremberg, Neustadt and Regensburg (1901)
* Composer Andreas Hager wrote in 1880 in his homage to &quot;General von der Thann march&quot;, as the parade of his regiment (Royal Bav. 11th Infantry Regiment &quot;Von der Thann&quot;) has been assigned.

;Orders and decorations
;Military appointments
* Presentation &quot;à la suite&quot; of the 1st Field Artillery Regiment &quot;Prince Leopold&quot;, &quot;24 July 1878&quot;
* Appointment as Chief of the Royal Prussian 2 Lower Silesian Infantry Regiment No. 47, &quot;8 August 1878&quot;

==Notes==
==References==

Attribution:

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76454" start="0" end="72" title="Ludwig Freiherr von und zu der Tann-Rathsamhausen" label="Ludwig Samson Heinrich Arthur Freiherr von und zu der Tann-Rathsamhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="107" end="114" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973" start="149" end="158" title="Darmstadt" label="Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="174" end="182" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q740117" start="231" end="243" title="von der Tann (disambiguation)" label="von der Tann"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="267" end="274" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="280" end="286" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="295" end="300" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="489" end="497" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="620" end="660" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="853" end="862" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q153500" start="996" end="1018" title="Joseph Radetzky von Radetz" label="Field Marshal Radetzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="1099" end="1106" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="1119" end="1126" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44530" start="1242" end="1252" title="Maximilian II of Bavaria" label="Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="1389" end="1407" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q685683" start="1427" end="1446" title="First Schleswig War" label="First Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q93732" start="1551" end="1573" title="Order of the Red Eagle" label="Order of the Red Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1589" end="1596" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q707685" start="1636" end="1664" title="Military Order of Max Joseph" label="Military Order of Max Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="1748" end="1755" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567585" start="1823" end="1829" title="Dybbøl" label="Dybbøl"/>
<link wikidata="Q78597" start="1847" end="1853" title="Julius Jacob von Haynau" label="Haynau"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="1881" end="1894" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire" label="Hungarian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q65970" start="1946" end="1965" title="Karl Wilhelm von Willisen" label="von Willisen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q708601" start="2158" end="2177" title="Punctation of Olmütz" label="surrender of Olmütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44530" start="2456" end="2466" title="Maximilian II of Bavaria" label="Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="2475" end="2502" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War of 1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q61548" start="2534" end="2564" title="Prince Karl Theodor of Bavaria" label="Prince Karl Theodor of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q265098" start="3257" end="3274" title="I Royal Bavarian Corps" label="I. Bavarian Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="3311" end="3330" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q684479" start="3488" end="3493" title="Battle of Wörth" label="Wörth"/>
<link wikidata="Q156681" start="3498" end="3503" title="Battle of Sedan (1870)" label="Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="3564" end="3569" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q567331" start="3607" end="3634" title="Louis d&amp;#x27;Aurelle de Paladines" label="d&amp;#x27;Aurelle de Paladines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="3694" end="3701" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q570919" start="3723" end="3732" title="Battle of Coulmiers" label="Coulmiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q57976" start="3854" end="3888" title="Frederick Francis II, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin" label="Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q265098" start="3974" end="3991" title="I Royal Bavarian Corps" label="I. Bavarian Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q131605" start="4041" end="4046" title="Meran" label="Meran"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="4160" end="4170" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q156478" start="4185" end="4199" title="Pour le Mérite" label="Pour le Mérite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="4353" end="4363" title="Strassburg" label="Strassburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q727962" start="4463" end="4487" title="Von der Tann (gunboat)" label="&amp;quot;Von der Tann&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q641685" start="4552" end="4580" title="SMS Von der Tann" label="SMS &amp;quot;Von der Tann&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q246015" start="4658" end="4685" title="6th Royal Bavarian Division" label="6th Royal Bavarian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="4704" end="4714" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q148988" start="4952" end="4956" title="Rhön" label="Rhön"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5127" end="5140" title="Andreas Hager" label="Andreas Hager"/>
<link wikidata="Q249405" start="5393" end="5403" title="à la suite" label="à la suite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303747" wikidata="Q183530" url="?curid=303747" title="Ghanaian cedi">
<text>The cedi ( , pronounced in the same way as CD) (currency sign: GH₵; currency code: GHS) is the unit of currency of Ghana. It is the fourth historical and only current legal tender in the Republic of Ghana. One Cedi is divided into one hundred Pesewas (Gp).

After independence, Ghana separated itself from the British West African pound, which was the currency of the British colonies in the region. The new republic&#x27;s first independent currency was the Ghanaian pound (1958–1965). In 1965, Ghana decided to leave the British colonial monetary system and adopt the widely accepted decimal system. The African name Cedi (1965–1967) was introduced in place of the old British pound system. Ghana&#x27;s first President Kwame Nkrumah introduced Cedi notes and Pesewa coins in July 1965 to replace the Ghanaian pounds, shillings and pence. The Cedi bore the portrait of the President and was equivalent to eight shillings and four pence (8s 4d), i.e. one hundred old pence, so that 1 pesewa was equal to one penny.

After the February 1966 military coup, the new leaders wanted to remove the face of Nkrumah from the banknotes. The &quot;new Cedi&quot; (1967–2007) was worth 1.2 Cedis, which made it equal to half of a pound sterling (or ten shillings sterling) at its introduction. Decades of high inflation devalued the new Cedi, so that in 2007 the largest of the &quot;new cedi&quot; banknotes, the 20,000 note, had a value of about US$2. The new cedi was gradually phased out in 2007 in favor of the &quot;Ghana Cedi&quot; at an exchange rate of 1:10,000. By removing four digits, the Ghana Cedi became the highest-denominated currency unit issued in Africa. It has since lost over 90% of its value.

== Etymology ==

The word is the Akan word for cowry shell. Cowries (plural of cowry) were formerly used as currency in what is now Ghana. The &quot;Monetaria moneta&quot; or money cowry is not native to West African waters but is a common species in the Indian Ocean. The porcelain-like shells came to West Africa, beginning in the 14th century, through trade with Arab merchants. The first modern coins exclusively used at the Gold Coast were produced in 1796 but cowries were used alongside coins and gold as currency until 1901.

== History ==

=== First cedi, 1965–1967 ===
AS

The first cedi was introduced in 1965, replacing the pound at a rate of 2.4 cedi = 1 pound, or 1 pesewa = 1 penny. The first cedi was pegged to sterling at a rate of 2.4 cedis = £1, or 8s 4d per cedi.

=== Second cedi (GHC), 1967–2007 ===


The first cedi was replaced in 1967 by a &quot;new cedi&quot; which was worth 1.2 first cedis. This allowed a decimal conversion with the pound, namely 2 second cedis = 1 pound. The change also provided an opportunity to remove Kwame Nkrumah&#x27;s image from coins and notes.

The second cedi was initially pegged to sterling at a rate of ₵2 = £1. However, within months, the second cedi was devalued to a rate of ₵2.45 = £1, less than the initial value of the first cedi. This rate was equivalent to ₵1 = 0.98 U.S. dollars and the rate to the dollar was maintained when sterling was devalued in November 1967. Further pegs were set of $0.55 in 1971, $0.78 in 1972, and $0.8696 in 1973 before the currency was floated in 1978. High inflation ensued, and so the cedi was re-pegged at ₵2.80 = $1.00.

The cedi&#x27;s value continued to be eaten away on the black market. In the early 1980s, the government started cracking down on the retail of products at prices other than the official established sale price (also known as price controls). This had the effect of driving nearly all commerce underground, where black market prices for commodities were the norm, and nothing existed on store shelves. By 1983, one U.S. dollar equalled about 120 cedis on the black market; a pack of cigarettes cost about ₵150 (if they could be found), but the bank rate continued at ₵2.80 = $1.00. Finally, with foreign currency completely drying up for all import transactions, Ghana was forced to begin a process of gradual devaluation, as well as a liberalization of its strict price controls. This process ended in 1990 with a free float of the cedi against foreign currencies. Inflation continued (see the exchange rate chart) until by July 2007, one US dollar was worth about ₵9500, and a transition to the third cedi was initiated.

In 1979 a currency confiscation took place. New banknotes were issued which were exchanged for old ones at a rate of 10 old notes for 7 new ones. Coins and bank accounts were unaffected.

A second confiscation took place in 1982, when the ₵50 note (the highest denomination) was demonetized. Ghanaians, in theory, could exchange any number of ₵50 notes for coins or other banknotes without loss, but foreigners could not make any exchange. However, many Ghanaians who were hoarding large amounts of cedis feared reprisal if they tried to convert all of it, and so simply burned a lot of their money. Meanwhile, Ghanaians in the United Kingdom received &quot;promise payment notes&quot; from banks, but never received compensation. This confiscation of money was publicly justified as a means to create a disincentive for the flourishing black market. However, from a monetary perspective, currency confiscations have the effect of reducing available cash reserves in the economy of Ghana, thereby slowing the rate of inflation. After the ₵50 note confiscation, the ₵20 note was the highest cedi denomination, but had a street value of only about $0.35 (U.S.)

After the ₵50 note confiscation, fears existed that the government could also confiscate the ₵20 or even the ₵10 notes. This fear, along with inflation running at about 100% annually, started causing Ghanaians to lose their faith in their country&#x27;s own currency. Some transactions could only then be done in foreign currencies (although that was technically illegal), and other, more routine transactions began to revert to barter.

In 1991, 10, 20, 50, and 100 cedi coins were introduced, followed by 200 and 500 cedis in 1996. These six denominations were still in circulation until 2007. However, the 10 cedis (~0.1 U.S. cents) and 20 cedis (~0.2 U.S. cents) coins were not seen much due to their small value.

=== Third cedi (GHS), 2007–present ===



Because of the rampant inflation in the decades before the exchange the second cedi was only worth a small fraction of its original value. The government decided to &quot;cut&quot; four zeros off the currency by switching to the third cedi. The new currency was not introduced as the third cedi but is instead officially called the &quot;Ghanaian cedi&quot; (GH₵), in contrast to the second cedi that was officially known as the &quot;new cedi&quot;. In the second half of 2007 both the second and third cedi were legal tender as the old currency was being gradually withdrawn. At the end of December 2007, more than 90% of all old coins and notes had been withdrawn. From January 2008 old banknotes could only be exchanged at banks and were no longer legal tender.

On 14 May 2010, a GH₵2 banknote was issued to meet public need for an intermediate denomination and reduce the frequency, and associated cost, of printing large volumes of the GH₵1 banknote. The introduction of the new denomination coincided with the conclusion of the year-long centenary celebrations of the birth of Kwame Nkrumah, Ghana&#x27;s first president, and has the commemorative text &quot;Centenary of the Birth of Dr. Kwame Nkrumah&quot;.

Due to periods of &quot;sustained high inflation&quot; and &quot;perennial depreciation of the currency&quot;, the Bank of Ghana on 29 November 2019, announced the issuance of a new 2-cedi coin and as well as new 100 and 200-cedi banknotes. Existing 1 and 2 cedi banknotes remain legal tender, though these denominations will be gradually replaced by coins to reduce costs.

The third Cedi has been losing value continuously since it was introduced. In 2014, the inflation rose rapidly as the value of the third cedi fell to a fourth of its original value. The devaluation was temporarily halted in the last quarter of 2014 as the currency stabilized due to a pending IMF bailout of Ghana.

Due to its negligible purchasing power, the one pesewa coin is rarely seen in circulation. In September 2021, the Bank of Ghana began the process of withdrawing GH₵1 and GH₵2 notes from circulation to encourage the use of coins of their corresponding face values.

In August 2022, accelerating inflation and continued economic mismanagement has caused the cedi&#x27;s value to drop to 10 U.S. cents (GH₵10 = US$1). , the annual inflation rate of 37.2% as reported by the Ghana Statistical Service was the highest since 2001.

By October 2022, the cedi became the world&#x27;s worst performing currency, having lost 60% of its value relative to the U.S. dollar since the end of 2021. The exchange rate was about GH₵15 per U.S. dollar.

== Coins ==
The Bank of Ghana has been issuing all Ghanaian coins since 1958. Beside the coins in general circulation the bank has also issued commemorative coins. These special coins have been issued in shillings (1958), crowns (1965), pounds (1958–1977), sikas (1997–2003) and cedis (2013–). It is unclear if the Bank of Ghana considered commemorative crowns and sikas together with the commemorative pounds that were coined after 1965 as legal tender or simply as medallions.

Only coins that have been or are in general circulation are included in this list. The years of issue does not indicate that the series have been coined every year in the period but that the coin has been issued more than once in the stated period. Some coins are held back and released years after they are issued. This means that in the general circulation there are worn out coins and coins in mint condition from the same issuing year. The Bank of Ghana has never stated if they are simply holding back already stamped coins until they are needed or if they are stamping coins successively with old issue years.

=== First cedi (1965–67) ===

=== Second cedi ===
=== Third cedi ===
The new coins are 1 pesewa (100 old cedi), 5 pesewas (500), 10 pesewas (1,000), 20 pesewas (2,000), 50 pesewas (5,000), 1 cedi (10,000) and 2 cedis (20,000).

== Banknotes ==
The Bank of Ghana has been issuing all Ghanaian banknotes since 1958. Most of the Ghanaian banknotes have been changed slightly from one year&#x27;s issue to the next year&#x27;s issue in the ongoing technological fight against counterfeit money. The signature on the notes also changes when a new governor takes over the management of the Bank of Ghana. Such changes are frequent and are not covered in this list. The years of issue do not indicate that the series has been printed every year in the period, but that the banknote has been issued more than once in the given period.

=== First cedi (1965–67) ===
=== Second cedi (1967–2007) ===
==== 1967 to 1979 ====


==== 1979 to 2007 ====


=== Third cedi (2007–present) ===
== Exchange rate history ==



== See also ==
* Economy of Ghana
* E-Cedi
* Previous Ghanaian currencies:
**Money cowry
**Akan goldweights (golddust)
**Gold Coast ackey
** British West African pound
** Ghanaian pound

== References ==
== External links ==
* Original source of the above pre-2007 Ghanaian banknotes: https://www.banknotes.com/gh.htm</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="4" end="8" title="Ghanaian cedi" label="cedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="43" end="45" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="48" end="61" title="currency sign" label="currency sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="63" end="66" title="Ghanaian cedi" label="GH₵"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="68" end="81" title="ISO 4217" label="currency code"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="83" end="86" title="Ghanaian cedi" label="GHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="103" end="111" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="115" end="120" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="167" end="179" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="187" end="195" title="Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="264" end="276" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q743823" start="310" end="336" title="British West African pound" label="British West African pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508175" start="459" end="473" title="Ghanaian pound" label="Ghanaian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="531" end="539" title="colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773266" start="540" end="555" title="monetary system" label="monetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="586" end="593" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="671" end="691" title="£sd" label="British pound system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="722" end="735" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="820" end="829" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="shillings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1027" end="1054" title="National Liberation Council#1966 coup" label="February 1966 military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="1243" end="1251" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="1300" end="1309" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476552" start="1633" end="1663" title="Central banks and currencies of Africa" label="currency unit issued in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="1740" end="1744" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q366291" start="1754" end="1759" title="cowry" label="cowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="1815" end="1823" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1839" end="1844" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314137" start="1856" end="1872" title="Monetaria moneta" label="Monetaria moneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="1882" end="1887" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="1911" end="1922" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="1962" end="1974" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="1980" end="1989" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="2010" end="2021" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2073" end="2077" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="2136" end="2146" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="2211" end="2215" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508175" start="2343" end="2348" title="Ghanaian pound" label="pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="2434" end="2442" title="Pound sterling" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="2641" end="2648" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="2759" end="2772" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="3043" end="3055" title="U.S. dollars" label="U.S. dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q14083" start="3076" end="3082" title="dollar" label="dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="3264" end="3273" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="3556" end="3570" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="3745" end="3756" title="United States dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181250" start="4711" end="4716" title="Coins of the pound sterling" label="coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856429" start="4726" end="4735" title="Banknotes of the pound sterling" label="banknotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555481" start="4808" end="4817" title="Ghanaians in the United Kingdom" label="Ghanaians"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="4925" end="4931" title="Money laundering" label="burned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555481" start="4965" end="4996" title="Ghanaians in the United Kingdom" label="Ghanaians in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="5943" end="5949" title="barter" label="barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="6138" end="6148" title="US dollar" label="U.S. cents"/>
<link wikidata="Q51005" start="6414" end="6428" title="John Kufuor" label="The government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="7360" end="7373" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995876" start="7442" end="7451" title="Centennial" label="Centenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q669484" start="7609" end="7622" title="Bank of Ghana" label="Bank of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q669484" start="8936" end="8949" title="Bank of Ghana" label="Bank of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q669484" start="10265" end="10278" title="Bank of Ghana" label="Bank of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10475" end="10506" title="Counterfeit money#Anti-counterfeiting measures" label="fight against counterfeit money"/>
<link wikidata="Q777007" start="11038" end="11054" title="Economy of Ghana" label="Economy of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q109258023" start="11057" end="11063" title="E-Cedi" label="E-Cedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314137" start="11098" end="11109" title="Monetaria moneta" label="Money cowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291228" start="11112" end="11128" title="Akan goldweights" label="Akan goldweights"/>
<link wikidata="Q742694" start="11142" end="11158" title="Gold Coast ackey" label="Gold Coast ackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q743823" start="11162" end="11188" title="British West African pound" label="British West African pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508175" start="11192" end="11206" title="Ghanaian pound" label="Ghanaian pound"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303749" wikidata="Q1113804" url="?curid=303749" title="Comcast">
<text>Comcast Corporation, formerly known as Comcast Holdings, is an American multinational mass media corporation that works in telecommunications and entertainment. It is headquartered at the Comcast Center in Philadelphia. Comcast is the third-largest broadcasting and cable television company worldwide by revenue (behind China Mobile and Verizon). It is the third-largest pay-TV company, the second-largest cable TV company by subscribers, and the largest home Internet service provider in the United States. In 2023, the company was ranked 51st in the Forbes Global 2000.

Comcast is additionally the nation&#x27;s third-largest home telephone service provider. It provides services to U.S. residential and commercial customers in 40 states and the District of Columbia. As the owner of NBCUniversal since 2013, Comcast is also a high-volume producer of films for theatrical exhibition and television programming, and a theme parks operator. It is the fourth-largest telecommunications company by worldwide revenue. Comcast owns and operates the Xfinity residential cable communications business segment and division; Comcast Business, a commercial services provider; and Xfinity Mobile, an MVNO of Verizon Communications.

Comcast is also the owner and operator of over-the-air national broadcast network channels through NBCUniversal, such as the National Broadcasting Company (one of the US&#x27; Big Three television networks), Spanish-language channels Telemundo, TeleXitos, and Universo, television stations like Cozi TV, multiple cable-only channels such as MSNBC, CNBC, USA Network, Syfy, Oxygen True Crime, Bravo, and E!, film studios Universal Pictures, DreamWorks Animation, Illumination and Focus Features, the Universal Studio Group, the VOD streaming service Peacock, and Universal Destinations &amp; Experiences. It also has significant holdings in digital distribution, such as thePlatform, which it acquired in 2006; and ad-tech company FreeWheel, which it acquired in 2014. NBCUniversal also works in news (NBC News and Noticias Telemundo) and sports (NBC Sports and Telemundo Deportes) areas, with Comcast acquiring professional sports company Spectacor in 1996. Since October 2018, Comcast is also the parent company of Sky Group after dropping out of the bid to buy 21st Century Fox, and instead acquired the stake 21CF owned, plus the rest of Sky.

Comcast is criticized and put under intense public scrutiny for a variety of reasons. Its customer satisfaction ratings were among the lowest in the cable industry during the years 2008–2010. It has violated net neutrality practices in the past and despite its commitment to a narrow definition of net neutrality, critics advocate a definition that precludes any distinction between Comcast&#x27;s private network services and the rest of the Internet. Critics also point out a lack of competition in the vast majority of Comcast&#x27;s service areas; in particular, the limited competition among cable providers. Given its negotiating power as a large ISP, some suspect that it could leverage paid peering agreements to unfairly influence end-user connection speeds. Its ownership of both content production (in NBCUniversal) and distribution (as an ISP) has raised antitrust concerns. These issues and others led to Comcast being dubbed &quot;The Worst Company in America&quot; by &quot;The Consumerist&quot; in 2010 and 2014. Comcast also failed to acquire Time Warner Cable in 2014.

==Overview==
===Leadership===

Comcast is described as a family business. Brian L. Roberts, its chairman and CEO, is the son of founder Ralph J. Roberts (1920–2015). Roberts owns or controls about 1% of all Comcast shares but all of the Class B supervoting shares, giving him an &quot;undilutable 33% voting power over the company&quot;. Legal expert Susan P. Crawford has said this gives him &quot;effective control over [Comcast&#x27;s] every step&quot;. In 2010, he was one of the highest paid executives in the United States, with total compensation of about $31 million.

====Board of directors====

* Brian L. Roberts, chairman and CEO of Comcast
* Kenneth J. Bacon, former Fannie Mae executive
* Thomas J. Baltimore Jr., chairman, president and chief executive officer of Park Hotels &amp; Resorts
* Madeline S. Bell, president and CEO of Children&#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia
* Edward D. Breen (lead independent director), executive chairman and CEO of DuPont
* Gerald Hassell, former chairman and CEO of The Bank of New York Mellon
* Jeffrey Honickman, CEO of Pepsi-Cola Bottling
* Maritza Montiel, former deputy chairman and CEO of Deloitte
* Asuka Nakahara, former CFO of Trammell Crow
* David C. Novak, former chairman and CEO of Yum! Brands

==== Executives ====
* Michael J. Cavanagh, President
** Cesar Conde, Chairman, NBCUniversal News Group
*** Rebecca Blumenstein, President, NBC News Editorial
*** Luis Fernández, Chairman, NBCUniversal Telemundo Enterprises
*** Beau Ferrari, Senior Advisor to the Chairman of NBCUniversal News Group
*** Rashida Jones, President, MSNBC
*** Valari Dobson Staab, Chairman, NBCUniversal Local
*** KC Sullivan, President, CNBC
** Bonnie Hammer, Vice Chairman, NBCUniversal
** Kimberley D. Harris, Executive Vice President of Comcast Corporation and General Counsel of NBCUniversal
** Anand Kini, Executive Vice President, Corporate Strategy, Comcast Corporation and Chief Financial Officer, NBCUniversal
** Donna Langley, Chairwoman, NBCUniversal Studio Group &amp; Chief Content Officer
*** Jimmy Horowitz, Chairman, Business Affairs &amp; Operations
*** Pearlena Igbokwe, Chairwoman, Universal Studio Group
*** Peter Levinsohn, Vice Chairman &amp; Chief Distribution Officer, Universal Filmed Entertainment Group
** Mark Lazarus, Chairman, NBCUniversal Media Group
*** Frances Berwick, Chairman, NBCUniversal Entertainment
*** Pete Bevacqua, Chairman, NBC Sports Group
*** Matt Bond, Chairman, Content Distribution
**** Matt Schnaars, President, Content Distribution
*** Mark Marshall, Chairman, Global Advertising &amp; Partnerships, NBCUniversal
*** Jenny Storms, Chief Marketing Officer, Entertainment and Sports
*** Matt Strauss, Chairman, Direct-to-Consumer and International
**** Kelly Campbell, President, Peacock and Direct to Consumer, NBCUniversal
** Adam Miller, Executive Vice President, NBCUniversal
*** Jen Friedman, Executive Vice President, Communications
*** Ian Trombley, President, Operations &amp; Technology, NBCUniversal
*** Vicki Williams, Chief Human Resources Officer, NBCUniversal
** Craig Robinson, Executive Vice President, Chief Diversity Officer
** Mark Woodbury, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Universal Destinations &amp; Experiences
*** Tom Mehrmann, President, Chief Operating Officer Universal Destinations &amp; Experiences, Pacific Rim

===Corporate offices===
Comcast is headquartered in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and has offices in Atlanta, Detroit, Denver, Manchester, New Hampshire and New York City. On January 3, 2005, it announced it would become the anchor tenant in the new Comcast Center in downtown Philadelphia—at , the second-tallest skyscraper in Pennsylvania. In the fall of 2018, it finished construction of the Comcast Technology Center, Pennsylvania&#x27;s tallest skyscraper, adjacent to its original headquarters. the company had 184,000 employees.

===Employee relations===
Comcast is often criticized by the media and its own staff for its less-than-upstanding policies of employee relations.

A 2014 investigative series published by &quot;The Verge&quot; involved interviews with 150 Comcast employees, and examined why the company was so widely criticized by its customers, the media, and its own workers. It concluded that Comcast&#x27;s staff endured unreasonable corporate policies: &quot;Customer service has been replaced by an obsession with sales; technicians are understaffed … tech support is poorly trained, and the company is hobbled by internal fragmentation.&quot; A widely read article by an anonymous Comcast call center employee appeared in November 2014 on &quot;Cracked&quot;. Titled &quot;Five Nightmares You Live While Working For America&#x27;s Worst Company&quot;, it claimed that Comcast was obsessed with sales, did not train its employees properly, and concluded that &quot;the system makes good customer service impossible.&quot;

Comcast has also earned a reputation as anti-union. A company training manual says, &quot;Comcast does not feel union representation is in the best interest of its employees, customers, or shareholders&quot;. A dispute in 2004 with CWA, a labor union representing many employees at Comcast&#x27;s Beaverton, Oregon offices, led to allegations of management intimidating workers, requiring them to attend anti-union meetings and unwarranted disciplinary action for union members. In 2011, Comcast received criticism from Writers Guild of America for its policies regarding unions.

Despite these criticisms, Comcast has appeared on multiple &quot;top places to work&quot; lists. In 2009, it was included on &quot;CableFAX&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;Top 10 Places to Work in Cable&quot;, which cited its &quot;scale, savvy and vision&quot;. Similarly, the &quot;Philadelphia Business Journal&quot; awarded Comcast the silver medal among extra-large companies in Philadelphia, with the gold medal going to partner organization, Comcast-Spectacor. &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; found Comcast to be that city&#x27;s top place to work in 2009. Employee diversity is also an attribute upon which Comcast receives strong marks. In 2008, &quot;Black Enterprise&quot; magazine rated Comcast among the top 15 companies for workforce diversity.

===Financial performance===
Comcast reported a net profit in each year during the period 2006 to 2022.

 the company was ranked 28th on the Fortune 500 rankings of the largest United States corporations by total revenue.

For the fiscal year 2022, Comcast reported earnings of US$15.4 billion, a decrease of 6.2% compared to the prior year. Annual revenue increased by 4.3% over the same period. Their net debt was $91.2 billion, exceeding total shareholders equity of $80.9 billion as of December 31, 2022.
===Lobbying and electoral fundraising===
With $18.8 million spent in 2013, Comcast has the seventh largest lobbying budget of any individual company or organization in the United States. Comcast employs multiple former U.S. Congressmen as lobbyists. The National Cable &amp; Telecommunications Association, which has multiple Comcast executives on its board, also represents Comcast and other cable companies as the fifth largest lobbying organization in the United States, spending $19.8 million in 2013. Comcast was among the top backers of Barack Obama&#x27;s presidential runs, with Comcast vice president David Cohen raising over $2.2 million from 2007 to 2012. Cohen has been described by many sources as influential in the U.S. government, though he is no longer a registered lobbyist, as the time he spends lobbying falls short of the 20% which requires official registration. Comcast&#x27;s PAC, the Comcast Corporation and NBCUniversal Political Action Committee, is among the largest PACs in the U.S., raising about $3.7 million from 2011 to 2012 for the campaigns of various candidates for office in the United States Federal Government. Comcast is also a major backer of the National Cable and Telecommunications Association Political Action Committee, which raised $2.6 million from 2011 to 2012. Comcast spent the most money of any organization in support of the Stop Online Piracy and PROTECT IP bills, spending roughly $5 million to lobby for their passage.

Comcast also backs lobbying and PACs on a regional level, backing organizations such as the Tennessee Cable Telecommunications Association and the Broadband Communications Association of Washington PAC. Comcast and other cable companies have lobbied state governments to pass legislation restricting or banning individual cities from offering public broadband service. Municipal broadband restrictions of varying scope have been passed in a total of 20 U.S. States.

According to watchdog group Documented, in 2020 Comcast contributed $200,000 to the Rule of Law Defense Fund, a fund-raising arm of the Republican Attorneys General Association that was shown to have provided funding to the Save America March that devolved into an attack on the U.S. Capitol on January 6, 2021.

===Philanthropy===

Comcast offers low cost internet and cable service to schools, subsidized by general broadband consumers through the U.S. government&#x27;s E-Rate program. Critics have noted that many of the strongest supporters of Comcast&#x27;s business deals have received substantial funding from the Comcast Foundation. However, it is important to note that for years, Comcast has been relying on subsidiaries to finance philanthropic pursuits.

==History==
===American Cable Systems===
In 1963, Ralph J. Roberts in conjunction with his two business partners, Daniel Aaron and Julian A. Brodsky, purchased American Cable Systems as a corporate spin-off from its parent, Jerrold Electronics, for U.S. $500,000. At the time, American Cable was a small cable operator in Tupelo, Mississippi, with five channels and 12,000 customers. In 1965, American Cable Systems purchased Storecast Corporation of America, a product placement supermarket specialist marketing firm. In 1968, American Cable Systems purchased its first franchise of Muzak, a brand of background music played in retail stores. Storecast was a client of Muzak.

===Comcast===

The company was re-incorporated in Pennsylvania on March 5, 1969, under the new name Comcast Corporation. Comcast&#x27;s initial public offering occurred on June 29, 1972, on the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation System (NASDAQ, a then-recently-established stock exchange), with a market capitalization of U.S. $3,010,000. In 1977, HBO was first launched on a Comcast system with 20,000 customers in western Pennsylvania with a five-night free preview getting a 15% sign up rate. In 1986, Comcast bought 26% of Group W Cable, a broadcast company, doubling its number of subscribers to 1 million. Also that year, Comcast made a founding investment of $380 million in QVC. In 1988, Comcast was able to buy a 50% share of SCI Holdings in a joint deal with Tele-Communications Inc. Comcast also acquired American Cellular Network Corporation in 1988 for $230 million, marking the first time it became a mobile phone operator.

===Increasing market share (1990–2001)===
In February 1990, Ralph Roberts&#x27; son, Brian L. Roberts, succeeded his father as president of Comcast. Two years later, the company&#x27;s mobile division, Comcast Cellular, purchased a controlling interest in Metromedia&#x27;s Philadelphia-area cellular telephone interests, Metrophone. By 1994, Comcast owned 50% stock in the cable communications company Garden State Cable, who by that year were serving approximately 195,000 subscribers. That same year, Comcast became the third-largest cable operator in the United States, with around 3.5 million subscribers following its purchase of Maclean-Hunter&#x27;s American division for $1.27 billion. Comcast grew to 4.3 million subscribers the following year with the purchase of the cable operation of E. W. Scripps Company for $1.575 billion in stock.

Comcast offered internet connection for the first time in 1996, with its part in the launch of the @Home Network. Also in 1996, Comcast formed Comcast Spectacor, which became owner of the Philadelphia Flyers. In 1997, Microsoft invested $1 billion in Comcast, and the company launched its digital TV service. That same year, in partnership with The Walt Disney Company, Comcast got a 50.1% controlling interest in E! Entertainment. By December 31, 1997, it was available in the Philadelphia, Detroit, Baltimore, Orange County, California, Sarasota and Union, New Jersey areas. 

Comcast&#x27;s cable acquisitions in 1997 were Jones Intercable, Inc. with 1 million customers, and a stake in Prime Communications with 430,000 subscribers. In February 1998, Comcast sold its U.K. division to NTL for US$600 million, along with the division&#x27;s $397 million in debt. In 1999, Comcast sold Comcast Cellular to SBC Communications for $400 million, releasing them from $1.27 billion in debt. Also in 1999, Comcast acquired Greater Philadelphia Cablevision, and launched Comcast University as well as Comcast Interactive Capital Group.

In November 1999, Comcast purchased Lenfest Communications, who were the ninth largest cable television operator at the time and were the largest operator in the Philadelphia area. This consolidated Comcast&#x27;s control over all of the Philadelphia region, and earned them approximately 1.3 million additional cable subscribers. The purchase of Lenfest also bought Comcast the remaining 50% stock of the cable operator Garden State Communications — a company whom Comcast had already owned half of in partnership with Lenfest for years. Comcast quickly replaced the ten-year general manager at Garden State with their own executive, and eventually Garden State ceased operating under its own name and was fully merged to become a part of the Comcast Corporation.

===Largest U.S. cable provider (2001–present)===


In 2001, Comcast announced it would acquire the assets of the largest cable television operator at the time, AT&amp;T Broadband, for $44.5 billion. The proposed name for the merged company was &quot;AT&amp;T Comcast&quot;, but the companies ultimately decided to keep only the Comcast name, with the company and new assets reincorporated in Pennsylvania on December 7, 2001. On November 18, 2002, Comcast officially acquired all assets of AT&amp;T Broadband, thus making Comcast the largest cable television company in the United States with over 22 million subscribers. This spurred the start of Comcast Advertising Sales (using AT&amp;T&#x27;s groundwork) which would later be renamed Comcast Spotlight and now effectv, A Comcast Company. As part of this acquisition, Comcast also acquired the National Digital Television Center in Centennial, Colorado as a wholly owned subsidiary, now known as the &quot;Comcast Media Center&quot;. In 2003, Comcast became one of the original investors in The Golf Channel. After Excite@Home went bankrupt in October 2001, Comcast took over providing internet directly to consumers in January 2002.

On February 11, 2004, Comcast announced a $54 billion bid for Disney, including taking on $12 billion of Disney&#x27;s debt. The deal would have made Comcast the largest media conglomerate in the world. However, after rejection by Disney and uncertain response from investors, the bid was abandoned in April. In 2004, Comcast sold its QVC shares to Liberty Media for $7.9 billion.

On April 8, 2005, a partnership led by Comcast and Sony Pictures Entertainment finalized a deal to acquire MGM and its affiliate studio, United Artists, and created an additional outlet to carry MGM/UA&#x27;s material for cable and Internet distribution. On October 31, 2005, Comcast officially announced that it had acquired Susquehanna Communications, a South Central Pennsylvania-based cable television and broadband services provider and unit of the former Susquehanna Pfaltzgraff company, for $775 million cash. Comcast previously owned approximately 30% of Susquehanna Communications through its affiliate company, Lenfest. In December 2005, Comcast announced the creation of Comcast Interactive Media, a new division focused on online media.

In July 2006, Comcast purchased the Seattle-based software company thePlatform. This represented an entry into a new line of business—selling software to allow companies to manage their Internet (and IP-based) media publishing efforts.

On April 3, 2007, Comcast announced it would acquire the cable systems owned and operated by Patriot Media, a privately held company owned by cable veteran Steven J. Simmons, Spectrum Equity Investors and Spire Capital, that served approximately 81,000 video subscribers for $483 million.

Comcast announced in May 2007 and launched in September 2008 a dashboard called SmartZone that allowed users to perform mobile functions online. There was also Cloudmark spam and phishing protection and Trend Micro antivirus. The address book is Comcast Plaxo software.

In May 2008, Comcast purchased Plaxo for a reported $150 million to $170 million.

Comcast won the &quot;Consumerist&quot; Worst Company In America (&quot;Golden Poo&quot;) award in 2010. A gold trophy in the shape of a pile of human feces was delivered to Comcast Corporate Headquarters to commemorate the unmatched level of enmity flowing from their customer base to their business. Comcast responded immediately by publicly acknowledging the dubious award and citing ongoing efforts to improve its customer service. One effort to change this is a new app called Tech ETA that allows customers to see exactly when a technician is coming.

On 21 May 2024, Comcast announced Xfinity StreamSaver™, a streaming bundle combining Peacock, Netflix, and Apple TV+ for Xfinity Internet and TV customers. This bundle offered a subscription to Netflix Standard with ads, Peacock Premium, and Apple TV+, promised over 30% savings or nearly $100 annually.

====Adelphia purchase====
In April 2005, Comcast and Time Warner Cable announced plans to buy the assets of bankrupted Adelphia Cable. The two companies paid a total of $17.6 billion in the deal that was finalized in the second quarter of 2006—after the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) completed a seven-month investigation without raising an objection. Time Warner Cable became the second-largest cable provider in the U.S., ranking behind Comcast. As part of the deal, Time Warner Cable and Comcast traded existing subscribers in order to consolidate them into larger geographic clusters.

In August 2006, Comcast and Time Warner Cable dissolved a 50/50 partnership that controlled the systems in the Houston, Southwest Texas, San Antonio, and Kansas City markets under the Time Warner Cable brand. After the dissolution, Comcast obtained the Houston system, and Time Warner retained the others. On January 1, 2007, Comcast officially took control of the Houston system but continued to operate under the Time Warner Cable brand until June 19, 2007.

====NBCUniversal====

Media outlets began reporting on October 1, 2009 that Comcast was in talks to buy NBC Universal. Comcast denied the rumors at first, while NBC would not comment on them. However, CNBC itself reported on October 1 that General Electric was considering spinning NBC Universal off into a separate company that would merge the NBC television network and its cable properties such as USA Network, Syfy and MSNBC, as well as Universal Pictures, with Comcast&#x27;s content assets. GE would maintain 49% control of the new company, while Comcast owned 51%. Vivendi, which owns 20%, would have to sell its stake to GE. It was reported that under the current deal with GE that it would happen in November or December. It was also reported that Time Warner would be interested in placing a bid, until CEO Jeffrey L. Bewkes directly denied interest, leaving Comcast the sole bidder. On November 1, 2009, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported Comcast had moved closer to a deal to purchase NBC Universal and that a formal announcement could be made sometime the following week.
Following a tentative agreement on December 1, the parties announced that Comcast would buy a controlling 51% stake in NBC Universal, including Universal Pictures, for $6.5 billion in cash and $7.3 billion in programming on December 3. GE would take over the remaining 49% stake in NBC Universal, using $5.8 billion to buy out Vivendi&#x27;s 20% minority stake in NBC Universal. On January 18, 2011, the FCC approved the deal by a vote of 4 to 1. The transaction was completed on January 28, 2011. In December 2012, Comcast adopted a new corporate logo, which incorporates NBC&#x27;s peacock logo to signify its ownership of the broadcaster. On February 12, 2013, Comcast announced that it would acquire the remaining 49% of General Electric&#x27;s interest in NBCUniversal, in a deal valued at approximately $16.7 billion. The acquisition was completed on March 19, 2013.

Comcast reported that third-quarter net profits in 2020 fell 37 percent to $2.02 billion from $3.22 billion the previous year, in part due to the limited capacity measures for the COVID-19 pandemic at theme parks like Universal Studios and movie theaters, with revenues falling 4.8 percent. With their theme park in California being closed since March 2020 and limited capacity at locations in Florida and Japan, the company was prompted to lay off a number of their employees; revenue for their theme park locations fell 81 percent to $311 million from $1.63 billion in 2019. In 2024, Comcast signed a deal with Starlink to provide satellite-based connectivity to business customers in regions with limited network access.

====Failed purchase of Time Warner Cable====

On February 12, 2014, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; reported that Comcast sought to acquire Time Warner Cable in a deal valued at $45.2 billion. On February 13, it was reported that Time Warner Cable agreed to the acquisition. This was to add several metropolitan areas to the Comcast portfolio, such as New York City, Los Angeles, Dallas–Fort Worth, Cleveland, Columbus, Cincinnati, Charlotte, San Diego, and San Antonio. Time Warner Cable and Comcast aimed to merge into one company by the end of 2014 and both have praised the deal, emphasizing the increased capabilities of a combined telecommunications network, and to &quot;create operating efficiencies and economies of scale&quot;.

In 2014, critics expressed concern that the deal would give Comcast greater negotiating power in a number of areas, including rebroadcast fees with television channels, and peering agreements with ISPs.

Critics noted in 2013 that Tom Wheeler, the head of the FCC, which has to approve the deal, is the former head of both the largest cable lobbying organization, the National Cable &amp; Telecommunications Association, and as largest wireless lobby, CTIA – The Wireless Association. According to &quot;Politico&quot;, Comcast &quot;donated to almost every member of Congress who has a hand in regulating it&quot;. The U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee held a hearing on the deal on April 9, 2014. The House Judiciary Committee planned its own hearing. On March 6, 2014, the United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division confirmed it was investigating the deal. In March 2014, the division&#x27;s chairman, William Baer, recused himself because he was involved in the prior Comcast NBCUniversal acquisition. Several states&#x27; attorneys general have announced support for the federal investigation. On April 24, 2015, Jonathan Sallet, general counsel of the F.C.C., explained that he was going to recommend a hearing before an administrative law judge, equivalent to a collapse of the deal.

In August 2015, Comcast announced that it would increase Internet speeds for low-income customers from 5 Mbit/s to 10 Mbit/s, provide free wireless routers, and pilot an initiative to increase Internet access for low-income senior citizens. In September of that year Comcast also launched Watchable, a YouTube competitor. The move was seen by &quot;Variety&quot; as an attempt to appeal to the cord-cutting market.

====DreamWorks Animation====

On April 28, 2016, Comcast officially announced its NBCUniversal subsidiary will acquire DreamWorks Animation for $3.8 billion. The acquisition completed on August 22, 2016; DreamWorks Animation was integrated into Universal Filmed Entertainment as part of Universal Pictures. Universal took over distribution of DreamWorks Animation films beginning in 2019 with &quot;How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World&quot; after DreamWorks Animation&#x27;s deal with 20th Century Fox ended.

====Cellular service====
In September 2016, Comcast confirmed that it would launch an MVNO cellular network with Verizon Wireless. The service, described as being a &quot;Wi-Fi and MVNO-integrated product&quot; was expected to launch in mid-2017. The partnership and the addition of wireless would allow Comcast to offer a quadruple play of services. Including Comcast&#x27;s Home Security offering, customers now have the option of a Quintuple Play. The service was officially announced on April 6, 2017, as Xfinity Mobile.

==== Attempted acquisition of Fox and subsequent acquisition of Sky ====

On November 16, 2017, it was reported that Comcast attempted to purchase 21st Century Fox, following the news 10 days earlier that Disney negotiated with Fox to acquire the same assets. Like Disney, the deal included the 20th Century Fox film and television studios, cable entertainment and broadcast satellite networks including FX Networks, National Geographic Partners, Fox Sports Networks, and international channels such as Star India. It would not include the Fox Broadcasting Company, Fox Television Stations, Fox Sports, and Fox News units, all which will be spun-off into a new independent company, which is later known as the Fox Corporation since the 2019 launch.

However, on December 11, 2017, Comcast officially dropped the bid, saying that &quot;We never got the level of engagement needed to make a definitive offer.&quot; On December 14, Disney officially confirmed its acquisition of 21st Century Fox for $52.4 billion in stock, pending review from the United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division.

On February 5, 2018, a new report by CNBC claims that despite the Disney/Fox deal, Comcast was considering topping Disney&#x27;s $52.4 billion offer once the AT&amp;T–Time Warner deal goes through, after the Department of Justice Antitrust Division sued to block it on November 20, 2017.

On February 27, 2018, Comcast offered to purchase 61% stake in Sky plc at a value of £12.50 per-share, approximately £22.1 billion. 21st Century Fox, which owns 39% stake in Sky, had previously declined a US$60 billion acquisition offer by Comcast in favor of its deal with Disney, due to anti-competition concerns. NBCUniversal CEO Steve Burke stated that purchasing Sky would roughly double its presence in English-speaking markets, and allow for synergies between the respective networks and studios of NBCUniversal and Sky. Fox stated that it &quot;remains committed to its recommended cash offer for Sky&quot;, and that Comcast had not yet made a &quot;firm offer&quot;.

On April 12, the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers ruled that Disney had to acquire all of Sky within 28 days of fully acquiring Fox if the latter&#x27;s acquisition of Sky was not completed by the time the merger was done, or if Comcast&#x27;s counter-offer was not accepted. On April 25, 2018, Comcast made its formal counter-bid for Sky plc, offering £12.50 per-share; Sky subsequently withdrew its recommendation of the Fox bid.

On May 7, 2018, Comcast announced a potential bid against Disney&#x27;s effort to acquire Fox after it spoke to investment banks about making a $60 billion cash offer, pending on approval of the AT&amp;T–Time Warner merger. Eight days later, several Fox investors expressed interests in signing a deal with Comcast due to their all-cash offer as opposed to Disney&#x27;s $52.4 billion stock offer. Then on June 5, 2018, Culture Secretary Matt Hancock cleared both 21st Century Fox and Comcast&#x27;s respective offers to acquire Sky plc. Fox&#x27;s offer is contingent on the divestiture of Sky News. Eight days later, Comcast officially announced a $65 billion counter-offer to acquire the 21st Century Fox&#x27;s assets that Disney offered to purchase.

On June 15, 2018, the European Commission gave antitrust clearance to Comcast&#x27;s offer to purchase Sky, citing that in terms of their current assets in Europe, there would be limited impact on competition. Comcast included a 10-year commitment to the operations and funding of Sky News similar to that of Disney&#x27;s offer. On June 19, 2018, Disney formally agreed to acquire Sky News as part of Fox&#x27;s proposed bid, with a 15-year commitment to increase its annual funding from £90 million to £100 million.

However, on June 20, 2018, Disney and Fox announced that they had amended their previous merger agreement, upping Disney&#x27;s offer to $71.3 billion (a 10% premium over Comcast&#x27;s $65 billion offer), while also offering shareholders the option of receiving cash instead of stock. On June 27, the United States Department of Justice gave antitrust approval to Disney under the condition of selling Fox&#x27;s 22 regional sports channels, to which the company has agreed. On the next day, Disney and Fox shareholders scheduled July 27, 2018 as the day to vote on Fox&#x27;s properties being sold to Disney, giving Comcast enough time to make a higher counter-offer for the Fox assets.

On July 11, 2018, 21st Century Fox raised its bid to purchase Sky plc assets to $32.5 billion, and $18.57 a share. In response, Comcast increased its bid to $34 billion, and $19.5 a share. At the same time, Fox was given clearance by the British government to purchase Sky. On July 18, 2018, &quot;Bloomberg&quot; reported that the Sky board scheduled July 27, 2018 as the day shareholders vote on selling Sky properties.

However, on July 12, 2018, the Department of Justice filed a notice of appeal with the D.C. Circuit to reverse the District Court&#x27;s approval for AT&amp;T acquisition of Time Warner (then renamed WarnerMedia). Although analysts say that the chances of the DOJ win are small, they say it is the &quot;final nail in the coffin for Comcast&#x27;s Fox chase. This is a clear gift to Disney.&quot; On the next day, CEO of AT&amp;T Randall Stephenson gave an interview with CNBC, about Comcast&#x27;s bid for Fox: &quot;It probably can&#x27;t help it. You&#x27;re in a situation where two entities are bidding for an asset, and this kind of action can obviously influence the outcome of those actions.&quot;

On July 16, 2018, CNBC reported that Comcast was unlikely to continue its bidding war to acquire Fox from Disney in favor of Sky. Three days later, Comcast officially announced that it was dropping its bid on the Fox assets in order to focus on their bid for Sky. CEO of Comcast, Brian L. Roberts said: &quot;I&#x27;d like to congratulate Bob Iger and the team at Disney and commend the Murdoch family and Fox for creating such a desirable and respected company.&quot; Eight days later, 21st Century Fox shareholders agreed to sell the majority of its assets to Disney for $71.3 billion. The sale covered the majority of 21CF&#x27;s entertainment assets, including 20th Century Fox, FX Networks, and National Geographic Partners, among others.

On September 22, 2018, Comcast outbid 21st Century Fox, by raising its bid for Sky plc to $40 billion, or $22.57 a share. On September 25, 2018, Comcast bought a 30% stake of Sky plc. The next day on September 26, 2018, Fox with the consent of its acquirer sold its 39% stake to Comcast in exchange for $15 billion in cash. In October 2018 Comcast later acquired the rest of the shares of Sky with the company being delisted in November. The merger was completed on November 7, 2018, when the company was delisted after becoming a wholly owned subsidiary and division of Comcast.

====Later investments, proposed spin-off of several NBCU assets====
On June 20, 2022, Comcast acquired Levl, an American-Israeli startup develops technology that authenticates wireless devices and can help prevent hacking, for an estimated $50 million. Following the acquisition, Comcast announced it will set up its first development center in Israel.

In 2023, Comcast and Disney agreed that Comcast would sell its 33% stake to Hulu (the service has an audience of 48 million subscribers). The streaming service is valued at $27.5 billion in this deal. Part of the proceeds from this deal will be used to buy back Comcast shares.

On October 31, 2024, Mike Cavanagh announced on the company&#x27;s 2024 third-quarter earnings call that it would consider a spin-off of its cable networks. On November 20 of that same year, the company announced that it had greenlit the spin-off. The entity would consist of NBCU&#x27;s US cable networks including USA Network, CNBC, MSNBC, Oxygen, E!, Syfy and Golf Channel alongside the company&#x27;s digital portfolio such as Fandango, SportsEngine, Rotten Tomatoes and GolfNow. NBCU would retain the NBC network, Telemundo, Bravo, Peacock, Hayu, the NBC Sports and NBC News divisions as well as NBCU&#x27;s filmed entertainment, television studios and theme park businesses. The separate entity, classified as a tax-free spin-off is scheduled to be completed in 2025, pending regulatory approval. This coincided with the promotion of Donna Langley to head the Entertainment &amp; Studios group while Matt Strauss being promoted to chairman as Mark Lazarus and Anand Kimi plan to step down after the spin-off&#x27;s completion to head the separate entity.

==Divisions and subsidiaries==
===Comcast Cable (Xfinity)===

Comcast Cable, which goes by the brand name Xfinity, provides cable television, broadband internet, and home telephone services. Comcast Cable also provides similar services to small to medium-sized business through its Comcast Business brand, and Fortune 1000 companies through its Comcast Enterprise brand.

===NBCUniversal===

Comcast delivers third-party television programming content to its own customers, and also produces its own first-party content both for subscribers and customers of other competing television services. Fully or partially owned Comcast programming includes Comcast Newsmakers, Comcast SportsNet, SportsNet New York, MLB Network, Golf Channel, Syfy, and USA Network. On May 19, 2009, Disney and ESPN announced an agreement to allow Comcast Corporation to carry the channels ESPNU and ESPN3.

Comcast&#x27;s content networks and assets also include E!, Oxygen, Golf Channel, Universal Kids, Bravo, and the regional NBC Sports Networks. When Comcast took majority ownership in NBCUniversal, a significant number of cable networks were added to this list. Comcast&#x27;s NHL deal obligated them to create a U.S. version of NHL Network, launched in October 2007. NBCSN folded in 2021.

Comcast has also operated local channels in some markets, such as Comcast Television in the Detroit region, Comcast Network in the Philadelphia and Mid-Atlantic regions (formerly CN8), and Comcast Entertainment Television in Denver and parts of Utah. They primarily carried local programs and sports (including, in some cases, serving as the designated overflow channel for local regional sports networks).

====DreamWorks Animation====
On August 22, 2016, NBCUniversal bought DreamWorks Animation along with its major IP, including &quot;Shrek&quot;, &quot;How to Train Your Dragon&quot;, &quot;Kung Fu Panda&quot;, &quot;Trolls&quot;, and &quot;Madagascar&quot;, included in the acquisition was Classic Media, which included a wide library of IP including &quot;Postman Pat&quot;, &quot;Felix the Cat&quot;, &quot;Noddy&quot;, &quot;Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer&quot;, &quot;Frosty the Snowman&quot;, &quot;Turok&quot;, &quot;Casper the Friendly Ghost&quot;, &quot;VeggieTales&quot; among a number of others.

=== Sky Group ===

Through Sky, Comcast offers any first-party and third-party television programming which using the satellite distribution and IPTV (Sky Glass and Sky Stream) systems to its customers and subscribers across several countries in Europe, such as the United Kingdom, Ireland, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and Italy. It is Europe&#x27;s largest media company and pay-TV broadcaster by revenue ( with 23 million subscribers and more than 31,000 employees as of 2019.

Until November 2018, Sky was owned by 21st Century Fox through a 39.14% controlling stake; on 9 December 2016, following a previous attempt under News Corporation that was affected by the News International phone hacking scandal, 21st Century Fox announced that it had agreed to buy the remainder of Sky, pending government approval. However, after a bidding war that included Disney (which was, in turn, acquiring most of 21st Century Fox assets), Comcast acquired the entirety of Sky in 2018 for £17.28 per-share.

In 2020, NBCUniversal and Sky Group began preparations to launch an international news channel called NBC Sky World News. The service was also planned for it to be available on Peacock in the United States. Plans for the launch – initially scheduled for summer 2020 – were put on hold due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom. and in August, the proposed service was scrapped, resulting in layoffs of 60 employees. NBC subsequently allowed its free streaming service NBC News Now to be seen internationally, and is available globally on YouTube and on Sky TV and Virgin Media in the UK.

=== Xumo ===

Xumo is a free ad-supported streaming television (FAST) service, which Comcast acquired on February 25, 2020, for an undisclosed amount. The service operates as a business within the Comcast Cable division. Comcast planned to position the service as a complement to its premium streaming service Peacock (as well as compete with ViacomCBS&#x27;s Pluto TV and Fox Corporation&#x27;s Tubi), and leverage its streaming technology, as well as its distribution partnerships with smart TV manufacturers.

On October 19, 2021, Comcast announced &quot;XClass TV&quot;, a line of smart TVs manufactured by Hisense that would be powered by the X1 software platform used by its cable services.

In April 2022, Comcast and Charter Communications announced that they would form a joint venture to form a &quot;next-generation streaming platform&quot;, with Comcast contributing its Xfinity Flex, XClass TV, and Xumo businesses. In November 2022, Comcast and Charter announced that the joint venture would use the Xumo name, with Xumo, Xfinity Flex, and XClass TV rebranded as Xumo Play, Xumo Stream Box, and Xumo TV respectively.

===Professional sports===

In 1996, Comcast bought a controlling stake in Spectacor from the company&#x27;s founder, Ed Snider. Comcast Spectacor holdings now include the Philadelphia Flyers NHL hockey team and their home arena in Philadelphia, as well as esports organization T1, in a joint venture with South Korea&#x27;s SK Telecom. Over a number of years, Comcast became majority owner of Comcast SportsNet, as well as Golf Channel and NBCSN (formerly the Outdoor Life Network, then Versus). In 2002, Comcast paid the University of Maryland $25 million for naming rights to the new basketball arena built on the College Park campus, the Xfinity Center. Before it was renamed for Comcast&#x27;s cable subsidiary, Xfinity Center was called Comcast Center from its opening in 2002 through July 2014. Comcast became the sponsor of NASCAR&#x27;s second-tier series renaming it the NASCAR Xfinity Series in 2015.

==Criticism and controversies==


In 2004 and 2007, the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) survey found that Comcast had the worst customer satisfaction rating of any company or government agency in the country, including the Internal Revenue Service. The ACSI indicates that almost half of all cable customers (regardless of company) have registered complaints, and that cable is the only industry to score below 60 in the ACSI. Comcast&#x27;s Customer Service Rating by the ACSI surveys indicate that the company&#x27;s customer service has not improved since the surveys began in 2001. Analysis of the surveys states that &quot;Comcast is one of the lowest scoring companies in ACSI. As its customer satisfaction eroded by 7% over the past year, revenue increased by 12%.&quot; The ACSI analysis also addresses this contradiction, stating that &quot;Such pricing power usually comes with some level of monopoly protection and most cable companies have little competition at the local level. This also means that a cable company can do well financially even though its customers are not particularly satisfied.&quot;

In April 2014, Comcast was awarded the 2014 &quot;Worst Company in America&quot; award; an annual contest by the consumer affairs blog &quot;The Consumerist&quot; that runs a series of reader polls to determine the least popular company in America. This was the second time Comcast had been awarded this title, the first being in 2010.

Comcast spends millions of dollars annually on lobbying. Comcast employs the spouses, sons and daughters of mayors, councilmen, commissioners, and other officials to assure its continued preferred market allocations.

Comcast was given an &quot;F&quot; for its corporate governance practices in 2010, by Corporate Library, an independent shareholder-research organization. According to Corporate Library, Comcast&#x27;s board of directors ability to oversee and control management was severely compromised (at least in 2010) by the fact that several of the directors either worked for the company or had business ties to it (making them susceptible to management pressure), and a third of the directors were over 70 years of age. According to &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; nearly two thirds of the flights of Comcast&#x27;s $40 million corporate jet purchased for business travel related to the NBCU acquisition, were to CEO Brian Roberts&#x27; private homes or to resorts.

On August 1, 2016, Washington State Attorney General Bob Ferguson filed a lawsuit against Comcast Corporation in King County Superior Court, alleging the company&#x27;s own documents reveal a pattern of illegally deceiving their customers to pad their bottom line by tens of millions of dollars. The FCC issued a $2.3 million fine to Comcast after finding that the company was charging customers for unordered services and equipment. More than a thousand customers issued complaints about these unprecedented charges to their bill. In addition, numerous customers reported inappropriate name-calling and interrogation by customer service representatives. Comcast&#x27;s executive vice president, David Cohen, admitted the company needed to improve their customer service.

On August 8, 2016, an official Comcast employee confirmed that Comcast was changing native 1080i channels to the 720p60 format. &quot;Official Employees are from multiple teams within Comcast: Product, Support, Leadership.&quot;

In February 2017, Comcast was ordered by the self-regulatory National Advertising Review Board to cease using a claim based on Speedtest.net data that it has &quot;America&#x27;s fastest internet&quot;, stating that &quot;Ookla&#x27;s data showed only that Xfinity consumers who took advantage of the free tests offered on the Speedtest.net website subscribed to tiers of service with higher download speeds than Verizon FiOS consumers who took advantage of the tests.&quot; They were also ordered to stop using a claim that the company offers the &quot;fastest in-home Wi-Fi,&quot; which was poorly substantiated.

On December 21, 2018, Minnesota State Attorney General Lori Swanson filed a lawsuit against Comcast in Hennepin County over allegations that the company had overcharged customers for cable packages, added home security, service protection plans, modem and other equipment packages to customers bills without their consent, and did not give customers the prepaid $200 Visa cards they promised to give if customers kept up-to-date on their monthly bills for 90 days on their advertisements. On January 25, 2020, the lawsuit was settled, Comcast being ordered to refund 15,600 customers and give 16,000 other customers debt relief. Comcast was also ordered to disclose the full amounts customers will be charged for using their services on their advertisements.

As of fall 2019, Comcast is the last major cable provider or streamer to neglect to carry the ACC Network, prompting some customers to consider cutting the cord or switching providers. &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine criticized the decision not to carry the college sports network as violating a fundamental principle of marketing: &quot;never give your customers a reason to switch.&quot; North Carolina Governor Roy Cooper asked Comcast and AT&amp;T to carry the network, after which AT&amp;T did so on their U-Verse cable service.

In June 2021, the Supreme Court rejected a petition for review by Comcast regarding an anti-trust lawsuit by Viamedia, Inc. after the Biden administration had recommended against review.

In September 2024, Marc Caputo reported that Comcast had made a $50,000 donation to the anti-abortion PAC Florida Freedom Fund. Two years earlier, Comcast announced it would give up to $10,000 in travel money to employees living in states with tight abortion restrictions in order to receive abortion care.

==Carbon footprint==
Comcast reported total CO2e emissions (direct + indirect) for the twelve months ending 31 December 2020 at 2,291 Kt (-249 /-9.8% y-o-y).

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="0" end="19" title="Comcast" label="Comcast Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="39" end="55" title="Comcast" label="Comcast Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="72" end="85" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="86" end="96" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="123" end="141" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="146" end="159" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113808" start="188" end="202" title="Comcast Center" label="Comcast Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="206" end="218" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="249" end="261" title="broadcasting" label="broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="266" end="282" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q741618" start="320" end="332" title="China Mobile" label="China Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="337" end="344" title="Verizon" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="371" end="377" title="pay-TV" label="pay-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="406" end="414" title="cable TV" label="cable TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="460" end="485" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134743" start="552" end="570" title="Forbes Global 2000" label="Forbes Global 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="634" end="660" title="telephone service provider" label="telephone service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="749" end="769" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="787" end="799" title="NBCUniversal" label="NBCUniversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151005" start="806" end="810" title="Acquisition of NBC Universal by Comcast" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="854" end="858" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186857" start="920" end="931" title="Universal Destinations &amp;amp; Experiences" label="theme parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q666926" start="952" end="993" title="List of telephone operating companies" label="fourth-largest telecommunications company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151002" start="1046" end="1053" title="Xfinity" label="Xfinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829921" start="1118" end="1134" title="Comcast Business" label="Comcast Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="1191" end="1195" title="MVNO" label="MVNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1349" end="1378" title="NBC" label="National Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906538" start="1400" end="1429" title="Big Three (American television)" label="Big Three television networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="1458" end="1467" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979414" start="1469" end="1478" title="TeleXitos" label="TeleXitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935542" start="1484" end="1492" title="Universo (TV channel)" label="Universo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952786" start="1494" end="1513" title="NBC Owned Television Stations" label="television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790678" start="1519" end="1526" title="Cozi TV" label="Cozi TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="1565" end="1570" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="1572" end="1576" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="1578" end="1589" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="1591" end="1595" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628" start="1597" end="1614" title="Oxygen (TV network)" label="Oxygen True Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="1616" end="1621" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="1627" end="1629" title="E!" label="E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="1644" end="1662" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="1664" end="1684" title="DreamWorks Animation" label="DreamWorks Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189512" start="1686" end="1698" title="Illumination (company)" label="Illumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q649649" start="1703" end="1717" title="Focus Features" label="Focus Features"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048317" start="1723" end="1745" title="Universal Studio Group" label="Universal Studio Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="1773" end="1780" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186857" start="1786" end="1826" title="Universal Destinations &amp;amp; Experiences" label="Universal Destinations &amp;amp; Experiences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711649" start="1894" end="1905" title="thePlatform" label="thePlatform"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048317" start="2019" end="2023" title="NBCUniversal News Group" label="news"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877626" start="2025" end="2033" title="NBC News" label="NBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q22023486" start="2038" end="2056" title="Noticias Telemundo" label="Noticias Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228060" start="2062" end="2068" title="NBC Sports Group" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046048" start="2070" end="2080" title="NBC Sports" label="NBC Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260717" start="2085" end="2103" title="Telemundo Deportes" label="Telemundo Deportes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036429" start="2163" end="2172" title="Comcast Spectacor" label="Spectacor"/>
<link wikidata="Q918390" start="2240" end="2249" title="Sky Group" label="Sky Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476713" start="2287" end="2303" title="21st Century Fox" label="21st Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186793" start="2382" end="2392" title="Criticism of Comcast" label="criticized"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="2579" end="2593" title="net neutrality" label="net neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11186" start="2769" end="2784" title="private network" label="private network"/>
<link wikidata="Q772532" start="3070" end="3088" title="peering agreements" label="peering agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727444" start="3360" end="3375" title="The Consumerist" label="The Consumerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988563" start="3413" end="3430" title="Attempted acquisition of Time Warner Cable by Comcast" label="failed to acquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885099" start="3431" end="3448" title="Time Warner Cable" label="Time Warner Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395324" start="3516" end="3531" title="family business" label="family business"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964404" start="3533" end="3549" title="Brian L. Roberts" label="Brian L. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287704" start="3595" end="3611" title="Ralph J. Roberts" label="Ralph J. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648261" start="3810" end="3827" title="Susan P. Crawford" label="Susan P. Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964404" start="4066" end="4082" title="Brian L. Roberts" label="Brian L. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q621096" start="4139" end="4149" title="Fannie Mae" label="Fannie Mae"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075186" start="4238" end="4263" title="Park Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Park Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569202" start="4305" end="4345" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868373" start="4348" end="4363" title="Edward D. Breen" label="Edward D. Breen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="4423" end="4429" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549228" start="4432" end="4446" title="Gerald Hassell" label="Gerald Hassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q589288" start="4475" end="4502" title="The Bank of New York Mellon" label="The Bank of New York Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="4531" end="4541" title="Pepsi-Cola" label="Pepsi-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="4604" end="4612" title="Deloitte" label="Deloitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232041" start="4661" end="4675" title="David C. Novak" label="David C. Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q668737" start="4704" end="4715" title="Yum! Brands" label="Yum! Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q114837356" start="4740" end="4759" title="Michael J. Cavanagh" label="Michael J. Cavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065434" start="4774" end="4785" title="Cesar Conde" label="Cesar Conde"/>
<link wikidata="Q47582149" start="4825" end="4844" title="Rebecca Blumenstein" label="Rebecca Blumenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q104017877" start="5021" end="5034" title="Rashida Jones (television executive)" label="Rashida Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="5047" end="5052" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="5135" end="5139" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942356" start="5143" end="5156" title="Bonnie Hammer" label="Bonnie Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858047" start="5420" end="5433" title="Donna Langley" label="Donna Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514811" start="5569" end="5585" title="Pearlena Igbokwe" label="Pearlena Igbokwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662266" start="5842" end="5855" title="Pete Bevacqua" label="Pete Bevacqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228060" start="5867" end="5883" title="NBC Sports Group" label="NBC Sports Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="6228" end="6235" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186857" start="6647" end="6687" title="Universal Destinations &amp;amp; Experiences" label="Universal Destinations &amp;amp; Experiences"/>
<link wikidata="Q94236009" start="6692" end="6704" title="Tom Mehrmann" label="Tom Mehrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="6895" end="6902" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="6904" end="6911" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="6913" end="6919" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q48370" start="6921" end="6946" title="Manchester, New Hampshire" label="Manchester, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6951" end="6964" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113808" start="7044" end="7058" title="Comcast Center (Philadelphia)" label="Comcast Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958963" start="7189" end="7214" title="Comcast Technology Center" label="Comcast Technology Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155442" start="7524" end="7533" title="The Verge" label="The Verge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154183" start="8575" end="8578" title="Communication Workers of America" label="CWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180240" start="8863" end="8887" title="Writers Guild of America" label="Writers Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842874" start="9204" end="9233" title="Philadelphia Business Journal" label="Philadelphia Business Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="9394" end="9410" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920731" start="9578" end="9594" title="Black Enterprise" label="Black Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="9817" end="9828" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663608" start="10292" end="10300" title="Lobbying in the United States" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10404" end="10420" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congressmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971173" start="10439" end="10490" title="National Cable &amp;amp; Telecommunications Association" label="National Cable &amp;amp; Telecommunications Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="10728" end="10740" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236187" start="10795" end="10806" title="David L. Cohen" label="David Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663599" start="11038" end="11068" title="Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995" label="requires official registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="11085" end="11088" title="Political action committee" label="PAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="11301" end="11333" title="United States Federal Government" label="United States Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q171322" start="11563" end="11581" title="Stop Online Piracy" label="Stop Online Piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q715282" start="11586" end="11596" title="Protect IP" label="PROTECT IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677200" start="12030" end="12049" title="Municipal broadband" label="Municipal broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973120" start="12141" end="12155" title="Watchdog journalism" label="watchdog group"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181318" start="12264" end="12304" title="Republican Attorneys General Association" label="Republican Attorneys General Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="12352" end="12370" title="Save America March" label="Save America March"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="12393" end="12438" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="attack on the U.S. Capitol on January 6, 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321447" start="12601" end="12607" title="E-Rate" label="E-Rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287704" start="12946" end="12962" title="Ralph J. Roberts" label="Ralph J. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17859800" start="13027" end="13044" title="Julian A. Brodsky" label="Julian A. Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="13084" end="13102" title="corporate spin-off" label="corporate spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183113" start="13120" end="13139" title="Jerrold Electronics" label="Jerrold Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q667727" start="13218" end="13237" title="Tupelo, Mississippi" label="Tupelo, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108796044" start="13480" end="13485" title="Muzak" label="Muzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="13710" end="13733" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="13768" end="13837" title="National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation System" label="National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="13899" end="13920" title="market capitalization" label="market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="13950" end="13953" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988935" start="14129" end="14142" title="Group W Cable" label="Group W Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q440774" start="14284" end="14287" title="QVC" label="QVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131902" start="14371" end="14395" title="Tele-Communications Inc." label="Tele-Communications Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6887204" start="14517" end="14538" title="mobile phone operator" label="mobile phone operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741127" start="14797" end="14807" title="Metromedia" label="Metromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="14944" end="14962" title="Garden State Cable" label="Garden State Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724624" start="15177" end="15191" title="Maclean-Hunter" label="Maclean-Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q283457" start="15339" end="15360" title="E. W. Scripps Company" label="E. W. Scripps Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570714" start="15490" end="15503" title="@Home Network" label="@Home Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036429" start="15534" end="15551" title="Comcast Spectacor" label="Comcast Spectacor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="15609" end="15618" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="15736" end="15759" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="15892" end="15901" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="15903" end="15928" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q491540" start="15930" end="15938" title="Sarasota, Florida" label="Sarasota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089738" start="15943" end="15960" title="Union Township, Union County, New Jersey" label="Union, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275218" start="16017" end="16039" title="Jones Intercable" label="Jones Intercable, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6955475" start="16180" end="16183" title="NTL Incorporated" label="NTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="16299" end="16317" title="SBC Communications" label="SBC Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654507" start="17449" end="17467" title="AT&amp;amp;T Broadband" label="AT&amp;amp;T Broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151002" start="18027" end="18044" title="Comcast Spotlight" label="Comcast Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="18186" end="18194" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q765990" start="18333" end="18349" title="Golf Channel" label="The Golf Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916382" start="18647" end="18665" title="media conglomerate" label="media conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516562" start="18826" end="18839" title="Liberty Media" label="Liberty Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="18910" end="18937" title="Sony Pictures Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="18966" end="18969" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="18996" end="19010" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055405" start="19185" end="19211" title="Susquehanna Communications" label="Susquehanna Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164055" start="19215" end="19241" title="South Central Pennsylvania" label="South Central Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649309" start="19320" end="19343" title="Susquehanna Pfaltzgraff" label="Susquehanna Pfaltzgraff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628225" start="19480" end="19487" title="Gerry Lenfest" label="Lenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151004" start="19541" end="19566" title="Comcast Interactive Media" label="Comcast Interactive Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512320" start="20306" end="20310" title="email spam" label="spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="20315" end="20323" title="phishing" label="phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q700974" start="20339" end="20350" title="Trend Micro" label="Trend Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q93249" start="20351" end="20360" title="antivirus software" label="antivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q946514" start="20390" end="20395" title="Plaxo" label="Plaxo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174392" start="20635" end="20646" title="human feces" label="human feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682079" start="21472" end="21486" title="Adelphia Communications Corporation" label="Adelphia Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="21612" end="21645" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885099" start="21720" end="21737" title="Time Warner Cable" label="Time Warner Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="22069" end="22076" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="22095" end="22106" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="22112" end="22123" title="Kansas City Metropolitan Area" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="22523" end="22536" title="NBC Universal" label="NBC Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="22659" end="22675" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="22860" end="22878" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127887" start="22991" end="22998" title="Vivendi" label="Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="23176" end="23187" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376418" start="23236" end="23253" title="Jeffrey L. Bewkes" label="Jeffrey L. Bewkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="23340" end="23358" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="23653" end="23671" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260154" start="24082" end="24105" title="NBC logo" label="NBC&amp;#x27;s peacock logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="24563" end="24580" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186857" start="24601" end="24618" title="Universal Destinations &amp;amp; Experiences" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337576" start="24699" end="24709" title="Universal Studios Hollywood" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880820" start="24777" end="24784" title="Universal Studios Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375103" start="24789" end="24794" title="Universal Studios Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867977" start="24996" end="25004" title="Starlink" label="Starlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="25186" end="25203" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="25477" end="25488" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="25490" end="25507" title="Dallas–Fort Worth" label="Dallas–Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="25509" end="25518" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="25520" end="25528" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="25530" end="25540" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="25542" end="25551" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="25553" end="25562" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316903" start="25975" end="25990" title="rebroadcast fee" label="rebroadcast fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q772532" start="26022" end="26029" title="peering" label="peering"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255546" start="26080" end="26091" title="Tom Wheeler (FCC)" label="Tom Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014574" start="26301" end="26332" title="CTIA – The Wireless Association" label="CTIA – The Wireless Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109740" start="26353" end="26361" title="Politico" label="Politico"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="26469" end="26500" title="United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary" label="U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="26550" end="26575" title="House Judiciary Committee" label="House Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889730" start="26623" end="26677" title="United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division" label="United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27256" end="27262" title="Data-rate units#Megabit per second" label="Mbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="27453" end="27460" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="27494" end="27513" title="Variety (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Variety&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303396" start="27545" end="27557" title="cord-cutting" label="cord-cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="27686" end="27706" title="DreamWorks Animation" label="DreamWorks Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101552926" start="27812" end="27842" title="Universal Studios, Inc." label="Universal Filmed Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="27854" end="27872" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27966" end="28008" title="How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World" label="How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="28059" end="28075" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="28170" end="28174" title="MVNO" label="MVNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="28175" end="28191" title="cellular network" label="cellular network"/>
<link wikidata="Q919641" start="28197" end="28213" title="Verizon Wireless" label="Verizon Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086460" start="28407" end="28421" title="quadruple play" label="quadruple play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476713" start="28757" end="28773" title="21st Century Fox" label="21st Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q110565573" start="29014" end="29025" title="FX Networks" label="FX Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q57155167" start="29027" end="29055" title="National Geographic Partners" label="National Geographic Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q46578" start="29057" end="29076" title="Fox Sports Networks" label="Fox Sports Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919785" start="29113" end="29123" title="Star India" label="Star India"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="29150" end="29174" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476982" start="29176" end="29199" title="Fox Television Stations" label="Fox Television Stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q75776" start="29201" end="29211" title="Fox Sports (United States)" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="29217" end="29225" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q60238941" start="29320" end="29335" title="Fox Corporation" label="Fox Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="29870" end="29878" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="29879" end="29890" title="WarnerMedia" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498872" start="30334" end="30345" title="Steve Burke (businessman)" label="Steve Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130827" start="30695" end="30725" title="Panel on Takeovers and Mergers" label="Panel on Takeovers and Mergers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297079" start="31529" end="31546" title="Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport" label="Culture Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q478161" start="31547" end="31559" title="Matt Hancock" label="Matt Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="32686" end="32721" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q979750" start="33927" end="33945" title="Randall Stephenson" label="Randall Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q918390" start="34329" end="34332" title="Sky Group" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="35875" end="35881" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="35960" end="35964" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="36008" end="36019" title="Subscription business model" label="subscribers"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="36026" end="36043" title="Streaming media" label="streaming service"/>
<link wikidata="Q939290" start="36137" end="36145" title="Share repurchase" label="buy back"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692" start="36154" end="36160" title="Share (finance)" label="shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="36479" end="36490" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="36492" end="36496" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="36498" end="36503" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628" start="36505" end="36511" title="Oxygen (TV channel)" label="Oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="36513" end="36515" title="E!" label="E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="36517" end="36521" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q765990" start="36526" end="36538" title="Golf Channel" label="Golf Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433722" start="36594" end="36602" title="Fandango Media" label="Fandango"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228060" start="36604" end="36616" title="SportsEngine" label="SportsEngine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="36618" end="36633" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125857" start="36638" end="36645" title="GolfNow" label="GolfNow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="36669" end="36672" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="36682" end="36691" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="36693" end="36698" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="36700" end="36707" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815367" start="36709" end="36713" title="Hayu (streaming service)" label="Hayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046048" start="36719" end="36729" title="NBC Sports" label="NBC Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877626" start="36734" end="36742" title="NBC News" label="NBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q101552926" start="36776" end="36796" title="Universal Studios, Inc." label="filmed entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048317" start="36798" end="36816" title="Universal Studio Group" label="television studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186857" start="36821" end="36831" title="Universal Destinations and Experiences" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151002" start="37331" end="37338" title="Xfinity" label="Xfinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829921" start="37507" end="37523" title="Comcast Business" label="Comcast Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151006" start="37894" end="37911" title="Comcast SportsNet" label="Comcast SportsNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q426638" start="37913" end="37931" title="SportsNet New York" label="SportsNet New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="37933" end="37944" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q765990" start="37946" end="37958" title="Golf Channel" label="Golf Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="38000" end="38006" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="38011" end="38015" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046165" start="38090" end="38095" title="ESPNU" label="ESPNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887818" start="38100" end="38105" title="ESPN3" label="ESPN3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628" start="38168" end="38174" title="Oxygen (TV network)" label="Oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406343" start="38190" end="38204" title="Universal Kids" label="Universal Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="38206" end="38211" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151006" start="38230" end="38249" title="NBC Sports Regional Networks" label="NBC Sports Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954063" start="38436" end="38447" title="NHL Network (American TV channel)" label="NHL Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309239" start="38878" end="38901" title="regional sports network" label="regional sports network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203222" start="39037" end="39042" title="Shrek (franchise)" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715071" start="39056" end="39080" title="How to Train Your Dragon" label="How to Train Your Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081372" start="39094" end="39107" title="Kung Fu Panda" label="Kung Fu Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q97185752" start="39121" end="39127" title="Trolls (franchise)" label="Trolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261392" start="39145" end="39155" title="Madagascar (franchise)" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306255" start="39195" end="39208" title="Classic Media" label="Classic Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143800" start="39262" end="39273" title="Postman Pat" label="Postman Pat"/>
<link wikidata="Q692603" start="39287" end="39300" title="Felix the Cat" label="Felix the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316110" start="39314" end="39319" title="Noddy (character)" label="Noddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q726898" start="39333" end="39363" title="Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer (1964 TV special)" label="Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506238" start="39377" end="39395" title="Frosty the Snowman (TV special)" label="Frosty the Snowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142036" start="39409" end="39414" title="Turok" label="Turok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442531" start="39428" end="39453" title="Casper the Friendly Ghost" label="Casper the Friendly Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235151" start="39467" end="39478" title="VeggieTales" label="VeggieTales"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="39630" end="39652" title="satellite television" label="satellite distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="39778" end="39792" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="39794" end="39801" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="39803" end="39810" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="39812" end="39819" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="39821" end="39832" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="39838" end="39843" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="39891" end="39897" title="Pay television" label="pay-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="40141" end="40157" title="News Corporation (1980–2013)" label="News Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057189" start="40183" end="40223" title="News International phone hacking scandal" label="News International phone hacking scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="40689" end="40696" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="40704" end="40717" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="40808" end="40847" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877626" start="40989" end="41001" title="NBC News Now" label="NBC News Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199764" start="41085" end="41097" title="Virgin Media" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263786" start="41124" end="41128" title="Xumo" label="Xumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q113561613" start="41134" end="41172" title="free ad-supported streaming television" label="free ad-supported streaming television"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022235" start="41470" end="41478" title="Pluto TV" label="Pluto TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189826" start="41506" end="41510" title="Tubi" label="Tubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q564635" start="41598" end="41606" title="smart TV" label="smart TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527941" start="41721" end="41728" title="Hisense" label="Hisense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961234" start="41835" end="41857" title="Charter Communications" label="Charter Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621395" start="41993" end="42005" title="Xfinity Flex" label="Xfinity Flex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335427" start="42359" end="42368" title="Ed Snider" label="Ed Snider"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="42413" end="42432" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="42433" end="42436" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q818735" start="42453" end="42469" title="Wells Fargo Center (Philadelphia)" label="their home arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="42473" end="42485" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="42498" end="42505" title="esports" label="esports"/>
<link wikidata="Q483981" start="42519" end="42521" title="T1 (esports)" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q493145" start="42566" end="42576" title="SK Telecom" label="SK Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="42764" end="42786" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189307" start="42803" end="42816" title="naming rights" label="naming rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985114" start="42883" end="42897" title="Xfinity Center (College Park, Maryland)" label="Xfinity Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="43073" end="43079" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="43122" end="43143" title="NASCAR Xfinity Series" label="NASCAR Xfinity Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743576" start="43210" end="43246" title="American Customer Satisfaction Index" label="American Customer Satisfaction Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="43389" end="43413" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274157" start="44021" end="44034" title="pricing power" label="pricing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="44667" end="44675" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="45369" end="45392" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932411" start="45654" end="45666" title="Bob Ferguson (politician)" label="Bob Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686741" start="46665" end="46698" title="Advertising Self-Regulatory Council" label="National Advertising Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575658" start="46731" end="46744" title="Speedtest.net" label="Speedtest.net"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="47242" end="47251" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q486229" start="47323" end="47331" title="Hennepin County, Minnesota" label="Hennepin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43371319" start="48074" end="48085" title="ACC Network" label="ACC Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303396" start="48124" end="48140" title="cord-cutting" label="cutting the cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="48171" end="48177" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="48366" end="48380" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372694" start="48390" end="48400" title="Roy Cooper" label="Roy Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654562" start="48487" end="48494" title="U-Verse" label="U-Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="48529" end="48542" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960242" start="48620" end="48634" title="Viamedia, Inc." label="Viamedia, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="48645" end="48665" title="Biden administration" label="Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="49051" end="49065" title="carbon footprint" label="CO2e emissions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303750" wikidata="Q941152" url="?curid=303750" title="Haverfordwest County A.F.C.">
<text>Haverfordwest County Association Football Club () is a Welsh semi-professional football team based in Haverfordwest, Wales. They currently play in the .

The club was founded in 1899 and was variously known as Haverfordwest FC, Haverfordwest Town, and Haverfordwest Athletic before adopting the current name, and plays at the Ogi Bridge Meadow Stadium, Haverfordwest, which accommodates 2,100 spectators.

== History ==
Haverfordwest Football Club was formed in 1899 and was quickly renamed Haverfordwest Town in 1901. In 1936, the name of Haverfordwest Athletic was adopted and the first team switched to the Welsh Football League, leaving a reserve side in the Pembrokeshire League. In 1956 they gained promotion to the Welsh League Premier Division, having won the First Division title. The present name of Haverfordwest County was adopted and the club embarked on a long stay in the top flight. Disaster struck in 1975–76 when the club won only four league matches and was relegated to the First Division. Promotion eluded them until 1980 and they went on to take the championship in their first season back, losing only five games.

In 1983, the Welsh League was reorganised to create a form of &quot;premiership&quot; for the leading clubs and Haverfordwest&#x27;s facilities, administration and playing record secured their admittance. In the nine years of existence of this National Division, Haverfordwest were out of the top six only once, but their way to the title was blocked by the powerful Barry Town side. Their opportunity to take the championship came in 1990, once Barry had decided to move to English non-league football.

Haverfordwest County were founder members of the League of Wales in 1992–93 but their stay was brief. Having accepted an offer which involved the redevelopment of their Bridge Meadow ground, and unable to find a suitable alternative ground of League of Wales standard, they resigned from the League in 1994. The decision to take a long-term view was fully vindicated by their return to the League of Wales three years later. The league has since changed its name to the Welsh Premier League.

In 2004, Haverfordwest County qualified for Europe via league position in the League of Wales and played in the UEFA cup losing over two legs 4–1 to Fimleikafélag Hafnarfjarðar of Iceland.

In the 2010–11 season, Haverfordwest County were involuntarily relegated from the Welsh Premier League for the first time. On 5 May 2015, they were promoted back to the Welsh Premier League following an unlikely 5–0 victory against Aberdare Town. They were immediately relegated the following season.

The COVID-19 pandemic saw all domestic football in Wales ended before the end of the 2019–20 season. Haverfordwest County had finished in second place, a point behind Swansea University F.C. in the Cymru South, but achieved promotion to the Cymru Premier for the 2020–21 season due to Swansea University failing to obtain a Tier One license. On the 27th of May 2020, Rob Edwards became chairman of the club, and declared his ambition to see the club gain qualification for European Competition within three years. The 2020–21 season saw mixed fortunes for the club, recording a famous 2–1 home win over TNS, but narrowly missing out on a top 6 finish. There was also excitement when in March 2021, the club announced the signing of former Swansea City and Cardiff City player, and Wales international, Jazz Richards.

The 2021–22 season began with a poor run of form that saw manager Wayne Jones step down in December after a 4–1 away defeat to Flint Town United, with Jazz Richards and former club captain Sean Pemberton taking charge temporarily until a new manager was found. On 31 December, the club announced Belgian Nicky Hayen as their new manager and technical director, the first Belgian to manage in the Cymru Premier. Under Hayen, form improved significantly in the latter half of the season, recording three of the biggest victories in the clubs history, with two 6-1 wins over Cefn Druids and a 6–0 victory over Aberystwyth Town. The success under Hayen was short lived, however, with the Belgian leaving in June 2022 after an approach from Club Brugge to manage their U23&#x27;s side, Club NXT.

In July 2022, former Swansea City and Hull City coach Tony Pennock was announced as Hayen&#x27;s replacement. After a promising start to the 2022–23 season, a poor run of form due to a number of injuries to key players saw the team near the bottom of the Cymru Premier table, however a memorable 2–1 home win over high flying Connah&#x27;s Quay in the final game of Phase One gave the team reason for optimism ahead of Phase Two. During Phase Two, an upturn in form saw an end of season seven game unbeaten run lead the team to finishing in a Europa Conference League play off spot. Haverfordwest met Cardiff Met at Cyncoed Campus in the play off semi final, a tight and cagey affair saw Haverfordwest as the eventual winners on penalties, with goalkeeper Zac Jones the hero, saving a penalty during regular time, and two in the shootout. The play off final against Newtown A.F.C saw the league&#x27;s highest attendance for the season, with 1,826 fans there to witness another penalty shootout. Corey Shephard scored the winner for the second successive 4-3 penalty win for Haverfordwest, sending them into the first round of qualification for the Europa Conference League. It was the first time since 2004 the club had qualified for Europe, and only the second time in their history.

In June 2023 the club pulled off another impressive transfer coup, announcing the signing of former Chelsea and Fulham academy player, and England youth international Martell Taylor-Crossdale. July 2023 saw another major coup, when the club managed to secure the signing of Maltese international Luke Tabone for an undisclosed fee from Gżira United.

== Rivalries ==
Haverfordwest County&#x27;s main rivals are Carmarthen Town A.F.C. with the rivalry described as among the most hostile in Welsh League football. Known as &#x27;The A40 Derby&#x27;, which is the principal dual carriageway between the 2 towns, it is a match that always sticks out of the fixture list for the bluebirds. Haverfordwest County supporters often like to remind their neighbours about their 4–0 win away at Carmarthen on 8 December 2000, being Carmarthen&#x27;s biggest home loss against any club since they were founded in 1950.

== Current squad ==










==Staff==

==European Competitions==


==Managers==

*2022 – Current Tony Pennock
*2022 – 2022 Nicky Hayen
*2021 – 2022 Sean Pemberton (Caretaker)
*2018 – 2021 Wayne Jones
*2017 – 2018 Sean Cresser
*2013 – 2016 Wayne Jones
*2011 – 2013 Mickey Ellis
*2011 – 2011 Derek Brazil
*2010 – 2011 Gavin Chesterfield
*2006 – 2010 Derek Brazil
*2002 – 2006 Deryn Brace
*2000 – 2002 Jason Jones
*1999 – 2000 Mike Ellery
*1994 – 1999 Mark Hopkins
*1992 – 1994 Ray Davies
== Honours ==

*Cymru Premier / Welsh Premier League
**Best ever finish Third in 2003–04
*Welsh Cup
**Best performance Semi-finalists in 2004–05
*FAW Premier Cup
**Best performance Quarter-finalists in 2004–05
*Welsh League Division 1 / Premier Division / National Division (Step 1)
**Winners 1956–57, 1980–81, 1989–90
**Runners-up 1969–70, 1970–71, 2014–15, 2017–18
*Welsh League Division 1 (Step 2)
**Winners 1979–80, 1996–97
**Runners-up 1974–75, 1994–95, 1995–96
*Welsh League Division 2 West (Step 2)
**Winners 1955–56
**Runners-up 1954–55
*Welsh League Cup
**Winners 1960–61, 1988–89
**Runners-up 1974–75, 1984–85, 1996–97
*Welsh League (Youth Division) Cup
**Winners 2005–06
**Runners-up 2010–11
*West Wales Senior Cup
**Winners 1981–82, 1988–89, 1991–92, 1992–93, 1997–98, 1998–99, 2005–06
**Runners-up 1937–38, 1949–50, 1956–57, 1958–59, 1960–61, 1980–81

== Biggest victories ==
*Biggest Cymru Premier Home Win: 6–1 v Cefn Druids in 2022
*Biggest Cymru Premier Away Win: 0–6 v Aberystwyth Town FC in 2022

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q941152" start="0" end="46" title="Haverfordwest County A.F.C." label="Haverfordwest County Association Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="79" end="87" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q990103" start="102" end="115" title="Haverfordwest" label="Haverfordwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="117" end="122" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q941152" start="210" end="226" title="Haverfordwest County A.F.C." label="Haverfordwest FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q941152" start="228" end="246" title="Haverfordwest County A.F.C." label="Haverfordwest Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q941152" start="252" end="274" title="Haverfordwest County A.F.C." label="Haverfordwest Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966243" start="326" end="351" title="Bridge Meadow Stadium" label="Ogi Bridge Meadow Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q990103" start="353" end="366" title="Haverfordwest" label="Haverfordwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q65052290" start="663" end="683" title="Pembrokeshire League" label="Pembrokeshire League"/>
<link wikidata="Q809114" start="1505" end="1515" title="Barry Town F.C." label="Barry Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q498536" start="2285" end="2312" title="Fimleikafélag Hafnarfjarðar" label="Fimleikafélag Hafnarfjarðar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2632" end="2649" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066306" start="2795" end="2818" title="Swansea University F.C." label="Swansea University F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="2869" end="2882" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="3231" end="3234" title="The New Saints F.C." label="TNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="3367" end="3379" title="Swansea City" label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="3384" end="3396" title="Cardiff City" label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463858" start="3430" end="3443" title="Jazz Richards" label="Jazz Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073748" start="3573" end="3590" title="Flint Town United" label="Flint Town United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463858" start="3597" end="3610" title="Jazz Richards" label="Jazz Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q605304" start="3750" end="3761" title="Nicky Hayen" label="Nicky Hayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777557" start="4018" end="4029" title="Cefn Druids" label="Cefn Druids"/>
<link wikidata="Q319756" start="4053" end="4069" title="Aberystwyth Town" label="Aberystwyth Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q190916" start="4182" end="4193" title="Club Brugge" label="Club Brugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625593" start="4227" end="4235" title="Club NXT" label="Club NXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="4259" end="4271" title="Swansea City" label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="4276" end="4285" title="Hull City" label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823155" start="4292" end="4304" title="Tony Pennock" label="Tony Pennock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395452" start="4564" end="4582" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay" label="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q59365764" start="4781" end="4805" title="Europa Conference League" label="Europa Conference League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096167" start="4839" end="4850" title="Cardiff Metropolitan University F.C." label="Cardiff Met"/>
<link wikidata="Q856474" start="5104" end="5117" title="Newtown A.F.C." label="Newtown A.F.C"/>
<link wikidata="Q59365764" start="5387" end="5411" title="Europa Conference League" label="Europa Conference League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="5625" end="5632" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="5637" end="5643" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q66817492" start="5692" end="5716" title="Martell Taylor-Crossdale" label="Martell Taylor-Crossdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q188782" start="5799" end="5820" title="Malta National Football Team" label="Maltese international"/>
<link wikidata="Q393302" start="5861" end="5873" title="Gżira United F.C." label="Gżira United"/>
<link wikidata="Q856468" start="5936" end="5958" title="Carmarthen Town A.F.C." label="Carmarthen Town A.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7823155" start="6532" end="6544" title="Tony Pennock" label="Tony Pennock"/>
<link wikidata="Q605304" start="6558" end="6569" title="Nicky Hayen" label="Nicky Hayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261832" start="6725" end="6737" title="Derek Brazil" label="Derek Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261832" start="6783" end="6795" title="Derek Brazil" label="Derek Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263401" start="6809" end="6820" title="Deryn Brace" label="Deryn Brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="6937" end="6973" title="Welsh Premier League" label="Cymru Premier / Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="7011" end="7020" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119083" start="7067" end="7082" title="FAW Premier Cup" label="FAW Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="7132" end="7203" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh League Division 1 / Premier Division / National Division (Step 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="7289" end="7321" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh League Division 1 (Step 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="7389" end="7426" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh League Division 2 West (Step 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="7467" end="7483" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223688" start="7551" end="7584" title="Welsh Football League" label="Welsh League (Youth Division) Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986966" start="7625" end="7646" title="West Wales FA Senior Cup" label="West Wales Senior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q319756" start="7908" end="7927" title="Aberystwyth Town FC" label="Aberystwyth Town FC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303759" wikidata="Q765642" url="?curid=303759" title="Queens' College, Cambridge">
<text>Queens&#x27; College is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge. Queens&#x27; is one of the 16 &quot;old colleges&quot; of the university, and was founded in 1448 by Margaret of Anjou. Its buildings span the River Cam with the Mathematical Bridge and Silver Street connecting the two sides.

College alumni include Desiderius Erasmus, who studied at the college during his trips to England between 1506 and 1515. Other notable alumni include author T. H. White, Israeli politician Abba Eban, founding father of Ghana William Ofori Atta, newsreader and journalist Emily Maitlis, actor and writer Stephen Fry, the Governor of the Bank of England Andrew Bailey, the British members of Parliament Stephen Kinnock, Liz Kendall and Suella Braverman, and Fields Medallist James Maynard. The college&#x27;s first Nobel Prize winner is Sir Demis Hassabis who received this award in 2024 for developing artificial intelligence models.

It is a registered charity and , the college held non-current assets valued at £197 million. The current president of the college is the economist Mohamed A. El-Erian. Past presidents include a number of notable figures, including the Catholic martyr John Fisher.

== History ==

Queens&#x27; College was founded in 1448 by Margaret of Anjou and refounded in 1465 by the rival queen Elizabeth Woodville. This dual foundation is reflected in its orthography: &quot;Queens&#x27;&quot;, not &quot;Queen&#x27;s&quot;. Its full name is &quot;The Queen&#x27;s College of St Margaret and St Bernard, commonly called Queens&#x27; College, in the University of Cambridge&quot;.

In 1446 Andrew Dokett obtained a charter from Henry VI to found St Bernard&#x27;s College, on a site now part of St Catharine&#x27;s College. A year later the charter was revoked and Dokett obtained a new charter from the king to found St Bernard&#x27;s College on the present site of Old Court and Cloister Court. In 1448 Queen Margaret received from her husband, King Henry VI, the lands of St Bernard&#x27;s College to build a new college to be called &quot;Queen&#x27;s College of St Margaret and St Bernard&quot;. On 15 April 1448, Sir John Wenlock, chamberlain to Queen Margaret, laid the foundation stone at the south-east corner of the chapel.

By 1460 the library, chapel, gatehouse and President&#x27;s Lodge were completed and the chapel licensed for service. In 1477 and 1484 Richard III made large endowments to the college and his wife, Anne Neville, became the third queen to be patroness of the college, making endowments on her own behalf, which were all taken away by Henry VII after he overthrew Richard. Between that time and the early 17th century, many improvements were made and new buildings constructed, including the Walnut Tree Building, which was completed in 1618. Since then the college has refurbished most of its old buildings and steadily expanded.

In the early 17th century Queens&#x27; had become a very fashionable college for the gentry and aristocracy, especially for those with more Puritan leanings. 

During the English Civil War the college sent all its silver to help the King. As a result, the president and the fellows were ejected from their posts. In 1660 the president was restored.

In 1777, a fire in the Walnut Tree Building destroyed the upper floors, which were rebuilt 1778–82. In February 1795 the college was badly flooded, reportedly waist-deep in the cloisters.

In 1823, the spelling of the college&#x27;s name officially changed from Queen&#x27;s to Queens&#x27;. The earliest known record of the Queens&#x27; College Boat Club dates from 1831. In 1862, the college’s debating club, the St Bernard Society, was founded. In 1884, the first football match was played by the college team and the St Margaret Society, the music society, was founded.

In 1980, women were admitted as members for the first time, with the first female graduates in 1983.

==Coat of arms==
The arms are the paternal arms of the first foundress queen, Margaret of Anjou, daughter of Rene, Duke of Anjou, with a difference of a &quot;bordure verte&quot; for the college. The six-quarters of these arms represent the six lordships (either actual or titular) which he claimed. These arms are of interest because the third quarter (Jerusalem) uses &quot;or&quot; (gold) on &quot;argent&quot; (silver), a combination which breaks the rule of tincture of &quot;no metal on metal&quot; in heraldry. The cross potent is a visual pun on the letters H and I, the first two letters of &quot;Hierusalem&quot;.

=== Badge ===

The silver boar&#x27;s head is not the official arms of the college, but, rather, a badge; a white boar was the badge of Richard III. The earliest evidence of the college using a boar&#x27;s head as a symbol is from 1544. The gold cross stands for St Margaret, and the gold crozier for St Bernard, the two patron saints of Queens&#x27; College. There is also a suggestion that the saltire arrangement of these (like the St Andrew&#x27;s Cross) is an allusion to Andrew Dokett, the first president of Queens&#x27;. Today, this badge is widely used by college clubs, and also appears in connection with food or dining.

== Buildings and location ==

Queens’ is the earliest example of a complete purpose-designed college in Cambridge. The original building, which now constitutes Old Court, incorporates all necessary components of a medieval college in a single building: residences, dining hall, kitchens, library, and chapel. There are, of course, older colleges, some having absorbed older non-collegiate buildings, and older collegiate buildings, but none of those were built as a complete college from the outset. Unlike many colleges, which in the 18th century clad their buildings in classical stone and transformed their Gothic windows into rectangular sash windows, Queens’ could not afford to, therefore leaving Old Court as one of the best-preserved medieval assemblages in the city.

Today, Queens&#x27; College has some of the most recognisable buildings in Cambridge. It combines medieval architecture and modern architecture in extensive gardens. It is one of two Cambridge colleges whose core buildings straddle the River Cam (the other being St John&#x27;s). The two halves are joined across the river by the Mathematical Bridge. The two banks are colloquially referred to as the &quot;light side&quot; and the &quot;dark side&quot;. Queens&#x27; College is located to the south of the centre of the city. It is the second southernmost of the colleges on the banks of the River Cam, primarily on the east bank. (The others - in distance order - are King&#x27;s, Clare, Trinity Hall, Trinity, St John&#x27;s, and Magdalene to the north and Darwin to the south).

=== Cloister Court ===

The President&#x27;s Lodge of Queens&#x27; is the oldest building on the river at Cambridge (ca. 1460). The President&#x27;s Lodge is part of Cloister Court: the Cloister walks were erected in the 1490s to connect the Old Court of 1448/9 with the riverside buildings of the 1460s, thus forming the court now known as Cloister Court. Essex Building, in the corner of the court, was erected 1756–60, named after its builder, James Essex the Younger (1722–1784), a local craftsman who had earlier erected the Mathematical Bridge.

=== Old Court ===
Old Court was built between 1448 and 1451. Stylistic features suggest that this was designed by and built under the direction of the master mason Reginald Ely, who was also at the same time erecting the original Old Court of King&#x27;s College (now part of the University Old Schools opposite Clare College), and the start of King&#x27;s College Chapel. Whereas King&#x27;s was built using very expensive stone, Queens&#x27; Old Court was made using cheaper clunch with a red brick skin. Queens&#x27; was finished within two years, whereas King&#x27;s Old Court was never finished, and the chapel took nearly a century to build.

The War Memorial Library is the present student library. The War Memorial Library was formerly the original chapel, part of Old Court. It was named in honour of Queens&#x27; College alumni and members who died in service in the Second World War. Before the 1940s, the student library was the present Old Library.

==== Old Library ====

The Old Library was built in 1448, part of Old Court, and situated between the President&#x27;s Lodge and the original chapel. It is one of the earliest purpose-built libraries in Cambridge. It houses a collection of nearly 20,000 manuscripts and printed books. It is especially notable because nearly all printed books remain in their original bindings, because Queens&#x27; has never been wealthy enough to afford re-binding all the books in a uniform manner, as was the fashion in the 18th century. It is also notable because it contains the earliest English celestial globes, owned once by Queens&#x27; fellow of mathematics Sir Thomas Smith (1513–1577), and because its medieval lecterns were refashioned into bookshelves, still present today.

===Walnut Tree Court===
Walnut Tree Court was erected 1616–18. Walnut Tree Building on the east side of the court dates from around 1617 and was the work of the architects Gilbert Wragge and Henry Mason at a cost of £886.9s. Only the ground floor of the original construction remains after a fire in 1777, so it was rebuilt from the first floor upwards between 1778 and 1782, and battlements were added to it in 1823. This court was formerly the site of a Carmelite friary, Cambridge Whitefriars, founded in 1292, but is now the location of the college chapel and various fellows&#x27; and students&#x27; rooms. The walnut tree in the court stands on the line of a former wall of the friary, and was a replacement of an older one in the same position after which the court was named.

===College Chapel===
The college chapel in Walnut Tree Court was designed by George Frederick Bodley in 1886, built by Rattee and Kett and consecrated in 1891. It included new stained glass by C.E. Kempe. Today&#x27;s chapel follows the traditional college chapel form of an aisle-less nave with rows of pews on either side, following the plan of monasteries, reflecting the origins of many colleges as a place for training priests for the ministry. The triptych of paintings on the altarpiece panel are late-15th-century Netherlandish, and are attributed to the &#x27;Master of the View of Saint Gudula&#x27;. They depict, from left to right, the Agony in the Garden of Gethsemane, the Resurrection of Jesus and Christ&#x27;s Appearance to the Disciples and may originally have been part of a set of five paintings.

===Friar&#x27;s Court===

The College experienced a growth in student numbers during the 19th century, bringing with it the need for additional student accommodation. The President&#x27;s second garden was taken as the site for new student accommodation called Friars&#x27; Building, designed by W. M. Fawcett and built in 1886. The building, named after the Cambridge Whitefriars, accommodates 52 students and fellows.

Friars&#x27; Building is flanked to the East by the Dokett Building. Dokett Building was designed by Cecil Greenwood Hare and built in 1912 from thin red Daneshill brick with Corsham stone dressings and mullioned windows. It stands on the former site of almshouses which were maintained by benefaction from a former President of the college Andrew Dokett. The almshouses were demolished in 1911 to make way for the new building. On demolition of the almshouses, a fund was made available for payment of pensions – always to eight women — in accordance with the will of Dokett. In 2014, Dokett Building underwent major restorations, with the majority of the bricks in the building being replaced and the rooms being reconfigured. In 2019, railings were restored to the Queens&#x27; Lane elevation of Dokett Building. These railings were based on the original design of the railings outside Dokett Building in 1912, but at a lowered height to preserve sightlines from groundfloor windows. This building is largely occupied by second and third years, along with some fellows.
The Erasmus Building completes Friar&#x27;s Court on the West. It was designed by Sir Basil Spence and erected in 1959, and is notable for being the first college building on the Backs to be designed in the Modernist tradition. The modern design of the building generated some controversy and the project encountered strong resistance at the time. It was officially opened by H.M. The Queen Mother in June 1961. The lawn in front includes a crown bowling green laid out in the 16th century.

=== Cripps Court ===

Cripps Court, incorporating Lyon Court (named after the late Queen Mother), was designed by Sir Philip Powell of Powell &amp; Moya and built in stages between 1972 and 1988. It was described by Stephen Gardiner as &quot;easily the best piece of modern architecture by a British architect anywhere.&quot; In brutalist style it houses a bar and gymnasium with squash courts, 171 student bedrooms, three fellows&#x27; flats, a solarium, dining hall and kitchens, various function rooms, a large multipurpose auditorium (The Fitzpatrick Hall) and three combination rooms (Junior for undergraduate students, Middle for postgraduates, and Senior for fellows). It was the benefaction of the Cripps Foundation and the largest building erected by the college. A fourth floor was added in 2007, providing student accommodation and fellows&#x27; offices.

=== Fisher Building ===
Named after St John Fisher, this was erected in 1936 and designed by G. C. Drinkwater. It continued the Queens&#x27; tradition of red brick. The window frames are of teak, and all internal woodwork is oak. It was the first student accommodation in Queens&#x27; to lie west of the river and was the first building in Queens&#x27; to have bathrooms and toilets on the staircase landings close to the student rooms. These were so obvious that it prompted the comment that the building &quot;seemed to have been designed by a sanitary engineer&quot;.

=== The Mathematical Bridge ===

The Mathematical Bridge (officially named &quot;the Wooden Bridge&quot;) crosses the River Cam and connects the older half of the college (affectionately referred to by students as the &quot;dark side&quot;) with the newer western half (the &quot;light side&quot;, officially known as &quot;The Island&quot;). It is part of one of the most photographed views in Cambridge; the typical photo being taken from the nearby Silver Street Bridge.

Popular fable has it that the bridge was designed and built by Sir Isaac Newton without the use of nuts or bolts, and at some point in the past students or fellows attempted to take the bridge apart and put it back together. The myth continues that the over-ambitious engineers were unable to match Newton&#x27;s feat of engineering, and had to resort to fastening the bridge by nuts and bolts. That is why nuts and bolts can be seen in the bridge today. This story is false: the bridge was built of oak in 1749 by James Essex the Younger (1722–1784) to the design of the master carpenter William Etheridge (1709–1776), 22 years after Newton died.

The bridge was repaired in 1866 due to decay, and had to be completely rebuilt in 1905. The rebuild was to the same design but made from teak, and the stepped walkway was made sloped for improved wheelchair access. A handrail was added on one side to help the Queen Mother cross the bridge on her visits to the college. The boltheads are more visible in the post-1905 bridge, which may have given rise to the failed reassembly myth.

=== Gallery ===
== Academic profile ==
Queens&#x27; College accepts students from all academic disciplines. As in other Cambridge colleges, all candidates go through an interview process. Undergraduate applicants for some courses are required to take an admission test in advance. For example, from 2022, applicants in economics are expected to have taken the Test of Mathematics for University Admission before they can be admitted.
Like all other Cambridge colleges, undergraduate education is based on the tutorial system. Most undergraduate supervisions are carried out in the college, though for some specialist subjects undergraduates may be sent to supervisors in other colleges. The faculty and academic supervisors associated with the colleges play a very important part in the academic success of students. The college maintains strong ties with Cambridge Judge Business School and has a growing graduate community, including a lively mix of doctoral, medical and PGCE students. The college also maintains an extensive library, which supplements the university libraries.

In 2021, Queens&#x27; ranked sixth in the Tompkins Table, which ranks the 29 undergraduate Cambridge colleges according to the academic performance of their undergraduates. Its highest position was second, and its average position was fifth. In 2022 the proportion of Firsts was 31.5%.

== Student life ==

The buildings of Queens&#x27; College include the chapel, the hall, two libraries, a bar, and common rooms for fellows, graduates and undergraduates. There are also extensive gardens, lawns, a sportsground and boat house. The college also owns its own punts which may be borrowed by students, fellows and staff.

College accommodation is provided for all undergraduate and many graduate students, with the majority of undergraduate accommodation being on the main college site, and all other students usually live in the college residence, Owlstone Croft, located in Newnham village, a fifteen-minute walk from the central site. The college also owns several houses and flats in Cambridge, which are usually occupied by doctoral students and married couples. Members of the college can choose to dine either in the hall, where three-course meals are served and members must wear academic gowns, or in the buttery, where food can be purchased from a cafeteria-style buffet.

Despite being an ancient college, Queens&#x27; is known as among the more open and relaxed Cambridge colleges. The college provides facilities to support most sports and arts. Queens&#x27; has active student societies, known as the Junior Combination Room and the Middle Combination Room, which represent the students and organise various activities for undergraduate and graduate students respectively. There are a variety of clubs ranging from wine tasting and amateur dramatics to the Queens&#x27; College Boat Club.

Queens&#x27; has a strong reputation for music and drama, with the Fitzpatrick Hall providing theatre and concert space for students and societies from across the university.

=== Sports ===

The college has sports grounds, a boat-house, squash courts and gym. The college rowing club, Queens&#x27; College Boat Club, is one of the oldest in the university with the earliest known record of the college boat club dates from 1831. The club&#x27;s boathouse was built in 1986 and is shared with Magdalene College Boat Club. Like other Cambridge boat clubs it takes part in a number of annual rowing races on the River Cam, Lent Bumps and May Bumps. Each year QCBC also hosts the Queens&#x27; Ergs competition in the Michaelmas Term, an 8x500m indoor rowing relay race open to novices only.

Queens&#x27; College Rugby Football Club (QCRFC), plays Rugby Union against other Cambridge colleges in both league and knock-out competitions. The rugby club has produced several notable alumni including Irish international star Mike Gibson, former England captain John Spencer, Barry Holmes, Charles Nicholl and Jamie Roberts.
The college football club, QCAFC, part of the Cambridge University Association Football League (CUAFL), won the Cuppers knockout cup competition in 2010–11 and jointly won in 2019-20 as the final match was canceled due to COVID. Queens&#x27; won the CUAFL Premier League title in 2017–18 season.

Queens&#x27; is also traditionally strong in cricket, with QCCC playing their home games on the cricket ground in the Barton Road playing fields.

=== May Ball ===
The college hosts a large, lavish May Ball every two years. In recent years, due to popularity, tickets have been available only to Queens&#x27; members and their guests. Highlights include an extravagant fireworks display and a variety of musical acts; Florence and the Machine, Bombay Bicycle Club, Kaiser Chiefs, Alex Clare, JP Cooper, and Klaxons have played at the event. 2013 marked the centenary of Queens&#x27; May Ball, the event was white tie and the entertainment included Simon Amstell and Bastille.

==Traditions==

===College grace===
The college grace is customarily said before and after dinner in the hall. The reading of grace before dinner () is usually the duty of a scholar of the college; grace after dinner () is said by the President or the senior fellow dining. The grace is said shortly after the fellows enter the hall, signalled by the sounding of a gong. The &quot;Ante Prandium&quot; is read after the fellows have entered, the &quot;Post Prandium&quot; after they have finished dining. However, the last grace is almost never used. A simpler English after-dinner grace is now said:

&quot;For these and all his mercies, for the queens our foundresses and for our other benefactors, God&#x27;s holy name be blessed and praised. God preserve our King and Church.&quot;

===College rivalry===

The college maintains a friendly rivalry with St Catharine&#x27;s College after the construction of the main court of St Catharine&#x27;s College on Cambridge&#x27;s former High Street relegated one side of Queens&#x27; College into a back alley.

===College stamps===
Queens&#x27; was one of only three Cambridge colleges (the others being Selwyn and St John&#x27;s) to issue its own stamps. From 1883 the college issued its own stamps to be sold to members of the college so that they could pre-pay the cost of a college messenger delivering their mail. This was instead of placing charges for deliveries on to members&#x27; accounts, to be paid at the end of each term.

The practice was stopped in 1886 by the General Post Office as it was decided that it was in contravention of its monopoly.

===Queen Mother&#x27;s standard===

When the college patroness, Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, died, she gave the college the right to fly her personal standard in her memory on the first day of Michaelmas term each year.

===Walking on the grass===
Unlike at most Oxbridge colleges, not even fellows may walk on the grass.

==People associated with the college==

=== Notable former students ===


=== Presidents ===

===Royal patronesses===

The college enjoyed royal patronage in its early years. Then, after a 425-year break, Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon became the college patron to mark the 550th anniversary of the college&#x27;s foundation. A portrait of the late Queen Mother by June Mendoza hangs in the Senior Combination Room and the most recent court to be built in college, Lyon Court, is named after her.

Queen Elizabeth II was a patron of the college from 2003 until her death in 2022.

== In popular culture ==
The college has made its way into literature, film and television. 
*&quot;Darkness at Pemberley&quot; (1932 novel) by T. H. White features St Bernard&#x27;s College, a fictionalised version of Queens&#x27; College. 
*In 1984, Queens&#x27; was the subject of an eight-part BBC fly-on-the-wall documentary entitled &quot;Queens&#x27;: A Cambridge College&quot;.
*In the American action-thriller film &quot;The Bourne Supremacy&quot; (2004), the first of a trilogy featuring Robert Ludlum&#x27;s Jason Bourne character, there are numerous visual cues and oblique references to various Cambridge colleges, but predominantly Queens&#x27;, where the director Paul Greengrass and one of the producers were both students in the mid-1970s.
*&quot;Eskimo Day&quot; (1996 TV Drama), written by Jack Rosenthal, and starring Maureen Lipman, Tom Wilkinson, and Alec Guinness, is about the relationship between parents and teenagers during an admissions interview day at Queens&#x27; College. There was also a sequel, &quot;Cold Enough for Snow&quot; (1997).
*&quot;Starter for 10&quot; (2006 film) starring James McAvoy includes the filming of a &quot;University Challenge&quot; episode between Queens&#x27; College and Bristol University.
*In &quot;Kingdom&quot; (2007–2009 TV series), created by Simon Wheeler and Alan Whiting, solicitor Peter Kingdom (played by Stephen Fry) and his brother (Dominic Mafham) are both Cambridge graduates. In the fourth episode of the first series, Kingdom returns to Cambridge and meets his old tutor (Richard Wilson), when one of his clients alleges that her daughter has been rejected by his old college purely because of her working-class background. Although the college is never identified, it is Queens&#x27;, where Fry himself was a student, that appears on screen.
*Old Hall was used as the backdrop to the music video, Things We Lost in the Fire, by the band Bastille—backing vocals were provided by the College Choir
*The College is the backdrop for the &quot; Secret Diary of a Porter Girl &quot; blog, created by Lucy Brazier a former deputy head porter.
* Queens&#x27; is used as a backdrop in the 2024 BBC comedy drama &quot;Ludwig&quot;

== See also ==
* List of organ scholars

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q765642" start="0" end="20" title="Queens&amp;#x27; College, Cambridge" label="Queens&amp;#x27; College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055028" start="26" end="45" title="Colleges of the University of Cambridge" label="constituent college"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="53" end="76" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q231145" start="179" end="196" title="Margaret of Anjou" label="Margaret of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q944772" start="221" end="230" title="River Cam" label="River Cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980588" start="240" end="259" title="Mathematical Bridge" label="Mathematical Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="328" end="346" title="Desiderius Erasmus" label="Desiderius Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q453410" start="462" end="473" title="T. H. White" label="T. H. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q305776" start="494" end="503" title="Abba Eban" label="Abba Eban"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="524" end="529" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580160" start="530" end="548" title="William Ofori Atta" label="William Ofori Atta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372273" start="576" end="589" title="Emily Maitlis" label="Emily Maitlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="608" end="619" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579905" start="625" end="656" title="Governor of the Bank of England" label="Governor of the Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756258" start="657" end="670" title="Andrew Bailey (banker)" label="Andrew Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="684" end="705" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377178" start="706" end="721" title="Stephen Kinnock" label="Stephen Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q750260" start="723" end="734" title="Liz Kendall" label="Liz Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957769" start="739" end="755" title="Suella Braverman" label="Suella Braverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="761" end="773" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19655060" start="778" end="791" title="James Maynard (mathematician)" label="James Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="818" end="829" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022141" start="840" end="858" title="Demis Hassabis" label="Sir Demis Hassabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="906" end="929" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="947" end="965" title="Charitable organization" label="registered charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q221296" start="1086" end="1105" title="Mohamed A. El-Erian" label="Mohamed A. El-Erian"/>
<link wikidata="Q317149" start="1190" end="1201" title="John Fisher" label="John Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q231145" start="1263" end="1280" title="Margaret of Anjou" label="Margaret of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="1310" end="1321" title="Wars of the Roses" label="rival queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q229214" start="1322" end="1341" title="Elizabeth Woodville" label="Elizabeth Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="1384" end="1395" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q297742" start="1504" end="1515" title="Saint Margaret the Virgin" label="St Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="1520" end="1530" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="St Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756815" start="1617" end="1630" title="Andrew Dokett" label="Andrew Dokett"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="1655" end="1663" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q256754" start="1722" end="1749" title="St Catharine&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St Catharine&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263491" start="2146" end="2162" title="John Wenlock, 1st Baron Wenlock" label="Sir John Wenlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="2397" end="2408" title="Richard III" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q229218" start="2460" end="2472" title="Anne Neville" label="Anne Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="2595" end="2604" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3063" end="3080" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270720" start="3567" end="3597" title="Queens&amp;#x27; College Boat Club" label="Queens&amp;#x27; College Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q179875" start="3638" end="3646" title="debating" label="debating"/>
<link wikidata="Q170353" start="4028" end="4047" title="Rene, Duke of Anjou" label="Rene, Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658963" start="4056" end="4066" title="Difference (heraldry)" label="difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="4273" end="4282" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q772296" start="4374" end="4390" title="rule of tincture" label="rule of tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="4427" end="4435" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q701211" start="4441" end="4453" title="cross potent" label="cross potent"/>
<link wikidata="Q266764" start="4570" end="4586" title="Boars in heraldry" label="boar&amp;#x27;s head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995576" start="4652" end="4662" title="white boar" label="white boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q297742" start="4807" end="4818" title="Margaret the Virgin" label="St Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="4845" end="4855" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="St Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q201960" start="4940" end="4947" title="saltire" label="saltire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201960" start="4979" end="5001" title="Saltire" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756815" start="5021" end="5034" title="Andrew Dokett" label="Andrew Dokett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349760" start="6052" end="6073" title="medieval architecture" label="medieval architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="6078" end="6097" title="modern architecture" label="modern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q944772" start="6190" end="6199" title="River Cam" label="River Cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="6217" end="6231" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980588" start="6284" end="6303" title="Mathematical Bridge" label="Mathematical Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="6624" end="6635" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q760967" start="6637" end="6642" title="Clare College, Cambridge" label="Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244704" start="6644" end="6656" title="Trinity Hall, Cambridge" label="Trinity Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="6658" end="6665" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="6667" end="6681" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="6687" end="6696" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q675110" start="6714" end="6720" title="Darwin College, Cambridge" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999824" start="7184" end="7207" title="James Essex the Younger" label="James Essex the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308676" start="7453" end="7465" title="Reginald Ely" label="Reginald Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263246" start="7634" end="7660" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Chapel" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136616" start="7766" end="7772" title="clunch" label="clunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425895" start="8837" end="8853" title="celestial globes" label="celestial globes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525572" start="8904" end="8920" title="Thomas Smith (diplomat)" label="Sir Thomas Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q390539" start="8959" end="8966" title="lectern" label="lectern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025620" start="9499" end="9520" title="Cambridge Whitefriars" label="Cambridge Whitefriars"/>
<link wikidata="Q966448" start="9887" end="9910" title="George Frederick Bodley" label="George Frederick Bodley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988358" start="9929" end="9944" title="Rattee and Kett" label="Rattee and Kett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077212" start="10003" end="10013" title="C.E. Kempe" label="C.E. Kempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79218" start="10264" end="10272" title="triptych" label="triptych"/>
<link wikidata="Q13438552" start="10332" end="10345" title="Netherlandish" label="Netherlandish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918711" start="10379" end="10413" title="Master of the View of Saint Gudula" label="Master of the View of Saint Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467856" start="10458" end="10477" title="Agony in the Garden" label="Agony in the Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q205333" start="10481" end="10491" title="Gethsemane" label="Gethsemane"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="10497" end="10518" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="Resurrection of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="10523" end="10564" title="Resurrection appearances of Jesus" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s Appearance to the Disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025620" start="10987" end="11008" title="Cambridge Whitefriars" label="Cambridge Whitefriars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029326" start="11150" end="11170" title="Cecil Greenwood Hare" label="Cecil Greenwood Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548045" start="11303" end="11313" title="almshouses" label="almshouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756815" start="11390" end="11403" title="Andrew Dokett" label="Andrew Dokett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172126" start="12204" end="12220" title="Sir Basil Spence" label="Sir Basil Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519854" start="12297" end="12306" title="the Backs" label="the Backs"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="12329" end="12338" title="Modernism" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="12503" end="12519" title="The Queen Mother" label="The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="12664" end="12668" title="Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184227" start="12732" end="12745" title="Philip Powell (architect)" label="Philip Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609294" start="12830" end="12846" title="Stephen Gardiner (architect)" label="Stephen Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="12943" end="12958" title="brutalist architecture" label="brutalist style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941359" start="13320" end="13337" title="Humphrey Cripps" label="Cripps Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q317149" start="13517" end="13531" title="St John Fisher" label="St John Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13574" end="13590" title="G. C. Drinkwater" label="G. C. Drinkwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980588" start="14090" end="14109" title="Mathematical Bridge" label="Mathematical Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q944772" start="14171" end="14180" title="River Cam" label="River Cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q26676095" start="14505" end="14525" title="Silver Street Bridge" label="Silver Street Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="14591" end="14607" title="Sir Isaac Newton" label="Sir Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394909" start="15117" end="15134" title="William Etheridge" label="William Etheridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="15437" end="15449" title="Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon" label="Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842934" start="15971" end="16015" title="Test of Mathematics for University Admission" label="Test of Mathematics for University Admission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856975" start="16120" end="16135" title="tutorial system" label="tutorial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934696" start="16467" end="16498" title="Cambridge Judge Business School" label="Cambridge Judge Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q178019" start="16585" end="16589" title="Postgraduate Certificate in Education" label="PGCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441207" start="16736" end="16750" title="Tompkins Table" label="Tompkins Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q572738" start="17253" end="17258" title="punt (boat)" label="punts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018643" start="17568" end="17575" title="Newnham, Cambridgeshire" label="Newnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153462" start="18207" end="18230" title="Junior Combination Room" label="Junior Combination Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153462" start="18239" end="18262" title="Middle Combination Room" label="Middle Combination Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270720" start="18463" end="18493" title="Queens&amp;#x27; College Boat Club" label="Queens&amp;#x27; College Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270720" start="18782" end="18812" title="Queens&amp;#x27; College Boat Club" label="Queens&amp;#x27; College Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729925" start="18989" end="19016" title="Magdalene Boat Club" label="Magdalene College Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q944772" start="19106" end="19115" title="River Cam" label="River Cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523275" start="19117" end="19127" title="Lent Bumps" label="Lent Bumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796435" start="19132" end="19141" title="May Bumps" label="May Bumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835655" start="19210" end="19225" title="Michaelmas Term" label="Michaelmas Term"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542861" start="19237" end="19250" title="Indoor rower" label="indoor rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="19341" end="19352" title="Rugby Union" label="Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q947144" start="19515" end="19526" title="Mike Gibson (rugby union)" label="Mike Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258643" start="19551" end="19563" title="John Spencer (rugby union, born 1947)" label="John Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864317" start="19565" end="19577" title="Barry Holmes" label="Barry Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910477" start="19579" end="19594" title="Charles Nicholl" label="Charles Nicholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q449012" start="19599" end="19612" title="Jamie Roberts" label="Jamie Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025574" start="19660" end="19708" title="Cambridge University Association Football League" label="Cambridge University Association Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194563" start="19726" end="19733" title="Cuppers" label="Cuppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025574" start="19864" end="19884" title="Cambridge University Association Football League" label="CUAFL Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865678" start="20029" end="20040" title="Barton Road, Cambridge" label="Barton Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853147" start="20109" end="20117" title="May Ball" label="May Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q217360" start="20329" end="20353" title="Florence and the Machine" label="Florence and the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q891829" start="20355" end="20374" title="Bombay Bicycle Club" label="Bombay Bicycle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q192308" start="20376" end="20389" title="Kaiser Chiefs" label="Kaiser Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q950204" start="20391" end="20401" title="Alex Clare" label="Alex Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q27807517" start="20403" end="20412" title="JP Cooper" label="JP Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q840882" start="20418" end="20425" title="Klaxons" label="Klaxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q29235661" start="20518" end="20527" title="white tie" label="white tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q978769" start="20559" end="20572" title="Simon Amstell" label="Simon Amstell"/>
<link wikidata="Q689" start="20577" end="20585" title="Bastille (band)" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q256754" start="21443" end="21470" title="St Catharine&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St Catharine&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q767650" start="21738" end="21744" title="Selwyn College, Cambridge" label="Selwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="21749" end="21763" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="22111" end="22130" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="22260" end="22293" title="Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22343" end="22360" title="Royal Standard of the United Kingdom#Consorts of the British monarch" label="personal standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835655" start="22395" end="22410" title="Michaelmas term" label="Michaelmas term"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="22730" end="22750" title="Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon" label="Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17538507" start="22880" end="22892" title="June Mendoza" label="June Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153462" start="22906" end="22929" title="Common Room (university)" label="Senior Combination Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="23019" end="23031" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846055" start="23080" end="23093" title="Death and state funeral of Elizabeth II" label="death in 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q453410" start="23240" end="23251" title="T. H. White" label="T. H. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="23394" end="23397" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190864" start="23526" end="23546" title="The Bourne Supremacy" label="The Bourne Supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q224113" start="23594" end="23607" title="Robert Ludlum" label="Robert Ludlum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059919" start="23615" end="23627" title="Jason Bourne" label="Jason Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q356275" start="23775" end="23790" title="Paul Greengrass" label="Paul Greengrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948783" start="23860" end="23870" title="Eskimo Day" label="Eskimo Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677193" start="23905" end="23919" title="Jack Rosenthal" label="Jack Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300246" start="23934" end="23948" title="Maureen Lipman" label="Maureen Lipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q211322" start="23950" end="23963" title="Tom Wilkinson" label="Tom Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103894" start="23969" end="23982" title="Alec Guinness" label="Alec Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q926238" start="24173" end="24187" title="Starter for 10 (film)" label="Starter for 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q193659" start="24215" end="24227" title="James McAvoy" label="James McAvoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667814" start="24358" end="24365" title="Kingdom (2007 TV series)" label="Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128765" start="24406" end="24419" title="Simon Wheeler" label="Simon Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708046" start="24424" end="24436" title="Alan Whiting" label="Alan Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="24473" end="24484" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290587" start="24503" end="24517" title="Dominic Mafham" label="Dominic Mafham"/>
<link wikidata="Q516671" start="24646" end="24660" title="Richard Wilson (Scottish actor)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14071835" start="24972" end="24998" title="Things We Lost in the Fire (song)" label="Things We Lost in the Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q689" start="25012" end="25020" title="Bastille (band)" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270719" start="25057" end="25070" title="Queens&amp;#x27; College Chapel Choir, Cambridge" label="College Choir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25169" end="25181" title="Lucy Brazier" label="Lucy Brazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231587" start="25191" end="25209" title="Porter (college)" label="deputy head porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q124251270" start="25283" end="25289" title="Ludwig (2024 TV series)" label="Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25314" end="25336" title="List of Organ Scholars at British Universities and Colleges#Queens&amp;#x27; College, Cambridge" label="List of organ scholars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303766" wikidata="Q4731236" url="?curid=303766" title="Allegany State Park">
<text>Allegany State Park is a state park in western New York State, located in Cattaraugus County just north of the Allegheny National Forest in Pennsylvania. The park is divided into two sections: The Red House Area and the Quaker Run Area. It lies within the Allegheny Highlands forests ecoregion.

The Red House Area is the northeastern half of Allegany State Park. The Red House area&#x27;s attractions include Stone Tower, the Summit Fire Tower, Red House Lake, Bridal Falls, and the Art Roscoe Ski Area. This section also contains of paved bike trails and 130 camp sites. The Red House area is the location of the Administration Building for the park.

The Quaker area is the southwestern section of the park. Its attractions include Quaker Lake, the Mount Tuscarora Fire Tower, hiking trails, Science lake, Bear Caves, Thunder Rocks, the Quaker Amphitheater, and several campsites. The Cain Hollow campground is located on the Quaker side of the park.

Allegany State Park was named as a top &quot;Amazing Spot&quot; in the nation in 2007. It has also been referred to as &quot;the wilderness playground of Western New York.&quot;

The park is 1 of 80 New York State Parks that was in the path of totality for the 2024 solar eclipse, with 1 minute and 42 seconds of totality.
==History==
The Allegany State Park began on May 2, 1921, when an Act of the New York State Legislature approved the purchase of two tracts of land in the Quaker Run Valley. The act provided $25,000 in state funds for the purchase of land, provided that an equal amount in private funds be raised first. The first tract, consisting of of land belonging to the heirs of Amasa Stone, was purchased for $31,500 on June 18, 1921. The second tract consisted of of land and buildings adjacent to the Stone Estate. The price for this property was $4,300. The park was formally dedicated on July 30, 1921.

Senator Albert T. Fancher was appointed by New York Governor Nathan Lewis Miller to head a five-member team to develop a vast park that continues to grow to this day. Fancher is known as the &quot;Father of Allegany State Park,&quot; and the seven Fancher Cottages in Allegany State Park are named after him.

A converted schoolhouse (near the present day Quaker Inn) served as the park&#x27;s first administration building, and World War I Army surplus tents on wooden platforms were primarily used during the time between the park&#x27;s creation until the completion of the first permanent cabins in 1925.

The first State Park Bond Issue was passed in 1924, and provided funds for the development of the Redhouse Area, including the construction of the Redhouse Administration Building and the building of the Redhouse Dam, which created Redhouse Lake.
In 1926, Science Lake was built and offered the first official swimming area in the park. Adjoining the lake was the Allegany School Of Natural History, a group of 42 cabins, and a main building housing a library, several science laboratories, and an assembly room.

The park was developed extensively between 1933 and 1942 when the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) took on the project of building roads, bridges, camping areas, trails, picnic areas and a ski resort. The CCC were also responsible for numerous conservation projects from reforestation to stream bank retention and wildlife improvements.

Through the years, the park was developed further with the addition of Quaker Lake, winterized cabins and full service cottages, hiking and snowmobile trails, picnic and recreation areas, bike and horse paths, and better roads enabling people to access the park. A ski facility was constructed in the park in the 1930s; the Bova ski area, which featured traditional alpine skiing and ski jumps, closed down in 1980 because of disrepair. (Cross-country skiing is still available in the park.)

By the 1960s, Allegany State Park had expanded to the point where it covered almost all of the towns of Red House and Elko, as well as much of the town of Carrollton. During this time, two major projects along the Allegheny River, the Kinzua Dam to the south and the Southern Tier Expressway to the north, were underway, and the state of New York attempted to evict those who remained in Elko and Red House through eminent domain using those projects as a pretense; what usable land that remained would be integrated into the park or handed to the Seneca Nation of Indians as compensation. Elko was successfully vacated and dissolved, but many of the remaining residents of Red House, among them the family of Pro Bowl fullback Marv Hubbard, managed to fight their evictions. To this day, a small northwestern corner of Allegany State Park is notched out, with 14 houses still (mostly) privately held by 38 residents. The state maintains a standing offer to the residents of Red House to buy out their property should it ever be abandoned.

===Dance halls===
Among some of the park&#x27;s rich history is the Old Quaker Dance Hall. The dance hall was located off ASP 3 across the creek from the Quaker Inn, near the Brow Cabin Trail and the Quaker Maintenance Area, and was torn down in 2002 due to its poor condition. Many dances occurred here through the Great Depression era into the mid-20th century. Bands would play live music at the hall while scores of people danced on the large dance floor.

The Redhouse Dance Pavilion was located along Redhouse Lake, near the beach parking lot. The old dance hall was built upon the concrete barn floor of a farmer,(John Sharpe), that formerly owned the land. As with the Quaker Dance Hall, weekend dances were held at the Redhouse Dance hall throughout the summer, from the 1920s through the rock &amp; roll era.

The Redhouse Dance Pavilion was last used for an Independence Day dance in 1973. The building then housed a game room until it was torn down in 1984. The Redhouse Miniature Golf Course was later built on the same concrete floor; that facility was torn out in the late 2000s and the site is currently a vacant lot, with only the overhead lights remaining.

An amphitheater was constructed on the Quaker side of the park. It is the traditional home of the park&#x27;s long-running hootenanny, which was held from 1972 to 2019.

===New Ireland===
Also a part of the history is the settlement of New Ireland (Carrollton, New York) which was formed in the mid-19th century by a small group of Irish settlers who had fled the pains of the Great Famine. It is near Limestone but within the boundaries of Allegany State Park. The village since was incorporated into Limestone, and no longer exists. Ruins of the old village are still visible and are accessible from the Limestone Run Road.

===Park fire towers===
Due to the danger of forest fires, and the damage caused by them in New York State Parks, three fire lookout towers were constructed. The first; Summit Fire Tower; was completed in 1926. It stands tall. The other fire towers were at Mt. Tuscarora Fire Tower located in the Quaker Area, and the Mt. Irvine Fire Tower, located in the Rice Brook (Limestone) area. The Mt. Tuscarora Fire Tower still stands today, near Quaker Lake. The Mt. Irvine Fire Tower, however, was disassembled by the park and moved to Science Hill near the Bradford, Pennsylvania entrance. When all the fire towers were abandoned in favor of aerial surveillance in 1971, the Mt. Irvine tower was the only one taken down by park personnel in the early 1970s. It was saved however, when reassembled by a BOCES class in Ellicottville.

===Gas lease===
Contained within the park off France Brook Road is a large storage pool for natural gas. Formerly a large gas well, the Limestone Storage Pool is operated by National Fuel Gas Supply Corporation. National Fuel leases rights to maintain and operate over 20 wells it uses to store and regulate the natural gas it stores in the massive underground sandstone deposit. The storage pool is connected to the &quot;K&quot; line, which is a diameter gas pipeline that runs from Buffalo, New York to Eldred, Pennsylvania. The pool is regulated by equipment located in a compression station situated on the access road near the Bova Ski Area and Camp Allegany. The gas stored in this pool is used by the park (which it receives for free as part of the agreement), and by local industries requiring high-pressure, high-volume gas supply. The rest of the gas is used on the K line for distribution in New York and Pennsylvania.

A master plan, adopted in 2010, provides protection from oil and gas drilling within the park.

== Park roads ==
The park uses a system of three main roads linking the Red House area and the Quaker Run area, and serving as major thoroughfares in the Red House and Quaker Run Areas.
* Allegany State Park Route 1 (ASP Route 1) runs north-to-south through the middle of the park. ASP Route 1 runs between the park&#x27;s entrance from exit 21 of the Southern Tier Expressway (Interstate 86 and New York State Route 17) in Salamanca, to its intersection with ASP Route 3 in the Quaker Run Area near the Quaker Rental Office. ASP Route 1 also intersects with ASP Route 2 by Redhouse Lake. Winding ASP Route 1, historically known as &quot;Stoddard Road&quot; before the park was constructed, is shut down and used only as a snowmobile trail during the winter. The route becomes New York State Route 951M (an unsigned reference route) at the park&#x27;s northern border.
* Allegany State Park Route 2 (ASP Route 2) runs west to east along the northern part of the park and then north to south along the eastern side of the park. ASP Route 2 runs from exit 19 of the Southern Tier Expressway (the former New York State Route 382) in the town of Red House, New York to its intersection with ASP Route 3 at the Bradford, Pennsylvania, entrance of the park. ASP Route 2 also intersects with ASP Route 1 by Redhouse Lake. ASP Route 2 to ASP Route 3 is the sole automobile road between Red House and Quaker Run within Allegany State Park during the winter.

* Allegany State Park Route 3 (ASP Route 3) runs west to east from the southern terminus of ASP Route 2 near the Bradford entrance to New York State Route 280 at the park&#x27;s Quaker Run entrance in Coldspring. ASP Route 3 to ASP Route 2 is the sole automobile road between Red House and Quaker Run during the winter.

There are also several paved secondary roads in Allegany State Park.

* Allegany State Park Route 2A (ASP Route 2A) runs along the southern shore of Red House Lake between ASP Route 1 and ASP Route 2.
* Quaker Lake Road runs from its intersection with ASP Route 3 (about east of the Quaker Entrance) around the North East side of Quaker Lake to just past the Quaker Beach.
* Cain Hollow Road goes from Quaker Lake Road (just north of ASP Route 3) into the Cain Hollow Campground.
* Friends Boat Launch Access Road is entered from outside the park, off NY 280, about north of the Quaker Entrance. This road leads to the boat launch onto the Allegheny Reservoir near the site of the old &quot;Tunesassa School&quot; (Indian School).

The park also has many minor access roads. These usually are dirt roads that go unmaintained during winter but otherwise range from good to rough condition.
* Bay State Road runs from ASP Route 1, about midpoint between Red House Lake and ASP3 past the former Big Basin Ski Area, north through the hamlet of Red House, and connects with ASP Route 2 just outside the park near I-86. Bay State Road cannot be navigated from end-to-end; it is only usable by snowmobile during the winter months and is gated off just south of Red House during the summer so as not to disturb the 38 remaining permanent residents of Red House. Bay State Road is maintained year-round by the town of Red House from the hamlet northward, as are two other roads in the hamlet, Lonkto Hollow Road and Beck Road.
* France Brook Road runs from ASP Route 2 near Group Camp 10, about south of Red House Lake, to ASP Route 1 near Bay State Road.
* Ridge Run Road starts at its intersection with ASP Route 2 (about north of the Bradford Entrance) and follows a ridge north to Thunder Rocks. Ridge Run Road is the main entrance to Thunder Rocks.
* Limestone Run Road goes from its intersection with ASP Route 2 (by France Brook Road) to the hamlet &amp; former village of Limestone on the eastern side of Allegany. About midway this road intersects with Ridge Run Road (the entrance way to Thunder Rocks). Limestone Run Road serves as the eastern entrance to Allegany State Park from Limestone during the summer.
* Coon Run Road runs south from its intersection with ASP Route 3 (just east of the Quaker Inn) into the state of Pennsylvania and the Allegheny National Forest. The road is gated at the New York-Pennsylvania border during the summer.
* Wolf Run Road is entered outside the park from NY 280 (about miles south of the Quaker Entrance). It follows a southerly course towards the state of Pennsylvania and the Allegheny National Forest, ending about one mile (1.6 km) northwest of the border. Wolf Run Road was originally built for the town of Elko, which by 1965 had been forcibly evacuated and assimilated into the park. Nothing of note is on Wolf Run Road.
* Holt Run Road is entered from NY 280 about north of the Quaker Entrance, across from the Friends Boat Launch.
* Bova Ski Hill Access Road diverges from ASP Route 2 at the fork in the road about 1/2 mile South of Red House Lake (by Camp Allegany) and runs east for about past the former Red House garbage dump to the old Bova Ski Area. Bova was a state-operated ski resort featuring alpine skiing and the region&#x27;s only ski jumps; the resort, named after the Beauvais family who previously owned the property, operated from the 1930s to 1980.
* Stone Tower Access Road is a loop that runs from ASP Route 1 past the Art Rosco Ski Area (near Summit Cabins) (about south of the Salamanca Entrance) around Stone Tower and back to ASP Route 1 (about north of Red House Lake).
* The roads within the cabin trails (mentioned below), with the exception of the steep Ryan trail, are dirt roads maintained during the winter to allow access to the cabins.

== Administration building ==

Built in the Tudor Style during the depression era, this building has been extensively modernized, but still keeps its cozy rustic charm. It houses the Red House Rental Offices, the NYS Park Police Station, the park&#x27;s natural history museum, the Red House Gift Shop, the Red House Restaurant and the Allegany Regional offices for the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation (NYSOPRHP).

The Administration Building also has a sitting room with a large bay window overlooking Red House Lake. This room is used for functions and meetings, and is equipped with two wood-burning fireplaces. The gift shop is operated by J-Con Parks, Inc. The rental office, gift shop, museum, and Park Police Station are located on the main level of the building. The restaurant, Allegany Regional Offices of NYSOPRHP, and park offices are located on the upper level of the building. The basement includes offices and storage.

==Old Quaker Store Museum==
Opened in 1996, the Old Quaker Store Museum features exhibits about the park&#x27;s history, natural history and development. The museum is located in Salamanca, New York.

== Hiking trails ==

Allegany State Park offers 21 hiking trails of various lengths and difficulties available for use year round. Six of the trails are part of the Art Roscoe Ski Touring Area. The trails within this system are groomed for cross-country skiing during the winter months, and are unavailable for hiking. The Ridgerun trail, which is part of the system, features a lean-to. The Art Roscoe trails are located near Summit in the Red House Area. In addition to these trails, The Allegheny Highlands Snowmobile and Horse Trail begins in the park off ASP 2. Another unique bragging right the park has is that the famous North Country Trail passes through it. The North Country Trail is a 4000+ mile trail that spans through New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and terminates in North Dakota. Allegany State Park&#x27;s section of the trail includes 4 lean-tos, two in the Quaker Area, and the other two in the Red House area. The Black Snake Mountain trail is also unique due to its direct contact with the Pennsylvania state line. One of the attractions on this trail is a concrete marker shows the exact line where New York and Pennsylvania meet. It is short enough that one could sit on the marker, and be in two states at once. Many other attractions are viewable on or from the trails listed below. In the Quaker Area, the Tornado Trail tours the damage area caused by an F-1 Tornado on August 28, 1990. Though much of the area has regrown, the path that was cut by the tornado is still visible; it was 1 of 4 to occur that day in Western New York. Here is a list of the hiking trails and their lengths. Each trail in the list is preceded by its longitude and latitude geographic coordinates (suitable to be used for a point of interest in various navigation devices):

===Listing of hiking trails===
* -78.872167, 42.042833, Mt. Tuscarora trail - Fire Tower (5.3 miles)
* -78.800333, 42.009667, Bear Caves trail - Mt. Seneca (4.0 miles)
* -78.775000, 42.003167, Black Snake Mountain trail (3.0 miles)
* -78.827000, 42.013333, Three Sisters trail (2.5 miles)
* -78.799500, 42.033333, Bear Springs trail (0.5 miles)
* -78.744167, 42.096667, Beehunter trail (6.5 miles)
* -78.741667, 42.106667, Osgood trail (2.5 miles)
* -78.752000, 42.105000, Red Jacket trail (2.0 miles)
* -78.778000, 42.105000, North Country Trail (ASP section of the trail) (18.0 miles)
* -78.749333, 42.100000, Conservation Trail (4.0 miles)
* -78.704167, 42.125000, Patterson trail (3.5 miles)
* -78.691667, 42.120000, Ridgerun trail (5.0 miles)
* -78.690667, 42.120333, Leonard Run Loop (5.0 miles)
* -78.694167, 42.123833, Christian Hollow Loop (4.0 miles)
* -78.698333, 42.125000, Sweetwater trail (2.7 miles)
* -78.863333, 42.046667, Flagg trail (3.0 miles)
* -78.766667, 42.052833, Eastwood Meadows trail (2.5 miles)
* -78.704167, 42.125000, Snowsnake Run (4.9 miles)

In addition to the hiking trails, a paved bicycle path circumscribes Red House Lake. Along this path is the Thomas E. Kelly Bridge, the only covered bridge in Western New York.

==Program sites==
In addition to the hiking trails, the park has set up 71 program sites which are used to direct park visitors to specific sites where the park naturalist staff conducts walks and other programs. The park publishes a Recreation Activities Bulletin which informs park visitors of the programs taking place in the published time period. The sites are numbered, with numbers corresponding to an attached map. When a program is conducted, park patrons are directed to meet at one of these specific places at the specified time. Examples of activities and their program site include a tour of a Beaver colony- Site 28, bike &amp; hike to Bridal Falls- Site 60, tour of the Bear Caves- Site 42, tour of Thunder Rocks- Site 35, night owl walk- Site 32, etc.

== Cabin trails ==
Cabin Trails are clusters of cabins accessible by dirt roads (see above). Each trail usually has centrally located pit toilets or bathrooms with flush toilets, while shower facilities are more widely separated. All cabin trails in the Red House area have a dedicated shower house within the trail. The park rents 375 cabins on the trails listed below, 150 of them winterized. The cabin trails are:

=== Red House area cabin trails ===
* -78.748573, 42.097695, Anderson
* -78.748731, 42.109869, Sugarbush
* -78.742612, 42.106411, McIntosh
* -78.737509, 42.094601, Beehunter
* -78.723352, 42.096392, Congdon
* -78.714923, 42.084279, Ryan
* -78.704998, 42.125828, Summit
* -78.723310, 42.103470, Bova 
====Red House cabin area notes====

Red House cabin styles: The Red House area of Allegany has, for the most part, newer cabins. Many of these cabins have more than one room, although some of the traditional one room, &quot;Quaker Style&quot; cabins still exist in the Red House area. These traditional one room cabins are: MacIntosh #&#x27;s 1, 3, 5, 20 (two rooms), 22, 26: Anderson #&#x27;s 2, 5, 6, 8 through 14 and 17: Beehunter #&#x27;s 6, 7, 31, 32 (two rooms), 33, 34.

There are some cabins that have one room plus a kitchenette in them. These are the cabins on Sugarbush and Congdon Trails. Newer three room cabins in the Red House area are located at: all of Summit Trail, Anderson Trail #&#x27;s 1, 1A, 7, 15, 16, all of MacIntosh Trail (except those mentioned above). All of Beehunter Trail (except for the #&#x27;s mentioned above) are even larger three room cottages. There are also older large four room cabins with fireplaces on Ryan Trail.

Electricity: The only cabins in the Red House area of the park that do not have electrical power or refrigerators are MacIntosh #&#x27;s 1, 3, 5, 20, 22, and 26.

Flush toilets and showers: All Cabin Trails in the Red House area have centrally located Flush toilets are also available in both the Red House and Beehunter Picnic Areas, the Red House Bathhouse, and the Red House Administration Building.

Winter rentals: All cabins in the Red House area are available year-round.

=== Quaker area cabin trails ===
* -78.842234, 42.020100, Weller
* -78.838036, 42.017306, Barton
* -78.830018, 42.011830, Ranger
* -78.828303, 42.011074, Pinetree
* -78.823084, 42.008992, Brow
* -78.823317, 42.015463, Ward
* -78.822524, 42.008965, Raccoon
* -78.823379, 42.011037, Diehl (also has tents and sites for trailers)
* -78.822295, 42.011202, Hamlin
* -78.817440, 42.010957, Bear Ridge Trail (three new cabins built in 2002)
* -78.815892, 42.011329, Horseshoe
* -78.815005, 42.011315, Reed
* -78.814186, 42.010855, Indian
* -78.814011, 42.011500, McCabe
* -78.812688, 42.011756, Angle (remodeled in 2003)
* -78.811019, 42.011471, Fancher Cottage Trail
* -78.809214, 42.011500, Buffalo
* -78.808566, 42.011290, Parallel
* -78.802848, 42.010129, Creekside
* -78.799062, 42.008980, Kaiser
* -78.834701, 42.014405, Taft
* -78.798044, 42.009154, Stony (special for horses with campers)

====Quaker Area Cabin Notes====

Quaker cabin styles: Although a few cabins in the Quaker area are the standard one room, &quot;Quaker Style Cabin&quot;, there are lots cabins with two or more beehives available on this side of Allegany State Park. These cabins are: Weller #&#x27;s 13, 15, and 22: Pinetree #&#x27;s 1 through 4: Ranger #4: Ward #6: Brow #&#x27;s 3, 7 and 11: Gypsy #&#x27;s 6, 12,13, 16, and 19: Circle #2: Indian #5: McCabe #1 (four room): All Cottages (three rooms and a private bath); Parallel #&#x27;s 1 and 2 (full service cottages); Buffalo 13: Creekside #&#x27;s 9, 15, and 16: Kaiser #11 (three room) and 12 (four rooms). Taft cabin also has multiple rooms and screened-in porches that can be used as bedrooms.

Electricity: Most cabins in the Quaker area have electricity and include a refrigerator, however some do not. The cabins without electrical power, or refrigerators, in the Quaker area are Barton #&#x27;s 1 through 13 and #&#x27;s 19 through 22: Hamlin #&#x27;s 1 to 8 and #&#x27;s 11 and 14: Gypsy #&#x27;s 4 through 7 and 12 through 32 (Gypsy #11 has electricity, fridge, and gas heat/stove): Indian #&#x27;s 1 through 4: all cabins on Circle, Reed, and Creekside Trails. All other cabins in the Quaker area do have electricity and refrigerators.

Toilets: In the Quaker area, there are centrally located flush toilets on Weller, Diehl, Gypsy, and Buffalo Cabin Trails, as well as in the Fancher Bath House, the Quaker Museum, the Quaker Picnic Area, and the Quaker Rental Office. McCabe #1 also has a seasonal flush toilet inside.

Showers: Showers are available in the Fancher Bath House, as well as the bathhouses on Weller, and Diehl Cabin Trails.

Winter Rentals: Some cabins in the Quaker area are available to rent during the winter months. These cabins include Weller #&#x27;s 1 through 9: Diehl #&#x27;s 1 through 8: Gypsy #&#x27;s 1, 2, 3, 8 and 9: Angle #&#x27;s 1 through 11: Parallel #&#x27;s 1 and 2, and all of the Fancher Cottages.

Full Service Cottages: In addition to the standard cabins, the park rents 10 &quot;full service&quot; Cottages located in the Quaker Run Area. The seven Fancher Cottages are located in the southern part of the Allegany State park, adjacent to Quaker Run Creek and offer guests a unique camping experience. Named for Senator Albert T. Fancher, the &quot;Father of Allegany State Park,&quot; each Fancher Cottage has a bathroom with shower, refrigerator, counter-top range and microwave. The fully handicapped accessible cottages sleep six, are furnished and stocked with pillows, bedding, cooking utensils, dishes and coffeemakers. In addition, each cottage has a grill and picnic table outside. Reminiscent of a classic hunting lodge, the Pitt Cottage in the Red House Area offers the same amenities as the Fancher Cottages. One outstanding feature of the Pitt Cottage is its gas burning stone fireplace. Located on Allegany State Park Rte. 2, the cottage is adjacent to Congdon Trail and three miles from the Administration Building. Pitt Cottage is not handicapped accessible. Recently rebuilt Parallel cabins 1 and 2 have the same amenities as the Fancher group of cottages and are handicapped accessible.

== Tent and trailer areas ==

In addition to cabin rentals, the park operates and maintains 3 tent and trailer campgrounds.

In the Red House Area there is the Red House Tent and Trailer Area; Quaker Area has the Diehl Tent and Trailer Trailer Area, and the Cain Hollow Camping Area. Between the three, 424 sites are available for tent or trailer use.

The Red House Tent and Trailer Area is situated along Stoddard Creek. Its entrance is on ASP1, across from the Redhouse General Store. This campground contains 5 loops; Loops A, B, C &amp; D, and E. Loop A and a few sites on the remaining 4 loops are non electric sites. All of the loops are interconnected by dirt roads.

The Cain Hollow Camping Area is located in Cain Hollow, off Quaker Lake Road, about east of Quaker Entrance to Allegany State Park on ASP 3. This campground has 4 loops; Loops A, B, C, and D. Many sites are equipped with an electrical hookup, and have central bathrooms. Water Taps are located throughout the campground and on the Bathhouses.
Cain Hollow loop A is entirely out in the open, and separate from the other 3 Loops, it is set up more for Trailers than Tenting. Loops B, C, and D are mostly Tree&#x27;d lots. Cain Hollow was recently renovated and all the bathhouses are new, with three automatic flush toilets and two showers in each, one of which in each is accessible to people with mobility issues.
There is a Trailer Dumping station on the main road near Site 55. All Roads are paved, with partial paved/gravel driveways for campsites. All sites are &#x27;back-in&#x27; sites, there are no &#x27;pull-thru&#x27; sites.
Cain Hollow Campground is only open during summer months, from mid-May until mid-October.

Diehl Tent and Trailer Trail sits beside English Creek, running parallel with ASP1 just east of the Quaker Inn. This camping trail also has 8 cabins on it, and is a single loop with 22 non-electric sites and a bath and shower house at the trail head.

Gift Cards can also be purchased for camping purposes. Gift cards can be purchased and redeemed at most New York State Parks.

== Reserving campsites and cabins ==
All sites and cabins can be reserved either in-person at the park or through ReserveAmerica.com.

== Group camps ==
The park also has several larger campsites known as Group Camps. These are reserved primarily by large groups or organizations such as Boy Scout troops, church groups, etc. They usually consist of several cabins or dormitories, a kitchen with dining hall, bathroom and shower facilities, and, in some of the larger group camps, classrooms or gathering halls. The largest group camp in Allegany State Park is Camp Allegany. While it is not operated by the park itself, park maintenance crews still are responsible for its upkeep. Camp Turner also is a group camp that is not operated by the park. Camp Turner, established in 1923, is used as a co-ed children&#x27;s summer camp and was operated by the youth department of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Buffalo until 2020. It is now operated by OLV Catholic Charities. Over the years the group camps have been falling apart, until recently. The park is going through a revitalization period. They have recently bulldozed Group Camp 5, and plan to rebuild for next spring. Camp 10 (Carlton) also has work being done on the cabins, as they were falling down. Otherwise, the park rents and maintains the other group camps.

== Beaches ==
There are two small bathing beaches in the park: one at Red House Lake and another at Quaker Lake at the end of Quaker Lake Road, past the entrance to Cain Hollow Campground. The swimming areas are staffed by lifeguards, and only open to swimmers from 11am-7pm while lifeguards are present. Both beaches have a Diving Platform, also staffed by lifeguards with deep water. There are very strict rules in the beach waters, no flotation devices are allowed unless Coastguard Approved. Air mattresses, Tubes, and even Kiddie Water-wings are prohibited. The beaches are often closed due to thunderstorms or other possibly dangerous situations. Both beaches have bathrooms near the parking lot; the 1960s-vintage restrooms near Quaker Lake were torn down after summer 2015, with a newly constructed pavilion to open in 2016. A snack bar is also present at both Red House Lake and Quaker Lake.

== Maps ==
A new Allegany State Park map &amp; brochure was produced in 2010 by Allegany State Park and Cattaraugus County. With Allegany State Park personnel, the Cattaraugus County Department of Real Property created a new map and the Department of Economic Development, Planning and Tourism worked on a new brochure.

=== ASP Routing System ===
There are three routes connecting through the State Park. In the Red House and Quaker Run Areas, the speed limit is 25 MPH (40 km/h), while the limit is 35 MPH (55 km/h) in forested parts.
==Climate==

According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Allegany State Park has a warm-summer humid continental climate, abbreviated &quot;Dfb&quot; on climate maps. The hottest temperature recorded in Allegany State Park was on July 9, 1936, while the coldest temperature recorded was on February 9, 1934.

== References ==
==Bibliography==
*

== External links ==

*New York State Parks: Allegany State Park – Quaker Area
*New York State Parks: Allegany State Park – Red House Area
*Friends of Allegany State Park
*Cattaraugus County Tourism: Allegany State Park Visitors Map
*Cattaraugus County Tourism: GPS Points of Interest for Allegany State Park
*Explore America&#x27;s Parks: Virtual Tour of Allegany State Park – Quaker Area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4731236" start="0" end="19" title="Allegany State Park" label="Allegany State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761072" start="25" end="35" title="state park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="47" end="61" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q114923" start="74" end="92" title="Cattaraugus County, New York" label="Cattaraugus County"/>
<link wikidata="Q448940" start="111" end="136" title="Allegheny National Forest" label="Allegheny National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="140" end="152" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22698" start="158" end="162" title="park" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731313" start="256" end="283" title="Allegheny Highlands forests" label="Allegheny Highlands forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="284" end="293" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q110291460" start="427" end="444" title="Summit Fire Tower" label="Summit Fire Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q34928100" start="752" end="778" title="Mount Tuscarora" label="Mount Tuscarora Fire Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="1355" end="1381" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624818" start="1433" end="1450" title="Quaker Lake" label="Quaker Run Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740385" start="1647" end="1658" title="Amasa Stone" label="Amasa Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711298" start="1885" end="1902" title="Albert T. Fancher" label="Albert T. Fancher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="1920" end="1937" title="New York Governor" label="New York Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q532620" start="1938" end="1957" title="Nathan Lewis Miller" label="Nathan Lewis Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q695207" start="2470" end="2476" title="log cabin" label="cabins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="3067" end="3094" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q509168" start="3937" end="3946" title="Red House, New York" label="Red House"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022445" start="3951" end="3955" title="Elko, New York" label="Elko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708804" start="3988" end="3998" title="Carrollton, New York" label="Carrollton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589498" start="4068" end="4078" title="Kinzua Dam" label="Kinzua Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485976" start="4100" end="4124" title="Southern Tier Expressway" label="Southern Tier Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="4248" end="4262" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q110904219" start="4381" end="4405" title="Seneca Nation of Indians" label="Seneca Nation of Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778373" start="4561" end="4573" title="Marv Hubbard" label="Marv Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5190" end="5206" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="6053" end="6065" title="amphitheater" label="amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140338" start="6173" end="6183" title="hootenanny" label="hootenanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708804" start="6299" end="6319" title="Carrollton, New York" label="Carrollton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="6427" end="6439" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453147" start="6452" end="6461" title="Limestone, New York" label="Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q748998" start="6796" end="6814" title="fire lookout tower" label="fire lookout tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q110291460" start="6845" end="6862" title="Summit Fire Tower" label="Summit Fire Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q34928100" start="6933" end="6957" title="Mount Tuscarora" label="Mt. Tuscarora Fire Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q34921706" start="6994" end="7015" title="Mount Irvine (New York)" label="Mt. Irvine Fire Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q34830724" start="7206" end="7218" title="Science Hill (New York)" label="Science Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365314" start="7488" end="7501" title="Ellicottville, New York" label="Ellicottville"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="7596" end="7607" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q587682" start="7626" end="7634" title="gas well" label="gas well"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="7865" end="7874" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="7965" end="7973" title="Pipeline transport" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="7989" end="8006" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131306" start="8010" end="8030" title="Eldred, Pennsylvania" label="Eldred, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q178898" start="8080" end="8091" title="Gas compressor" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485976" start="8884" end="8908" title="Southern Tier Expressway" label="Southern Tier Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q94930" start="8910" end="8923" title="Interstate 86 (east)" label="Interstate 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485976" start="8928" end="8951" title="New York State Route 17" label="New York State Route 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380435" start="8956" end="8965" title="Salamanca (city), New York" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487655" start="9309" end="9334" title="New York State Route 951M" label="New York State Route 951M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487655" start="9348" end="9363" title="reference route (New York)" label="reference route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487671" start="9633" end="9657" title="New York State Route 382" label="New York State Route 382"/>
<link wikidata="Q509168" start="9674" end="9693" title="Red House, New York" label="Red House, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q662409" start="9738" end="9760" title="Bradford, Pennsylvania" label="Bradford, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486574" start="10116" end="10140" title="New York State Route 280" label="New York State Route 280"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708624" start="10183" end="10193" title="Coldspring, New York" label="Coldspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731332" start="10943" end="10962" title="Allegheny Reservoir" label="Allegheny Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10994" end="11010" title="Tunesassa School" label="Tunesassa School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453147" start="12274" end="12283" title="Limestone, New York" label="Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="12629" end="12641" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q448940" start="12650" end="12675" title="Allegheny National Forest" label="Allegheny National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088963" start="12702" end="12730" title="New York-Pennsylvania border" label="New York-Pennsylvania border"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022445" start="13056" end="13060" title="Elko, New York" label="Elko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13263" end="13282" title="Friends Boat Launch" label="Friends Boat Launch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13405" end="13418" title="Camp Allegany" label="Camp Allegany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13494" end="13507" title="Bova Ski Area" label="Bova Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718" start="13597" end="13605" title="ski jump" label="ski jump"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13792" end="13810" title="Art Rosco Ski Area" label="Art Rosco Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13817" end="13830" title="Summit Cabins" label="Summit Cabins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13879" end="13890" title="Stone Tower (New York)" label="Stone Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="14167" end="14178" title="Tudor Style" label="Tudor Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="14190" end="14204" title="depression era" label="depression era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706660" start="14493" end="14561" title="New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation" label="New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380435" start="15274" end="15293" title="Salamanca, New York" label="Salamanca, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="15536" end="15556" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797440" start="15675" end="15682" title="lean-to" label="lean-to"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716246" start="15925" end="15944" title="North Country Trail" label="North Country Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="16712" end="16719" title="Tornado" label="Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586222" start="16723" end="16738" title="1990 Plainfield tornado" label="August 28, 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="17005" end="17027" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q960648" start="17055" end="17072" title="point of interest" label="point of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825472" start="18323" end="18337" title="covered bridge" label="covered bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988104" start="18341" end="18357" title="Western New York" label="Western New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q170544" start="25469" end="25473" title="tent" label="tent"/>
<link wikidata="Q216146" start="25478" end="25485" title="Trailer (vehicle)" label="trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q832778" start="25486" end="25497" title="campgrounds" label="campgrounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="26275" end="26285" title="electrical" label="electrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="27824" end="27835" title="dormitories" label="dormitories"/>
<link wikidata="Q867424" start="28334" end="28367" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Buffalo" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q114923" start="29784" end="29802" title="Cattaraugus County, New York" label="Cattaraugus County"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="30247" end="30276" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="30311" end="30348" title="warm-summer humid continental climate" label="warm-summer humid continental climate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303771" wikidata="Q4507688" url="?curid=303771" title="Private overprint">
<text>In philately, private overprintsorcommercial overprints are overprints applied to postage stamps, postal stationery or revenue stamps by anyone other than the official stamp-issuing entity. These overprints have principally been used as a security measure, however, propaganda and commemorative examples are also known. When overprinted for security purposes, they serve a similar function to perfins. It is important to distinguish between private overprints and private cancellations.

==Background==
Private overprints have been used for a number of reasons. Generally they cannot be used as control marks, as the stamp or stamps are thus rendered invalid for prepayment of postage (though some such invalid stamps have successfully passed through the mails, presumably due to an oversight of postal employees). However, while in Great Britain privately overprinted stamps usually served as receipts for tax payments, in 1859, upon application of the Oxford Union Society, there was a unique instance of a private overprint being approved for application on the face of stamps. This is to be distinguished from the more or less frequent application of private overprints to the back of stamps as control marks.
In Great Britain, commercial overprints were principally used to pay the tax on receipts and are found on both revenue and postage stamps with a great number of different varieties known between the 1880s and 1970s.

Other countries which had commercial overprints include Canada, Ceylon, India, Kenya &amp; Uganda, New South Wales, New Zealand, South Africa, Spain, the Straits Settlements and Victoria.

Private overprints can also originate from speculative philatelic purposes produced deliberately with a view to selling them to unsuspecting collectors.

==Political causes==
Private overprints have been used to express political opinions, or to commemorate events by creating collectors&#x27; items in cases in which the overprinted stamps cannot be used. For instance, German sympathisers in the Sudetenland privately overprinted Czechoslovakian stamps with swastikas before the annexation, and in Italy, after the fall of Mussolini and his establishment of the Italian Social Republic, stamps of the King were overprinted with fasces by Fascist sympathizers.

==In the United States==
Private overprints have also been used in the United States, though the Domestic Mail Manual states that stamps &quot;overprinted with an unauthorized design, message or other marking&quot; are not valid for postage. A private overprint exists on the Florida commemorative, and during the Vietnam War, a woman privately overprinted the stamps on her outgoing mail with the slogan &quot;Pray for War&quot; before postal authorities compelled her to move this stamping away from the stamps. There have been several American examples of postal cards being overprinted with a private overprint revaluation shortly after a rate change, including the Post Office Department&#x27;s authorization of a special Pitney-Bowes Tickometer surcharge to be used to revalue postal cards in the possession of General Electric when the postcard rate went up to 3 cents in August 1958. The USPS also authorised overprinting of the 10¢ Tractor Trailer and 5¢ Canoe Transportation coil stamps.

==See also==
* Perfin
* Underprint

==References and sources==
;References
;Sources
* GBOS. &quot;Bogus overprints. Website Great Britain Overprints Society. Online article

== External links ==
*Unidentified Philatelic Objects
*GB Victoria Protective Overprints and Underprints</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131026" start="3" end="12" title="philately" label="philately"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507688" start="14" end="32" title="Private overprint" label="private overprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507688" start="34" end="55" title="Private overprint" label="commercial overprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166786" start="60" end="69" title="overprint" label="overprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="82" end="95" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493772" start="98" end="115" title="postal stationery" label="postal stationery"/>
<link wikidata="Q699462" start="119" end="132" title="revenue stamp" label="revenue stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760241" start="393" end="400" title="perfins" label="perfins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246186" start="464" end="484" title="private cancellation" label="private cancellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="2018" end="2029" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="2080" end="2088" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="2145" end="2154" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="2260" end="2267" title="Fascism" label="Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="2567" end="2580" title="Commemorative stamp" label="commemorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281973" start="2842" end="2853" title="postal card" label="postal card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="2953" end="2975" title="Post Office Department" label="Post Office Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q428977" start="3010" end="3022" title="Pitney-Bowes" label="Pitney-Bowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166786" start="3034" end="3043" title="Overprint" label="surcharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="3100" end="3116" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760241" start="3297" end="3303" title="Perfin" label="Perfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126409" start="3306" end="3316" title="Underprint" label="Underprint"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303778" wikidata="Q880304" url="?curid=303778" title="Elisha Baxter">
<text>Elisha Baxter (September 1, 1827May 31, 1899) was an American businessman and politician who served as the 10th governor of Arkansas from 1873 to 1874.

==Early life and career==
Baxter was born in Rutherford County, North Carolina. He sought and obtained an appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point. Baxter&#x27;s father, William, strongly opposed his appointment, and Baxter resigned it. He returned home and became a businessman. He ran a successful mercantile business in Rutherford County with his brother-in-law Spenser Eaves.

In 1852, Baxter moved to Batesville, Arkansas, and opened a mercantile business with his brother, Taylor. It soon failed. Baxter joined the Whig party and was elected mayor of Batesville in 1853. One year later he was elected as state representative from Independence County to the tenth general assembly. He studied law and, in 1856, was admitted to the Arkansas bar. He was reelected to the House in 1858 and served two terms from Independence County, leaving in 1860.

==American Civil War==
At the outbreak of the Civil War, he had been conflicted about which side he supported. When General Samuel Curtis and the 2nd Iowa Infantry occupied Batesville in the Spring of 1862, the General recognized Baxter as a loyal Unionist, and tried to bestow upon him the title of &quot;Regt. of loyal Arkansians&quot; which he refused. When Curtis left Batesville, Baxter was forced to flee to Missouri. He was captured, brought back to Little Rock, and charged with treason, only to escape later before his trial could take place. He describes this episode in his life in his autobiography:
Through a fortunate combination of circumstances I escaped from prison before my trial came on and lived for eighteen days in the forist(sic) and fields near Little Rock without a morsil(sic) of food except such raw corn and berries as I could gather in my lone wanderings. While a prisoner I felt that I was ungenerously treated by the harsh criticisms of the press and individuals not only in regard to my want of loyalty to the southern caus(sic) but also with regard to my supposed want of courage. I therefore resolved if God would grant me deliverance I would at once enter the Federal Army.

When Baxter returned to Batesville, he organized the 4th Arkansas Mounted Infantry for the Union and commanded it until he was named a State Supreme Court judge by Governor Murphy in the Spring 1864. Shortly after being named a judge, he was elected to the U.S. Senate by the legislature along with Rev. Andrew Hunter, but they were not seated in the Senate as the senate did not recognize the Murphy Administration. In 1867, he was appointed by Governor Clayton judge of the 3rd Judicial circuit. In 1868 he was appointed the 1st Congressional district of Arkansas. He held these two positions until he was nominated for governor in 1872. Baxter was virtually unknown and privately clean of scandals, unlike most of the Minstrels. They believed he could attract votes from Unionists and Northerners, their core base, as well as natives of the state. He was captured and tried for treason.

He escaped north and joined the 4th Arkansas Mounted Infantry (Union), serving as colonel of the regiment. In 1864, after Arkansas was occupied by Union troops, Baxter was appointed as Justice of the Arkansas Supreme Court, but he did not serve in that position. He and William Meade Fishback were chosen by the new legislature in May 1864 as the two U.S. senators from Arkansas, but in February 1865, their admission was denied by congressional Republicans displeased with Lincoln for trying to restore Southern representation in Congress so easily. In mid-1865, Baxter formed a law partnership in Little Rock with future U.S. Congressman and fellow Unionist James M. Hinds.

==Reconstruction era==
In 1868 the Reconstruction-era state legislature elected him and Andrew Hunter to the US Senate, but his appointment was blocked once again by Congress because of the southern states&#x27; refusal to extend the franchise to freedmen. From 1868 to 1872, Baxter served as a judge on the 3rd Circuit Court.

In 1872, Baxter was elected as a Republican Governor of Arkansas over Joseph Brooks in a controversial election that resulted in the Brooks-Baxter War. Baxter was physically removed from the governor&#x27;s office by Brooks and state militia loyal to him. Baxter was not restored to the governorship until a month later.

During his term, state delegates passed a new constitution that shortened the term of the governor and restored the franchise to ex-Confederates. Baxter declined to accept the 1874 nomination for governor. Due to the disenfranchisement of most blacks in the 1890s, the Republican Party was reduced in Arkansas. Democrats established a one-party state that survived into the 1960s. Baxter was the last Republican governor to be elected in Arkansas until Winthrop Rockefeller in 1966, after the Republican Party began a revival there.

==Later life and legacy==
After leaving office, Baxter returned to his farm near Batesville. He ran for a position in the Arkansas House of Representatives in 1878 but was unsuccessful. He died in Batesville, Arkansas and is buried at Oaklawn Cemetery there. Baxter County was named after him.

==Personal life==
In 1849 Baxter married Harriet Patton, also from Rutherford County, and together they had six children: Milliard P., Edward A., Catherine M., George E., Hattie O., and Fannie E. Baxter was a brother of federal judge John Baxter, and an uncle of Wyoming territorial governor George W. Baxter.

==References==
==External links==
* Elisha Baxter at the National Governors Association
* Elisha Baxter at The Political Graveyard</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q880304" start="0" end="13" title="Elisha Baxter" label="Elisha Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="112" end="132" title="List of governors of Arkansas" label="governor of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q508254" start="198" end="231" title="Rutherford County, North Carolina" label="Rutherford County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="278" end="308" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="312" end="322" title="West Point" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q79687" start="582" end="602" title="Batesville, Arkansas" label="Batesville, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="697" end="707" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig party"/>
<link wikidata="Q61350" start="812" end="831" title="Independence County, Arkansas" label="Independence County"/>
<link wikidata="Q61350" start="990" end="1009" title="Independence County, Arkansas" label="Independence County"/>
<link wikidata="Q197539" start="1153" end="1166" title="Samuel Ryan Curtis" label="Samuel Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633735" start="1175" end="1192" title="2nd Iowa Infantry" label="2nd Iowa Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="1443" end="1451" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2293" end="2322" title="4th Arkansas Mounted Infantry" label="4th Arkansas Mounted Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q879985" start="2404" end="2419" title="Isaac Murphy" label="Governor Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757368" start="2539" end="2557" title="Andrew Hunter (Methodist preacher)" label="Rev. Andrew Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="3121" end="3128" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791883" start="3331" end="3353" title="Arkansas Supreme Court" label="Arkansas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q365262" start="3401" end="3423" title="William Meade Fishback" label="William Meade Fishback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680744" start="3791" end="3805" title="James M. Hinds" label="James M. Hinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757368" start="3896" end="3909" title="Andrew Hunter (Methodist preacher)" label="Andrew Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281736" start="4206" end="4219" title="Joseph Brooks (politician)" label="Joseph Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975141" start="4269" end="4286" title="Brooks-Baxter War" label="Brooks-Baxter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q878708" start="4911" end="4931" title="Winthrop Rockefeller" label="Winthrop Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q79687" start="5189" end="5209" title="Batesville, Arkansas" label="Batesville, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61086" start="5251" end="5264" title="Baxter County, Arkansas" label="Baxter County"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451841" start="5521" end="5532" title="John Baxter (judge)" label="John Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508410" start="5579" end="5595" title="George W. Baxter" label="George W. Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="5655" end="5685" title="National Governors Association" label="National Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757656" start="5705" end="5728" title="The Political Graveyard" label="The Political Graveyard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303781" wikidata="Q6918773" url="?curid=303781" title="Ribbon">
<text>A ribbon or riband is a thin band of material, typically cloth but also plastic or sometimes metal, used primarily as decorative binding and tying. Cloth ribbons are made of natural materials such as silk, cotton, and jute and of synthetic materials, such as polyester, nylon, and polypropylene. Ribbon is used for useful, ornamental, and symbolic purposes. Cultures around the world use ribbon in their hair, around the body, and as ornament on non-human animals, buildings, and packaging. Some popular fabrics used to make ribbons are satin, organza, sheer, silk, velvet, and grosgrain.

==Etymology==
The word ribbon comes from Middle English &quot;ribban&quot; or &quot;riban&quot; from Old French &quot;ruban&quot;, which is probably of Germanic origin.

==Cloth==
Along with that of tapes, fringes, and other smallwares, the manufacture of cloth ribbons forms a special department of the textile industries. The essential feature of a ribbon loom is the simultaneous weaving in one loom frame of two or more webs, going up to as many as forty narrow fabrics in modern looms. To affect the conjoined throwing of all the shuttles and the various other movements of the loom, the automatic action of the power-loom is necessary, and it is a remarkable fact that the self-acting ribbon loom was known and extensively used more than a century before the famous invention of Cartwright. A loom in which several narrow webs could be woven at one time is mentioned as having been working in Danzig towards the end of the 16th century. Similar looms were at work in Leiden in 1620, where their use gave rise to so much discontent and rioting on the part of the weavers that the states-general had to prohibit their use. The prohibition was renewed at various intervals throughout the century, and in the same interval the use of the ribbon loom was interdicted in most of the principal industrial centres of Europe. In 1676, under the name of the Dutch loom or engine loom, it was brought to London, and although its introduction there caused some disturbance, it does not appear to have been prohibited. In 1745, John Kay, the inventor of the fly-shuttle, obtained, conjointly with Joseph Stell, a patent for improvements in the ribbon loom. Since that period, it has benefited by the inventions applied to weaving machinery generally.

Ribbon-weaving is known to have been established near St. Etienne (dep. Loire) as early as the 11th century, and that town has remained the headquarters of the industry in Europe. During the Huguenot troubles, ribbon-weavers from St. Etienne settled at Basel, and there, established an industry which in modern times has rivalled that of the original seat of the trade. In the late 19th century a Frenchman known as C.M. Offray— himself from St. Etienne— moved his ribbon business to the United States and set up a company called &quot;C.M. Offray &amp; Sons, Inc&quot; which went on to become a huge manufacturer of ribbons in North America. In Germany, Krefeld is the centre of the ribbon industry; the manufacture of black velvet ribbon being a specialty. In England. Coventry is the most important seat of ribbon-making, which is also prosecuted at Norwich and Leicester.

While satin and other sorts of ribbon have always been used in lingerie, the usage of ribbon in the clothing industry, while subject to fashion trends, saw an upsurge in the mid to late 1990s. This upsurge led to increased ribbon manufacturing as well as new and improved manufacturing techniques. Due to more competitive production rates, as well as past experience in this field, companies in the Far East – especially those in China – gradually secured themselves to be the major ribbon suppliers in the world and improved both the quality and the variety of their merchandise to match those of their established European and North American competitors.

Presently, the North American continent remains the largest importer of ribbon and ribbon derivative products (such as bows, rosettes, and other garment accessories made from ribbon). However, due to outsourcing of production of garments by North American garment manufacturers, countries in Asia and South America have started to contribute to the change of the statistical figures of ribbon imports. Inspired by European silk ribbons obtained through trade, Great Lakes and Prairie Native American tribes created art form of appliqué ribbon work.

==For printers and typewriters==

Typewriters and dot matrix printers use a cloth or plastic ribbon to hold the ink.

==Symbolism==

Pieces of ribbon are used as symbols of support or awareness for various social causes and are called &quot;awareness ribbons&quot;. Ribbons are used in some ceremonies, such as in a ribbon cutting ceremony.

In Leeds, UK, the sculpture &quot;Ribbons&quot; by Pippa Hale uses them as a motif, since - according to Hale - they &quot;... tie many parts together, so the idea is that we are binding the names of these women together over time and space in a celebration of womanhood.&quot;

==See also==
* Award ribbon
* Awareness ribbon (e.g. Pink Ribbon)
* List of awareness ribbons
* Ribbon bar
* Ribbon cable

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6918773" start="2" end="8" title="Ribbon" label="ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918773" start="12" end="18" title="Ribbon" label="riband"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="218" end="222" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="339" end="345" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="421" end="425" title="human body" label="body"/>
<link wikidata="Q335261" start="434" end="442" title="ornament (art)" label="ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="480" end="489" title="Packaging and labeling" label="packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q14298" start="537" end="542" title="satin" label="satin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683724" start="544" end="551" title="organza" label="organza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492502" start="553" end="558" title="sheer fabric" label="sheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="560" end="564" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q243519" start="566" end="572" title="velvet" label="velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19970439" start="578" end="587" title="grosgrain" label="grosgrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="631" end="645" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="691" end="701" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="742" end="750" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858046" start="789" end="793" title="Twill tape" label="tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353860" start="796" end="802" title="fringe (trim)" label="fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q607081" start="894" end="912" title="textile industry" label="textile industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="948" end="952" title="loom" label="loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="973" end="980" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353185" start="1355" end="1386" title="Power loom" label="famous invention of Cartwright."/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="1489" end="1495" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="1563" end="1569" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q140683" start="2111" end="2119" title="John Kay (flying shuttle)" label="John Kay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2180" end="2192" title="Joseph Stell" label="Joseph Stell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42716" start="2389" end="2400" title="St. Etienne" label="St. Etienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="2526" end="2534" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="2588" end="2593" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60765443" start="2751" end="2762" title="C.M. Offray" label="C.M. Offray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805" start="2990" end="2997" title="Krefeld" label="Krefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q243519" start="3061" end="3067" title="velvet" label="velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="3106" end="3114" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="3188" end="3195" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="3200" end="3209" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11828862" start="3312" end="3329" title="clothing industry" label="clothing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28920908" start="3348" end="3361" title="History of fashion design" label="fashion trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q11049265" start="3484" end="3507" title="manufacturing engineering" label="manufacturing technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3841" end="3855" title="North American" label="North American"/>
<link wikidata="Q14125" start="3989" end="3992" title="bow tie" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261331" start="3995" end="4002" title="rosette (decoration)" label="rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="4245" end="4251" title="number" label="figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="4330" end="4341" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="4346" end="4353" title="Prairie" label="Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885585" start="4354" end="4375" title="Tribe (Native American)" label="Native American tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="4385" end="4393" title="The arts" label="art form"/>
<link wikidata="Q621642" start="4397" end="4405" title="appliqué" label="appliqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322271" start="4406" end="4417" title="ribbon work" label="ribbon work"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="4454" end="4464" title="Typewriter" label="Typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q584101" start="4470" end="4488" title="dot matrix printer" label="dot matrix printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127418" start="4532" end="4535" title="ink" label="ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="4582" end="4588" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q153524" start="4661" end="4677" title="awareness ribbon" label="awareness ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010369" start="4736" end="4759" title="ribbon cutting ceremony" label="ribbon cutting ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q130524130" start="4796" end="4803" title="Ribbons (sculpture)" label="Ribbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q87414549" start="4813" end="4823" title="Pippa Hale" label="Pippa Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322255" start="5056" end="5068" title="Award ribbon" label="Award ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153524" start="5071" end="5087" title="Awareness ribbon" label="Awareness ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585434" start="5109" end="5134" title="List of awareness ribbons" label="List of awareness ribbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q806373" start="5137" end="5147" title="Ribbon bar" label="Ribbon bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187223" start="5150" end="5162" title="Ribbon cable" label="Ribbon cable"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303789" wikidata="Q790068" url="?curid=303789" title="Bank of China">
<text>The Bank of China (BOC; ; Portuguese: &quot;Banco da China&quot;) is a state-owned Chinese multinational banking and financial services corporation headquartered in Beijing, China. It is one of the &quot;big four&quot; banks in China. As of 31 December 2019, it was the second-largest lender in China overall and ninth-largest bank in the world by market capitalization value, and it is considered a systemically important bank by the Financial Stability Board. As of the end of 2020, it was the fourth-largest bank in the world in terms of total assets, ranked after the other three Chinese banks. 

The Bank of China was formed in 1912 by renaming the Qing dynasty&#x27;s Da-Qing Bank (est. 1905) under the newly established Republican government. Until 1942, it issued banknotes on behalf of the government as one of the &quot;Big Four&quot; banks of the period, together with the Bank of Communications (est. 1908), Central Bank of China (est. 1924), and Farmers Bank of China (est. 1933). Following the Chinese Communist Revolution in 1949, the bank continued activity in Taiwan where it renamed itself International Commercial Bank of China upon privatization in 1971, while its mainland operations were absorbed into the People&#x27;s Bank of China (PBC). In 1979, the Bank of China was re-established by spin-off from the PBC in the early phase of Chinese economic reform.

The Bank of China (Hong Kong) is the local subsidiary of the Bank of China, with which it maintains close relations in management and administration and co-operates in several areas including reselling BOC&#x27;s insurance and securities services.

==History==

===Early 20th century===

In 1905, the Qing government established the Da-Qing Bank in Beijing. When the Republic of China was established in 1912, Chen Jintao was named head of financial reform in President Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s government and reorganized the Da-Qing Bank into the Bank of China, of which he has subsequently been viewed as the founder.

In 1917, Tsuyee Pei opened the branch of the Bank of China in Hong Kong. In 1928, the bank moved its head office from Beijing to Shanghai.

In 1920, the bank opened the Investigative Office of the Bank of China. The Investigative Office was the earliest research body in China&#x27;s banking sector.

In 1929, the bank opened a branch in London, its first outside of China. The branch managed the government&#x27;s foreign debt, became a center for the bank&#x27;s management of its foreign exchange, and acted as an intermediary for China&#x27;s international trade. In 1931, another overseas branch opened in Osaka, and in 1936 in Singapore (to handle remittances to China of overseas Chinese) as well as an agency in New York.

In 1937, on the outbreak of hostilities with Japan, Japanese forces blockaded China&#x27;s major ports. The Bank of China opened a number of branches in Batavia, Penang, Kuala Lumpur, Haiphong, Hanoi, Rangoon, Bombay, and Calcutta to facilitate the gathering of remittances and the flow of military supplies. It also opened sub-agencies in Surabaya, Medan, Dabo, Batu Pahat, Baichilu, Mandalay, Lashio, Ipoh, and Seremban. In 1941-1942, the Japanese conquest of Southeast Asia forced the BOC to close all its overseas branches, agencies, sub-branches and sub-agencies, except London, New York, Calcutta, and Bombay. Nevertheless, in 1942, it managed to set up six new overseas branches, such as in Sydney, (Australia), Liverpool, and Havana, and possibly Karachi. In late July 1942, it lost its note-issuance privilege simultaneously as the Bank of Communications and the Farmers Bank of China, as the Central Bank of China was granted the issuance monopoly in the territories still ruled by the Nationalist government.

Following the end of World War II, the Bank of China in 1946 reopened its branches and agencies in Hong Kong, Singapore, Haiphong, Rangoon, Kuala Lumpur, Penang, and Jakarta. It moved the Hanoi agency to Saigon. At the suggestion of the Allied Forces Headquarters, it liquidated the branch in Osaka, Japan and opened a sub-branch in Tokyo. In 1947, the bank opened agencies in Bangkok, Chittagong, and Tokyo.

In 1950, following the victory of Communist forces in the civil war, some of the BOC&#x27;s overseas branches (e.g. Hong Kong, Singapore, London, Penang, Kuala Lumpur, Jakarta, Calcutta, Bombay, Chittagong, and Karachi) of Bank of China remained with the mainland bank headquartered in Beijing, while others (e.g. New York, Tokyo, Havana, Bangkok, and one other, possibly Panama) remained with the Bank of China headquartered in Taipei, which in 1971 took the new name International Commercial Bank of China (). The Rangoon branch was nationalized in 1963 together with all other foreign and domestic banks in Burma. In 1971, China transferred the two branches in Karachi and Chittagong to the National Bank of Pakistan. In 1975, the Republic of South Vietnam nationalized the branch in Saigon and the Khmer Rouge government nationalized that in Phnom Penh.

===Since 1979===
The People&#x27;s Bank of China began spinning off its commercial functions starting in 1978, and re-established the Bank of China in 1979 with focus on international finance. That same year, the new BOC opened a branch in Luxembourg, which gradually became its European headquarters through the 1990s. In 1981 it opened a branch in New York, followed by Paris in 1985. In 1987, the BOC became an ordinary member of the LBMA. In 1992, it opened a representative office in Toronto, upgraded the next year as a Schedule II bank. 

During Reform and Opening Up, the Bank of China established its Institute of International Finance. The Institute performed research that influenced bank decisions and central government policy making. 

===2000s===
The BOC experiences challenges in Singapore. In 2001, Kwangtung Provincial Bank was closed and merged under Bank of China, Singapore Branch; one year later, Bank of China Futures Pte Ltd wound up operations in Singapore. In 2001-2007, the BOC undertook massive staff layoffs and paycuts in BOC Singapore Branch, a phase of turmoil that culminated in 2007 when branch head Zhu Hua was asked to leave by the Monetary Authority of Singapore for his poor performance. He was replaced by Liu Yan Fen. In 2008, the head of Settlements at BOC, Chin Chuh Meng, was investigated involvement for Multi-Level Marketing Activities in Singapore, a scheme involving employees of the Bank of China and ex-Kwangtung Bank. In 2009, People&#x27;s Park Remittance Centre opened in Singapore, while Sunday Banking Business ceased in Chinatown Sub-branch in Singapore.

In 2005, in the runup to its initial public offering, BOC solicited long term investors to take strategic stakes in the company, including a $3.1 billion investment by the Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC and further investments by Swiss bank UBS AG and Temasek Holdings (who also promised to subscribe for an additional $500 million worth of shares during the IPO). The Bank was also investigated by the United States in its money laundering probe related to the superdollars affair. On , the BOC&#x27;s listing on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange was the largest IPO since 2000 and the fourth largest IPO ever, raising some US$9.7 billion in the H-share Global Offering. The Over-Allotment Option was then exercised on 7 June 2006, raising the total value of their IPO to US$11.2 billion. BOC also made a successful IPO in mainland China on 5 July 2006, offering up to 10 billion A-shares on the Shanghai A Stock Exchange for RMB20 billion (US$2.5 billion). BOC also bought Singapore Airlines&#x27;s stake in Singapore Aircraft Leasing Enterprise, renaming it BOC Aviation in 2007. 

Mainland China accounted for 60% of the bank by profits and 76% by assets as at December 2005.

In 2008, BOC acquired a 20 percent stake in the Compagnie Financière Edmond de Rothschild (LCFR) for 236.3 million euros (US$340 million). In 2009, the bank opened branches in São Paulo and Maputo, as well as Penang in October.

As of 2009, the BoC was the second largest lender in China overall, and the fifth largest bank in the world by market capitalization value. Once 100% owned by the central government, via China Central Huijin and National Council for Social Security Fund (SSF), an Initial public offering (IPO) of its shares took place in June 2006; at present, the free float is over 26%.

===2010s===
In December 2010, the New York branch of the BoC began offering renminbi products for Americans. It was the first major Chinese bank to offer such a product.

A list published in 2011 by &quot;Forbes&quot; ranked the BoC as the 4th-largest company in the world.

In 2012, the BOC opened a branch in Taiwan. The opening was seen as a symbol of deepening economic ties across Taiwan Strait Bank of China (M) Bhd opened its 6th branch in Malaysia at Tower 2, PFCC, Bandar Puteri Puchong in 2012. BOC also opened a branch in Stockholm in 2012, and in Lisbon in 2013.

During the 2013 Korean crisis, the Bank of China halted business with a North Korean bank accused by the United States of financing Pyongyang&#x27;s missile and nuclear programs. New branch opened in Montreal. The Canadian arm of the Bank of China now has 10 branches across Canada, including five in the Greater Toronto Area and three in Vancouver.

In 2015, the BOC gained entry to the London Bullion Market Association gold price auction. At the time, it was one of eight members to the auction. That same year, the BOC opened two global commodity centres in Singapore, becoming the first Chinese bank to do so outside China.

Between 2015 and 2020, the BOC lent over US$185.1 for Belt and Road Initiative projects.

In 2016, the BOC received permission to open a branch in Brunei, and opened a branch in Mauritius becoming the first Chinese-funded bank in Mauritius. In 2017, it received permission to operate a deposit bank in Turkey, and in October 2017, opened its first branch in Pakistan in Karachi.

The BoC is the most globally-active of China&#x27;s banks, with branches on every inhabited continent. As of 2017, BOC operated outside of mainland China in 27 countries and areas including Australia, Canada, United Kingdom, Ireland, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Russia, Hungary, United States, Panama, Brazil, Japan, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Bahrain, Zambia, South Africa, and a branch office in the Cayman Islands. Even so, its operations outside China accounted for less than 4% of the activity of the bank by both profits and assets.

In 2019, the Bank set up its current think-tank body, the Bank of China Research Institute.

===2020s===
In 2022, the BoC was ranked #42 among global institutions by &quot;Fortune&quot; magazine.

In August 2023, &quot;Reuters&quot; reported BoC launched a countrywide exercise to reduce the salary gaps among its employees and mid- and high-level managers in line of the common prosperity agenda promoted by Chinese leader Xi Jinping. The story said the BoC launched a &quot;salary management system reform plan&quot; after an inspection team by the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection found out that the bank&#x27;s salary system had issues regarding &quot;wealth inequality&quot; after investigations. Under the plan, employees below the mid-level manager level would have their salary raised by about 10% to 15%, while the salaries of higher-level managers would be reduced at a similar range.

As of January 2024, the BoC planned to sell a new category of total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) bonds worth 150 billion yuan ($21 billion). This would make it the first state-owned bank in the country to fill the funding gap by 2025.

In June 2024, the BoC complied with global financial sanctions against the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and would no longer trade with sanctioned Russian banks. At the, time trade between Russia and China accounted for more than a third of all Russian exports.

==Major subsidiaries==

===Hong Kong===


BOC started operations in Hong Kong in 1917. It became Hong Kong&#x27;s third note-issuing bank in 1994, and in Macau in 1995.

In 2001, BOC regrouped its Hong Kong operations into Bank of China (Hong Kong); then BOCHK listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange in October 2002. Two-thirds of its share capital are in free float. The bank&#x27;s headquarters in Hong Kong are located in the Bank of China Tower, designed by the renowned architect I.M. Pei, and was opened to the public in 1990 as the tallest building in Hong Kong at that time.

It listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (independently from BOCHK) (SEHK:3988) by floating the largest initial public offering (IPO) in the world by any institution since 2000 on 1 June 2006, raising US$9.7 billion. The IPO attracted HK$286 billion (US$36.7 billion) in retail orders and was the most heavily oversubscribed in the history of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. The offer was around 76 times oversubscribed. Although some financial analysts advised caution due to the worrying amounts of non-performing loans, this hardly deterred investors. The IPO share price started at HK$2.95 per share and jumped 15% (to HK$3.40) after the first day of trading.

In 2008, the Bank of China was crowned Deal of the Year - Debt Market Deal of the Year at the 2008 ALB Hong Kong Law Awards.

===Canada===

Bank of China (Canada), commonly known as BOCC, is the Canadian subsidiary of the Bank of China (BOC). The Bank of China began its business in Canada by opening a representative office in Toronto on 8 September 1992. BOCC was incorporated as a subsidiary of BOC in 1993 under Schedule II of the Bank Act. BOCC provides the following types of banking services in Canada: bank accounts to both personal and commercial banking clients, remittance services (including bank drafts and wire transfers), loans and mortgages, foreign exchange services, and China visa application assistance services where by it acts as agent, however plans for a China Visa Application Centre are being made and it is anticipated that the Consulate General of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in Toronto will entrust all future China Visa applications to Bank of China Canada&#x27;s Visa Application Centre.

In Canada, BOCC has ten locations located in Markham, Toronto (several branches, in downtown, North York and Scarborough], Mississauga, Vancouver, Montreal, and Calgary. It previously had branches in Burnaby and Richmond. As well, the bank is a member of the Canadian Bankers Association (CBA); registered member with the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC), a federal agency insuring deposits at all of Canada&#x27;s chartered banks; and, a member of Interac, which handles transactions between automated teller machines of different banks and debit card transactions.

==Banknotes==

Although it is not a central bank, the Bank of China is licensed to issue banknotes in two of China&#x27;s Special Administrative Regions. Until 1942, the Bank of China issued banknotes in mainland China on behalf of the Government of the Republic of China. Today, the Bank issues banknotes in Hong Kong and banknotes in Macau (under the Portuguese name &quot;Banco da China, Sucursal de Macau&quot;), along with other commercial banks in those regions.

==Ownership==

As of 30 September 2015, largest shareholders of the Bank of China ordinary shares (both A shares and H shares) were:
* China Central Huijin (an investment arm of the government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China): 64.63% (A shares)
* HKSCC Nominees Limited (nominee account): 27.78% (H shares)
* China Securities Finance (state-owned legal person): 2.90% (A shares)

As of 30 September 2015, largest shareholders of the Bank of China preference shares (both domestic and offshore) were:
* The Bank of New York Mellon (custodian bank): 39.96% (offshore)
* China Mobile Communications: 18.01% (domestic)
* China National Tobacco Corporation: 5.00% (domestic)
* Zhongwei Real Estate: 3.00% (domestic)

== Leadership ==

* , administrator February - December 1912
* , president December 1912 - June 1913
* Xiong Xiling, president 1913 - 1916
* Xu Enyuan (徐恩元), president June 1916 - June 1917
* Sun Duosen, president in absentia June - July 1917
* , president June - July 1917
* Wang Kemin, president July 1917 - February 1918
* , president February 1918 - June 1922
* Wang Kemin, president June 1922 - October 1923
* , president October 1923 - November 1928
* Feng Gengguang, acting president 1926 - November 1928
* Li Fusun (李馥蓀), chairman November 1928 - April 1935
* Chang Kia-ngau, general manager November 1928 - April 1935
* T. V. Soong, chairman April 1935 - February 1944
* H. H. Kung, chairman February 1944 - 1948
* , general manager 1935 - 1948 and managing director 1948 - 1949
* , general manager 1948 - 1949
* Nan Hanchen, chairman after 1949
* Gong Yinbing, general manager 1949 - 1973
* , president June 1979 - April 1982, then chairman
* , acting president and acting chairman in the early 1980s
* , president April 1982 - February 1985
* , president June 1985 - November 1993
* , president November 1993 - February 2000, also chairman from May 1995
* Liu Mingkang, chairman February 2000 - March 2003
* Li Lihui, president August 2004 - January 2014
* Chen Siqing, president February 2014 - August 2017, then chairman August 2017 - April 2019
* Liu Lian&#x27;ge, President June 2018 - June 2019, then chairman June 2019 - March 2023
* Wang Jiang, president December 2019 - February 2021
* Liu Jin, president April 2021 - August 2024

==Controversies==

===Guarantee scandal in Poland===

After COVEC withdrew from completing its construction of the A2 highway in Poland, Bank of China was to pay a performance guarantee to the Polish government&#x27;s road organization GDDKiA. However, with Export-Import Bank of China, they refused to pay this; only Deutsche Bank honoured its obligations under the court decision.

===Wultz v. Bank of China===

On 8 August 2008, the family of Daniel Wultz, an American teenager killed in a 2006 terrorist attack in Israel, filed suit against the Bank of China in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. The case was subsequently transferred to the United States District Court, Southern District of New York, where litigation continues. On 29 October 2012, the Honorable J. Scheindlin issued a ruling compelling Bank of China to provide discovery.

===Alleged money transfers to Hamas===

In 2012, the families of eight terror victims of the 2008 Mercaz HaRav massacre in Jerusalem filed a lawsuit against the Bank of China. The suit asserted that in 2003 the bank&#x27;s New York branch wired millions of dollars to Hamas from its leadership in Syria and Iran. The Bank of China subsequently denied providing banking services to terrorist groups: &quot;The Bank of China has always strictly followed the UN&#x27;s anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing requirements and regulations in China and other judicial areas where we operate.&quot;

==See also==
* List of largest banks
* List of asset management companies of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Foreign exchange reserves of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* BOC Aviation - Singapore-based aircraft leasing company owned by BOC

==References==
==Resources==

* Bank of China, &quot;A History of the Bank of China, 1912–1949&quot;, Beijing: 1999.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q790068" start="4" end="17" title="Bank of China" label="Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q790068" start="19" end="22" title="Bank of China" label="BOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="26" end="36" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="91" end="104" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="117" end="135" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="165" end="179" title="Beijing" label="Beijing, China"/>
<link wikidata="Q858859" start="204" end="212" title="Big four banks" label="big four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151565" start="400" end="427" title="Systemically important financial institution" label="systemically important bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q13411871" start="435" end="460" title="Financial Stability Board" label="Financial Stability Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679682" start="496" end="528" title="List of largest banks" label="fourth-largest bank in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="654" end="666" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10936462" start="674" end="686" title="Da-Qing Bank" label="Da-Qing Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q806680" start="884" end="906" title="Bank of Communications" label="Bank of Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q198642" start="920" end="941" title="Central Bank of China" label="Central Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435781" start="959" end="980" title="Farmers Bank of China" label="Farmers Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="1008" end="1036" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="Chinese Communist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1077" end="1083" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q709757" start="1108" end="1146" title="International Commercial Bank of China" label="International Commercial Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q249203" start="1228" end="1255" title="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="1356" end="1379" title="Chinese economic reform" label="Chinese economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q787060" start="1386" end="1411" title="Bank of China (Hong Kong)" label="Bank of China (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1683" end="1687" title="Qing" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10936462" start="1715" end="1727" title="Da-Qing Bank" label="Da-Qing Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="1731" end="1738" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="1749" end="1766" title="Republic of China (1912-49)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658415" start="1792" end="1803" title="Chen Jintao" label="Chen Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="1852" end="1863" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057437" start="2006" end="2016" title="Tsuyee Pei" label="Tsuyee Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="2126" end="2134" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="2608" end="2613" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="2630" end="2639" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2717" end="2725" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199713" start="2881" end="2888" title="Batavia, Dutch East Indies" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="2890" end="2896" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="2898" end="2910" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q72818" start="2912" end="2920" title="Haiphong" label="Haiphong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="2922" end="2927" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995" start="2929" end="2936" title="Rangoon" label="Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2938" end="2944" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="2950" end="2958" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11462" start="3068" end="3076" title="Surabaya" label="Surabaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972" start="3078" end="3083" title="Medan" label="Medan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093843" start="3085" end="3089" title="Dabo, Indonesia" label="Dabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306850" start="3091" end="3101" title="Batu Pahat" label="Batu Pahat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3103" end="3111" title="Baichilu" label="Baichilu"/>
<link wikidata="Q185518" start="3113" end="3121" title="Mandalay" label="Mandalay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209397" start="3123" end="3129" title="Lashio" label="Lashio"/>
<link wikidata="Q271619" start="3131" end="3135" title="Ipoh" label="Ipoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q847610" start="3141" end="3149" title="Seremban" label="Seremban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="3426" end="3432" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="3447" end="3456" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="3462" end="3468" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="3483" end="3490" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111151" start="3523" end="3546" title="Bank of issue" label="note-issuance privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q806680" start="3569" end="3591" title="Bank of Communications" label="Bank of Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435781" start="3600" end="3621" title="Farmers Bank of China" label="Farmers Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q198642" start="3630" end="3651" title="Central Bank of China" label="Central Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3770" end="3782" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="3953" end="3959" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="4126" end="4133" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="4135" end="4145" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="4588" end="4594" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q709757" start="4628" end="4666" title="International Commercial Bank of China" label="International Commercial Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883425" start="4853" end="4878" title="National Bank of Pakistan" label="National Bank of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="4961" end="4972" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="5005" end="5015" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q249203" start="5039" end="5066" title="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="5258" end="5268" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5390" end="5395" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648272" start="5455" end="5459" title="LBMA" label="LBMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314257" start="5482" end="5503" title="representative office" label="representative office"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="5507" end="5514" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023551" start="5544" end="5560" title="Schedule II banks" label="Schedule II bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="5571" end="5592" title="Reform and Opening Up" label="Reform and Opening Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="5814" end="5823" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661296" start="6186" end="6217" title="Monetary Authority of Singapore" label="Monetary Authority of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6263" end="6274" title="Liu Yan Fen" label="Liu Yan Fen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6317" end="6331" title="Chin Chuh Meng" label="Chin Chuh Meng"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="6801" end="6823" title="Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="6872" end="6878" title="UBS AG" label="UBS AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q762479" start="6883" end="6899" title="Temasek Holdings" label="Temasek Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q599325" start="7093" end="7104" title="superdollar" label="superdollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="7149" end="7173" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="7190" end="7193" title="initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q739514" start="7523" end="7548" title="Shanghai Stock Exchange" label="Shanghai A Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="7601" end="7619" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263139" start="7636" end="7673" title="BOC Aviation" label="Singapore Aircraft Leasing Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263139" start="7687" end="7699" title="BOC Aviation" label="BOC Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117395" start="7855" end="7896" title="Compagnie Financière Edmond de Rothschild" label="Compagnie Financière Edmond de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="7983" end="7992" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="7997" end="8003" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="8016" end="8022" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944409" start="8223" end="8243" title="China Central Huijin" label="China Central Huijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="8300" end="8323" title="Initial public offering" label="Initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q283747" start="8385" end="8395" title="free float" label="free float"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="8486" end="8494" title="renminbi" label="renminbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="8615" end="8621" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="8721" end="8727" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891923" start="8997" end="9015" title="2013 Korean crisis" label="2013 Korean crisis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9200" end="9233" title="Bank of China#Canada" label="Canadian arm of the Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024624" start="9291" end="9311" title="Greater Toronto Area" label="Greater Toronto Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648272" start="9374" end="9407" title="London Bullion Market Association" label="London Bullion Market Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="9670" end="9694" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9918" end="9924" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="10135" end="10149" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10197" end="10203" title="Bank of China#Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="10254" end="10264" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="10298" end="10304" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="10321" end="10338" title="Republic of Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="10340" end="10349" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="10351" end="10357" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="10359" end="10370" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="10372" end="10379" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="10381" end="10389" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="10391" end="10399" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="10401" end="10410" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="10412" end="10422" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="10424" end="10431" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="10433" end="10439" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="10441" end="10453" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="10482" end="10496" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="10792" end="10799" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="10839" end="10846" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11250670" start="10992" end="11009" title="common prosperity" label="common prosperity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="11044" end="11054" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192996" start="11171" end="11215" title="Central Commission for Discipline Inspection" label="Central Commission for Discipline Inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q25530138" start="11651" end="11655" title="Yuan_(currency)" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="11841" end="11868" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="12096" end="12105" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="12125" end="12134" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="12182" end="12187" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="12225" end="12234" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q787060" start="12251" end="12276" title="Bank of China (Hong Kong)" label="Bank of China (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="12303" end="12327" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q283747" start="12384" end="12394" title="free float" label="free float"/>
<link wikidata="Q214855" start="12457" end="12476" title="Bank of China Tower, Hong Kong" label="Bank of China Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="12513" end="12521" title="I.M. Pei" label="I.M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="12629" end="12653" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="12717" end="12740" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314257" start="13579" end="13600" title="representative office" label="representative office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13692" end="13703" title="Banking in Canada#Regulation" label="Schedule II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855898" start="13711" end="13719" title="Bank Act (Canada)" label="Bank Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548025" start="13758" end="13774" title="banking services" label="banking services"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="13778" end="13784" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q676459" start="13786" end="13798" title="bank account" label="bank account"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548025" start="13808" end="13816" title="Personal banking" label="personal"/>
<link wikidata="Q848507" start="13821" end="13831" title="Commercial Banking" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="13849" end="13859" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2971998" start="13880" end="13890" title="bank draft" label="bank draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q334501" start="13896" end="13909" title="wire transfer" label="wire transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189539" start="13913" end="13917" title="loan" label="loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="13923" end="13932" title="Mortgage loan" label="mortgages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468383" start="13934" end="13959" title="foreign exchange company" label="foreign exchange services"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13965" end="13970" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13971" end="13975" title="Travel Visa" label="visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="14307" end="14313" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q44016" start="14349" end="14356" title="Markham, Ontario" label="Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="14358" end="14365" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="14427" end="14438" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="14440" end="14449" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="14451" end="14459" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="14465" end="14472" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032046" start="14563" end="14591" title="Canadian Bankers Association" label="Canadian Bankers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312861" start="14626" end="14662" title="Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation" label="Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153067" start="14764" end="14771" title="Interac" label="Interac"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="15005" end="15035" title="Special Administrative Region of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Special Administrative Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856412" start="15179" end="15201" title="Banknotes of the Hong Kong dollar" label="banknotes in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q241214" start="15206" end="15224" title="Macanese pataca" label="banknotes in Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="15236" end="15246" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081659" start="15435" end="15450" title="ordinary shares" label="ordinary shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q836113" start="15457" end="15465" title="A-share (mainland China)" label="A shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q422027" start="15470" end="15477" title="H share" label="H share"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944409" start="15488" end="15508" title="China Central Huijin" label="China Central Huijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="15553" end="15584" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q751361" start="15607" end="15629" title="Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing" label="HKSCC Nominees Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623027" start="15631" end="15646" title="nominee account" label="nominee account"/>
<link wikidata="Q20917563" start="15669" end="15693" title="China Securities Finance" label="China Securities Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q622588" start="15807" end="15824" title="preference shares" label="preference shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q589288" start="15862" end="15889" title="The Bank of New York Mellon" label="The Bank of New York Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q781369" start="15891" end="15905" title="custodian bank" label="custodian bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q741618" start="15928" end="15955" title="China Mobile Communications" label="China Mobile Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003789" start="15977" end="16011" title="China National Tobacco Corporation" label="China National Tobacco Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16032" end="16052" title="Zhongwei Real Estate" label="Zhongwei Real Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130548" start="16175" end="16187" title="Xiong Xiling" label="Xiong Xiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q716097" start="16348" end="16358" title="Wang Kemin" label="Wang Kemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070221" start="16640" end="16654" title="Chang Kia-ngau" label="Chang Kia-ngau"/>
<link wikidata="Q716051" start="16701" end="16712" title="T. V. Soong" label="T. V. Soong"/>
<link wikidata="Q631416" start="16752" end="16762" title="H. H. Kung" label="H. H. Kung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208360" start="16894" end="16905" title="Nan Hanchen" label="Nan Hanchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8313175" start="16929" end="16941" title="Gong Yinbing" label="Gong Yinbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109829" start="17239" end="17251" title="Liu Mingkang" label="Liu Mingkang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230881" start="17291" end="17299" title="Li Lihui" label="Li Lihui"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687759" start="17340" end="17351" title="Chen Siqing" label="Chen Siqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q85876147" start="17433" end="17449" title="Liu Lian&amp;#x27;ge" label="Liu Lian&amp;#x27;ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q97348911" start="17523" end="17533" title="Wang Jiang (banker)" label="Wang Jiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q111123419" start="17577" end="17584" title="Liu Jin (banker)" label="Liu Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001705" start="17682" end="17687" title="COVEC" label="COVEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q429422" start="17737" end="17747" title="A2 (Poland)" label="A2 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163349" start="17858" end="17864" title="GDDKiA" label="GDDKiA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073267" start="17880" end="17907" title="Export-Import Bank of China" label="Export-Import Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="17940" end="17953" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821783" start="18068" end="18080" title="Death of Daniel Wultz" label="Daniel Wultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915118" start="18582" end="18603" title="Mercaz HaRav massacre" label="Mercaz HaRav massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="18752" end="18757" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="18781" end="18786" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="18791" end="18795" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679682" start="19104" end="19125" title="List of largest banks" label="List of largest banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808802" start="19128" end="19201" title="List of asset management companies of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="List of asset management companies of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468395" start="19204" end="19268" title="Foreign exchange reserves of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Foreign exchange reserves of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263139" start="19271" end="19283" title="BOC Aviation" label="BOC Aviation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303799" wikidata="Q743361" url="?curid=303799" title="Peter Popoff">
<text>Peter George Popoff (born July 2, 1946) is a German-born American televangelist, charlatan, debunked clairvoyant, and faith healer. He was exposed in 1986 by James Randi for using a concealed earpiece to receive radio messages from his wife, who gave him the names, addresses, and ailments of audience members during Popoff-led religious services. Popoff falsely claimed God revealed this information to him so that Popoff could cure them through faith healing.

He went bankrupt the next year, but made a comeback in the late 1990s. Beginning in the mid-2000s, Popoff bought TV time to promote &quot;Miracle Spring Water&quot; on late-night infomercials, and referred to himself as a prophet. &quot;Miracle Spring Water&quot; promotions are still running on TV channels in the United States and Canada in 2025. The promotions depict individual testimonials regarding their own financial gains, attributing the &quot;miracle&quot; to Popoff&#x27;s spring water.

== Early life and career ==
Popoff was born in Occupied Berlin on July 2, 1946, the son of George and Gerda Popoff. As a child, Popoff emigrated with his family to the United States, where he attended Chaffey College before transferring to the University of California, Santa Barbara, from which he graduated in 1970.

Popoff&#x27;s father preached at revival meetings throughout the United States. Beginning in 1960, Popoff also began making appearances as a preacher. Billed as &quot;The Miracle Boy Evangelist&quot; in print advertisements, the ads also claimed he was born in a West Berlin bomb shelter, and had been rescued from a Siberian prison camp. The powers he claimed included the abilities to heal the sick and foretell the future.

Popoff married his wife Elizabeth in August 1971 and the couple settled in Upland, California. He then began his television ministry that, by the early 1980s, was being broadcast nationally. His miraculous &quot;curing&quot; of chronic and incurable medical conditions became a central attraction of his sermons. Popoff would tell attendees suffering from a variety of illnesses to &quot;break free of the devil&quot; by throwing their prescription pills onto the stage. Many would obey, tossing away bottles of digitalis, nitroglycerine, and other important maintenance medications. Popoff would also &quot;command&quot; supplicants in wheelchairs to &quot;rise and break free&quot;. They would stand and walk without assistance, to the joyous cheers of the faithful. Critics later documented that the recipients of these dramatic &quot;cures&quot; were fully ambulatory people who had been seated in wheelchairs by Popoff&#x27;s assistants prior to broadcasts.

In 1985, Popoff began soliciting donations for a program to provide Bibles to citizens of the Soviet Union by attaching them to helium-filled balloons and floating them into the country. When skeptics asked him to prove that the money he had collected had in fact been spent on Bibles and balloons, Popoff staged a burglary at his own headquarters. On subsequent broadcasts, he tearfully begged for additional donations to help repair the damage.

== Investigation by James Randi ==
At the height of his popularity in the 1980s, Popoff would accurately announce home addresses and specific illnesses of audience members during his &quot;healing sermons&quot;, a feat that he implied was due to divine revelation and &quot;God-given ability&quot;. In 1986, the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry charged that Popoff was using electronic transmissions to receive his information; Popoff denied it, insisting that the messages were divinely revealed. Skeptic groups distributed pamphlets explaining how Popoff&#x27;s feats could be accomplished without any sort of divine intervention. Popoff branded his critics &quot;tools of the devil&quot;.

Popoff&#x27;s methods were definitively exposed in 1986 by the magician and skeptic James Randi and his associate Steve Shaw, an illusionist known professionally as Banachek, with technical assistance from the crime scene analyst and electronics expert Alexander Jason. With a scanner radio, Jason was able to demonstrate that Popoff&#x27;s wife, Elizabeth, was using a radio transmitter to broadcast information that she and her aides had culled from prayer request cards filled out by audience members. Popoff received the transmissions via a receiver and earpiece he was wearing and repeated the information to astonished audience members. Jason produced video segments interspersing the intercepted radio transmissions with Popoff&#x27;s &quot;miraculous&quot; pronouncements.

Randi also planted accomplices in Popoff&#x27;s audiences, including a man dressed as a woman whom Popoff &quot;cured&quot; of uterine cancer at a meeting in Detroit in 1984. Randi and Shaw recorded Elizabeth describing a woman to Popoff as &quot;that big nigger in the back&quot;, and warning him, &quot;Keep your hands off those tits ... I&#x27;m watching you.&quot; At another session, Elizabeth and her aides were heard laughing uncontrollably at the physical appearance of a man suffering from advanced testicular cancer.

In May 1986, Randi presented one of Jason&#x27;s videos on &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot;. Popoff initially denied Randi&#x27;s accusations and accused NBC of &quot;...[hiring] an actress to impersonate Mrs. Popoff on a doctored videotape&quot;. Eventually Popoff admitted the existence of the radio device, but claimed that Elizabeth only &quot;occasionally&quot; gave him &quot;the name of a person who needs special prayers&quot;. He added that &quot;almost everybody&quot; knew about the radio communication system. Although donations had exceeded over half a million dollars monthly, his ministry&#x27;s viewer ratings and donations declined significantly after the Carson airing, and in September 1987 he declared bankruptcy, listing more than 790 unpaid creditors and a ministry debt of over $1 million, and personal debts of almost half that. Popoff&#x27;s attorney, William Simon, &quot;attributed the collapse of his ministry to financial mismanagement more than to disclosures about Popoff.&quot; Jason&#x27;s video footage was also aired on the &quot;Nova&quot; episode &quot;Secrets of the Psychics&quot; in 1991. The episode was released on video as part of a lesson in critical thinking.

Larry Skelton, a former organist of Popoff from 1965 to 1990, and for Peter&#x27;s father before that, said: &quot;When you&#x27;re praying for the sick, it&#x27;s through the Holy Spirit, and there&#x27;s some times that it works freely, and then there are other times when the Spirit&#x27;s just not there.&quot; He went on to say that &quot;on the days it didn&#x27;t show, you still had to pay for the auditorium, so you needed to help the Holy Spirit along.&quot; Skelton claimed that he had seen miracles; for instance, a believer whose short leg grew six inches to match the length of his normal leg.

== Resurgence ==
In 1998, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; reported that Popoff was making a comeback, seeking to jump-start his ministry by repackaging himself for an African American audience, buying time on the Black Entertainment Television network. Popoff, along with Don Stewart and Robert Tilton, received &quot;criticism from those who say that preachers with a long trail of disillusioned followers have no place on a network that holds itself out as a model of entrepreneurship for the black community&quot;.

A February 2007 &quot;Inside Edition&quot; segment reported that Popoff&#x27;s new infomercials depict him &quot;healing the sick&quot; in a manner identical to his methods prior to James Randi&#x27;s exposé. Victims were interviewed, including a married couple who charged that Popoff had taken &quot;thousands of dollars&quot; from them. Popoff refused to comment. &quot;Flim flam is his profession,&quot; Randi explained to reporter Matt Meaghan. &quot;That&#x27;s what he does best. He&#x27;s very good at it, and naturally he&#x27;s going to go back to it.&quot; In May 2007, ABC&#x27;s &quot;20/20&quot; focused on Popoff&#x27;s comeback and explored the lives of a few people who felt cheated. Various other media outlets have run similar stories. In July 2008, a Nanaimo, British Columbia, resident was reimbursed by Popoff after she went public with her concerns over his fundraising tactics.

In 2008, the UK broadcasting regulator Ofcom issued strong warnings to broadcasters for transmitting Popoff&#x27;s material, which the regulator felt promoted his products &quot;in such a way as to target potential susceptible and vulnerable viewers&quot;. These programs included offers of free &quot;Miracle Manna&quot; that allegedly provided health and financial miracles. In 2009, Popoff began running advertisements in UK periodicals offering a free cross containing &quot;blessed water&quot; and &quot;holy sand&quot;. The water, he claimed, was drawn from a spring near Chernobyl, Ukraine (the site of the 1986 nuclear reactor disaster). Animals and humans drinking from the spring were purportedly spared radiation sickness. Responders to the ad received a small wooden cross bearing the inscription &quot;Jerusalem&quot; and a solicitation for donations, followed by numerous additional solicitation letters.

Popoff was designated by the James Randi Educational Foundation (JREF) as one of its recipients of the 2011 Pigasus Award for fraudulent practices, along with Mehmet Oz (from &quot;The Dr. Oz Show&quot;) and CVS Pharmacy. &quot;Debt cancellation is part of God&#x27;s plan&quot;, according to Popoff, who taught that God would respond to prayer and seed-faith by providing financial blessing. Credit.com wrote a blog post concerning Popoff&#x27;s claims.

In September 2015, Michael Marshall of the Good Thinking Society documented Popoff&#x27;s latest promises of &quot;fabulous extreme fortune&quot; and &quot;miracles&quot; in exchange for donations to his organization. At a recent London gathering, GTS filmed Popoff &quot;healing&quot; a woman supposedly &quot;wracked with pain&quot;, though Marshall and a colleague had previously seen her—in no obvious distress—handing out pens and questionnaires to audience members. Soon after the &quot;healing&quot;, they watched her quietly leave the room.&lt;ref name=&quot;Penman_9/23/2015&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

In the mid-2000s, Popoff began to offer &quot;Miracle Spring Water&quot; on late-night infomercials in the US, Canada, the UK, Australia, and New Zealand. Respondents were promised miraculous protection from disease and disability, along with financial prosperity (which might include &quot;divine money transfers directly into your account&quot;), if they slept with the water for one night before drinking it, then prayed over the empty bottle and sent it back to Popoff—with a donation. A deluge of solicitation letters and token enclosures would follow, requesting more donations in exchange for miracles. Popoff also started referring to himself as a prophet.

Popoff&#x27;s operation had functioned as a for-profit company until 2006, when it merged with a small church in Farmers Branch, Texas called Word for the World, which operated out of a storefront. Now classified as a church, Popoff&#x27;s corporation no longer had to report annual income or salary to the IRS. When a reporter from &quot;GQ&quot; attempted to visit this church on a Sunday morning in late 2016, he found a deserted parking lot in an industrial park with no church sign visible on the outside.

Because of Popoff&#x27;s history of fraud and financial irregularities, his &quot;People United For Christ&quot; organization earned a &quot;Did Not Disclose&quot; rating with the Better Business Bureau, indicating its refusal to provide information that would enable BBB to determine whether the group adheres to its Standards for Charity Accountability.

Popoff&#x27;s longtime assistants Reeford and Pamela Sherrell also began a televised Texas-based ministry, with Reeford using the name Pastor Lee Sherrell. Like Popoff, they used the offer of a religious trinket (a free prayer cloth) to compile an address list. Once a follower requested the prayer cloth and input his or her address, letters asking for money were dispatched.

Researcher and bioethics expert Fred M. Frohock cited Popoff as &quot;one of many egregious instances of fake healing.&quot; Ole Anthony of the Trinity Foundation, founded in 1987 to research the claims of televangelists, said, &quot;Most of these guys are fooled by their own theology&quot;—referring to other televangelists such as Joel Osteen and T. D. Jakes—but in the case of Popoff, &quot;he&#x27;s fundamentally evil, because he &quot;knows&quot; he&#x27;s a con man.&quot;

== Financial details ==
Popoff was collecting almost $4 million per year in the late 1980s, according to Randi. In 2003, his ministry received over $9.6 million, and in 2005, over $23 million. In that year, he and his wife were paid a combined salary of nearly $1 million, while two of his children received over $180,000 each. Financial data is not available for Popoff&#x27;s ministry since 2005 because Peter Popoff Ministries changed from a for-profit business to a religious organization in 2006, making it tax-exempt. Popoff purchased a home in Bradbury, California, for $4.5 million in 2007. He drives a Porsche and a Mercedes-Benz.

== In popular culture ==
The radio transmitter incident was parodied in the 1989 movie &quot;Fletch Lives&quot;.

The 1990 album &quot;Spiritual Healing&quot; by the death metal band Death was inspired by Popoff, and the front cover artwork depict a priest almost identical to him healing a person in a wheelchair.

The 1992 Steve Martin dramedy &quot;Leap of Faith&quot; was inspired by Popoff&#x27;s fraudulent ministry, and demonstrated a number of the techniques Popoff and other televangelist scammers use to create the illusion of divine intervention. A 2012 Broadway musical adaptation of the same title was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Musical.

Popoff was also the inspiration for a character in the 2012 thriller film &quot;Red Lights&quot;, a psychic who uses information fed to him via a hidden earpiece to persuade the audience at his shows that he is receiving personal details psychically. The script includes Elizabeth Popoff&#x27;s infamous line, &quot;Hello Petey, can you hear me? If you can&#x27;t, you&#x27;re in trouble&quot;, almost verbatim.

James Randi&#x27;s exposure of Popoff&#x27;s fraudulent technique was featured in a segment of episode seven of season 21 of &quot;Mysteries at the Museum&quot;.

== Publications ==
* &quot;3 Steps to Answered Prayer&quot;. Faith Messenger Publications (1981) (91 pages)
* &quot;Calamities, Catastrophes, and Chaos&quot;. Faith Messenger Publications (1980) 
* &quot;Demons At Your Doorstep&quot;. Faith Messenger Publications (1982) (50 pages)
* &quot;Dreams: God&#x27;s Language for Life More Abundantly&quot;. Publisher: People United For Christ (1989) (88 pages)
* &quot;Forecasts for 1987&quot;. (1984) (33 page booklet)
* &quot;God Has Promised You Divine Wealth&quot;
* &quot;God&#x27;s Abundant Blessings&quot;
* &quot;Guaranteed Answered Prayer&quot;
* &quot;Prosperity Thinking&quot;
* &quot;Releasing the Power of the Holy Spirit in Your Life&quot;
* &quot;Six Things Satan Uses to Rob You of God&#x27;s Abundant Blessings&quot;. Faith Messenger Publications (1982) (93 pages)

==Notes==
== References ==

== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==

* Peter Popoff Ministries – Official website
* Peter Popoff Ministries – Official website (archived)
* More of Popoff&#x27;s Secrets by James Randi (James Randi Educational Foundation)
* Inside Edition from James Randi Educational Foundation, 2007
* Skeptics with a K Episode 157 (A special episode covering Marshal Masters visit to Popov&#x27;s London gathering)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q743361" start="0" end="19" title="Peter Popoff" label="Peter George Popoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407240" start="66" end="79" title="televangelism" label="televangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430956" start="81" end="90" title="charlatan" label="charlatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="101" end="112" title="Clairvoyance" label="clairvoyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420463" start="118" end="130" title="Faith healing" label="faith healer"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="158" end="169" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="1010" end="1025" title="Occupied Berlin" label="Occupied Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066795" start="1164" end="1179" title="Chaffey College" label="Chaffey College"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="1207" end="1246" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q747466" start="1784" end="1802" title="Upland, California" label="Upland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="2115" end="2120" title="devil" label="devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156533" start="2221" end="2230" title="digitalis (medicine)" label="digitalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221044" start="2232" end="2246" title="nitroglycerin (drug)" label="nitroglycerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2767" end="2779" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="2801" end="2807" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="3374" end="3384" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115728" start="3433" end="3464" title="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry" label="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359185" start="3618" end="3625" title="Religious skepticism" label="Skeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="3799" end="3804" title="devil" label="devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="3897" end="3908" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q806058" start="3978" end="3986" title="Banachek" label="Banachek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474480" start="4090" end="4103" title="scanner (radio)" label="scanner radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209744" start="4722" end="4736" title="uterine cancer" label="uterine cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324464" start="5103" end="5120" title="testicular cancer" label="testicular cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="5188" end="5227" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="5296" end="5299" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="5864" end="5874" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="6207" end="6211" title="Nova (American TV program)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444532" start="6232" end="6255" title="Secrets of the Psychics" label="Secrets of the Psychics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="6524" end="6535" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6989" end="7008" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="7170" end="7208" title="BET" label="Black Entertainment Television network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293569" start="7229" end="7240" title="Don Stewart (preacher)" label="Don Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350402" start="7245" end="7258" title="Robert Tilton" label="Robert Tilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151548" start="7498" end="7512" title="Inside Edition" label="Inside Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662452" start="7559" end="7570" title="infomercial" label="infomercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="7849" end="7858" title="Confidence trick" label="Flim flam"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="8057" end="8060" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q197867" start="8074" end="8079" title="20/20 (American TV program)" label="20/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q16461" start="8247" end="8254" title="Nanaimo" label="Nanaimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="8256" end="8272" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="8418" end="8423" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q241156" start="8689" end="8694" title="Manna" label="Manna"/>
<link wikidata="Q129677" start="8957" end="8966" title="Chernobyl" label="Chernobyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="8968" end="8975" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="8993" end="9022" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="1986 nuclear reactor disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681020" start="9328" end="9362" title="James Randi Educational Foundation" label="James Randi Educational Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669430" start="9407" end="9420" title="Pigasus Award" label="Pigasus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537149" start="9458" end="9467" title="Mehmet Oz" label="Mehmet Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393313" start="9480" end="9495" title="The Dr. Oz Show" label="The Dr. Oz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="9507" end="9519" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="CVS Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063521" start="9774" end="9790" title="Michael Marshall (skeptic)" label="Michael Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19990888" start="9798" end="9819" title="Good Thinking Society" label="Good Thinking Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q655189" start="10605" end="10625" title="prosperity theology" label="financial prosperity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="11018" end="11025" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q980067" start="11141" end="11162" title="Farmers Branch, Texas" label="Farmers Branch, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044785" start="11720" end="11742" title="Better Business Bureau" label="Better Business Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="11982" end="11987" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085797" start="12400" end="12411" title="Ole Anthony" label="Ole Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842809" start="12419" end="12437" title="Trinity Foundation (Dallas)" label="Trinity Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q468048" start="12609" end="12620" title="Joel Osteen" label="Joel Osteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q845288" start="12625" end="12636" title="T. D. Jakes" label="T. D. Jakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q896910" start="13308" end="13328" title="Bradbury, California" label="Bradbury, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="13368" end="13375" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="13382" end="13395" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754850" start="13491" end="13503" title="Fletch Lives" label="Fletch Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q849440" start="13533" end="13550" title="Spiritual Healing (album)" label="Spiritual Healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="13564" end="13575" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192843" start="13581" end="13586" title="Death (metal band)" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="13723" end="13735" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="13736" end="13743" title="dramedy" label="dramedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196673" start="13750" end="13763" title="Leap of Faith (film)" label="Leap of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="13963" end="13971" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="14031" end="14058" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q733000" start="14141" end="14151" title="Red Lights (2012 film)" label="Red Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917466" start="14161" end="14168" title="psychic" label="psychic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17114098" start="14605" end="14628" title="Mysteries at the Museum" label="Mysteries at the Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="15675" end="15686" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681020" start="15688" end="15722" title="James Randi Educational Foundation" label="James Randi Educational Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681020" start="15746" end="15780" title="James Randi Educational Foundation" label="James Randi Educational Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303800" wikidata="Q856474" url="?curid=303800" title="Newtown A.F.C.">
<text>Newtown Association Football Club () is a professional Welsh football club based in Newtown, Powys, which plays in the . Newtown are one of only two clubs that can claim unbroken membership of the league since its formation in 1992, with the other club being Aberystwyth Town.

The club plays at Latham Park, Newtown, which accommodates 5,000 spectators. They are the only top flight football club in Powys.

== History ==

The club has its origins in two previous clubs, both active from 1875; Newtown and White Stars. The latter won the 1878–79 Welsh Cup and in the aftermath an attempt was made to merge the clubs under the name Excelsior. The Newtown club folded into the Excelsior, but White Stars continued, and absorbed the Excelsior in 1880. After losing the 1880–81 Welsh Cup final, the White Stars disbanded; but a meeting at the Lion Hotel on 23 July 1884 re-established a Newtown association football club, featuring many of the players and officials who had been involved with the White Stars, and, in some cases, with the original Newtown club beforehand.

The revived club won the 1894–95 Welsh Cup, beating Wrexham 3–2 at Welshpool, despite Goodwin in goal being ordered off for retaliation before the second half (while Newtown was 2–1 down), but in July 1900 it lost the use of the Cunnings, and, with diminished gates and additional expenses, there were fears for the future of the club. Another article from March 1901 referred to Newtown being defunct, and hoped that Newtown Excelsior would resuscitate the club. Newtown North End and Royal Welsh Warehouse Newtown emerged in the town in their place. In 1910, they were still inactive. No records exist of Newtown Football Club again until the 1919.

For most of the years since the 1920s the club operated in the &quot;Mid-Wales League&quot;, or the &quot;Central Wales League&quot; as it was sometimes known, winning the championship in 1975–76, 1978–79, 1981–82, 1986–87 and 1987–88 and on the strength of this record, the club gained entry to the English league system in the Northern Premier League.

In 1992 the club became rather reluctant founder members of the League of Wales. Since then it has finished runners-up in the league in both 1995–96 and 1997–98, and subsequently played UEFA cup ties against Skonto Riga of Latvia and Wisła Kraków of Poland.

Newtown Association Football Club are one of the oldest clubs in Wales, being formed in 1875 and are one of the founder members of the FAW. In addition, the club was also one of the founder members of the League of Wales, now known as the Cymru Premier.

The club has a long and proud tradition with the move in the late 1980s into the Northern Premier League being part of the progressive nature of the club.

Way back in 1877, Newtown took part in the first Welsh Cup tie on Saturday 13 October against Druids of Ruabon. Cefn Druids now former members of the Welsh Premier are derived from this club. Wrexham went on to win the competition but in the following season, Newtown White Stars beat the favourites Wrexham 2–1 in Oswestry and became the first club to receive the famous trophy, which had only been purchased a few months earlier. In December 1895 Newtown travelled to play Manchester City at Maine Road and shocked the City team by winning 3–2. Newtown&#x27;s W. Parry scored all three goals for the Robins.

In 2014 Newtown became the second Cymru Premier club, after The New Saints, to change their grass turf for a 3G pitch. During the 2014–15 season Newtown finished in the top six for the second consecutive season. They also took part in their first Welsh Cup final in 118 Years after memorable wins against Caersws, Bangor and Rhyl. However they lost the match 2–0 to The New Saints, despite it being played at Latham Park in front of a capacity crowd. After the cup final defeat, Newtown entered the European play-offs. During the play-offs, they won away at Port Talbot Town and won away at Aberystwyth Town to take a spot in the 2015–16 Europa League qualifiers.

In July 2015 Newtown faced Maltese opponents Valletta in the first round of qualifying for the 2015-16 Europa League. A last minute winner in the 1st leg at Latham Park gave the club their first European win and was followed with an away victory giving Newtown their first Europa League Win over two legs. Newtown faced Danish giants Copenhagen in the second round and were defeated over both legs losing 5–1 on aggregate. Newtown finished in the top 6 again during the following 2015-16 Welsh Premier League season and were also the only team to beat The New Saints at Park Hall, but eventually lost at home to Airbus UK Broughton in the play-off semi final. Newtown again reached the play-offs after finishing 7th in the 2016-17 Welsh Premier League season, but were beaten 3–2 away to Bangor City.

== Honours ==
*Welsh Cup
**Winners: 1878–79, 1894–95
**&quot;Runner-up:&quot; 1880–81, 1885–86, 1887–88, 1896–97, 2014–15
*League Cup
**&quot;Runner-up:&quot; 2011–12
*League of Wales
**&quot;Runner-up:&quot; 1995–96, 1997–98
* Welsh Amateur Cup
**Winners: 1954–55
*Mid Wales League
**Winners: 2008–09 (Reserves)
* Ladies Welsh Cup
**Finalists: 2003–04
*Mid Wales League
**Winners: 1975–76, 1978–79, 1981–82, 1986–87, 1987–88, 1995–96 (Reserves)
*Summer Cup
**Winners: 1994–95, 1995–96
*Mid Wales South League
**Winners: 1981–82, 1983–84 (Reserves)

*Arthur Barritt Cup
**Winners: 1986–87
*Welsh Intermediate Cup
**Finalists: 1985–86, 1987–88
*Central Wales Cup
**Winners: 1992–93, 1993–94
*Central Wales Floodlit Cup
**Winners: 1994–95
*Mid Wales League Cup
**Winners: 1994–95, 1997–98
*Montgomeryshire Cup
**Winners: 1936–37, 1968–69, 1947–48, 1949–50, 1951–52, 1954–55, 1955–56, 1956–57, 1957–58, 1965–66, 1966–67, 1967–68, 1968–69, 1978–79, 1981–82, 1995–96
*Radnorshire Cup
**Winners: 1980–81 (Reserves)
**Finalists: 1969–70, 1986–87 (Reserves)
*UEFA Cup/Europa League
**Preliminary round qualifiers: 1996–97, 1998–99, 2015–16
*Shropshire League
**Winners: 1892–93
==Players==
===Current squad===









=== Technical staff ===

== Managers ==

* Brian Coyne (1992–03)
* Roger Preece (2003–06)
* Darren Ryan (2006–10)
* Andy Cale (2010–11)
* Darren Ryan (2011)
* Bernard McNally (2011–13)
* Chris Hughes (2013–2024)
* Scott Ruscoe (2024)
* Callum McKenzie (2024–present)

== Europe ==

Newtown have participated in UEFA competition five times.

;Notes
* PR: Preliminary round
* 1Q: First qualifying round
* 2Q: Second qualifying round

== Rivalries ==
Newtown share a local rivalry with Caersws who are only around 5 miles away and often attract big crowds when the teams meet. In the Cymru Premier Newtown have derby matches against fellow Mid-Wales clubs Aberystwyth Town and The New Saints.

== League record ==


== References ==
== External links ==
*Whitestars website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q856474" start="0" end="33" title="Newtown A.F.C." label="Newtown Association Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="55" end="60" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="61" end="69" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q669171" start="84" end="91" title="Newtown, Powys" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q156150" start="93" end="98" title="Powys" label="Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q319756" start="259" end="275" title="Aberystwyth Town F.C." label="Aberystwyth Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495866" start="296" end="307" title="Latham Park" label="Latham Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q669171" start="309" end="316" title="Newtown, Powys" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q156150" start="401" end="406" title="Powys" label="Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q126679092" start="495" end="502" title="Newtown F.C. (1875–79)" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q126708866" start="507" end="518" title="White Stars F.C." label="White Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555678" start="539" end="556" title="1878–79 Welsh Cup" label="1878–79 Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q126284420" start="632" end="641" title="Newtown Excelsior F.C." label="Excelsior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555799" start="767" end="784" title="1880–81 Welsh Cup" label="1880–81 Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1096" end="1113" title="1894–95 Welsh Cup" label="1894–95 Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="1123" end="1130" title="Wrexham A.F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024911" start="1138" end="1147" title="Welshpool" label="Welshpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="2142" end="2157" title="League of Wales" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q223823" start="2286" end="2297" title="Skonto FC" label="Skonto Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="2301" end="2307" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="2312" end="2324" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2328" end="2334" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="2576" end="2589" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770481" start="2852" end="2858" title="Ruabon" label="Ruabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777557" start="2860" end="2871" title="Cefn Druids" label="Cefn Druids"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="2940" end="2947" title="Wrexham A.F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009221" start="3063" end="3071" title="Oswestry" label="Oswestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="3223" end="3238" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q865093" start="3242" end="3252" title="Maine Road" label="Maine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="3393" end="3406" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="3419" end="3433" title="The New Saints F.C." label="The New Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="3606" end="3615" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q658273" start="3664" end="3671" title="Caersws F.C." label="Caersws"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="3673" end="3679" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q595516" start="3684" end="3688" title="Rhyl F.C." label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495866" start="3768" end="3779" title="Latham Park" label="Latham Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q239241" start="3917" end="3933" title="Port Talbot Town F.C." label="Port Talbot Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q319756" start="3950" end="3966" title="Aberystwyth Town F.C." label="Aberystwyth Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="4051" end="4058" title="Malta" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q331589" start="4069" end="4077" title="Valletta F.C." label="Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699191" start="4119" end="4140" title="2015-16 Europa League" label="2015-16 Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q188430" start="4358" end="4368" title="Fc copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20312086" start="4504" end="4532" title="2015-16 Welsh Premier League" label="2015-16 Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365405" start="4594" end="4603" title="Park Hall (football ground)" label="Park Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q553732" start="4636" end="4655" title="Airbus UK Broughton F.C." label="Airbus UK Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24804130" start="4747" end="4775" title="2016-17 Welsh Premier League" label="2016-17 Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="4812" end="4823" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="4841" end="4850" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555678" start="4862" end="4869" title="1878–79 Welsh Cup" label="1878–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555799" start="4904" end="4911" title="1880–81 Welsh Cup" label="1880–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986636" start="4913" end="4920" title="1885–86 Welsh Cup" label="1885–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413701" start="4940" end="4947" title="2014–15 Welsh Cup" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q647072" start="4949" end="4959" title="Welsh League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624406" start="4985" end="4992" title="2011–12 Welsh League Cup" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="4994" end="5009" title="Cymru Premier" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251668" start="5035" end="5042" title="1995–96 League of Wales" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132846" start="5044" end="5051" title="1997–98 League of Wales" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424520" start="5054" end="5071" title="FAW Trophy" label="Welsh Amateur Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841046" start="5092" end="5108" title="Mid Wales League" label="Mid Wales League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420814" start="5141" end="5157" title="FAW Women&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Ladies Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841046" start="5180" end="5196" title="Mid Wales Football League" label="Mid Wales League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841048" start="5313" end="5335" title="Mid Wales South League" label="Mid Wales South League"/>
<link wikidata="Q130050786" start="5614" end="5633" title="Montgomeryshire Challenge Cup" label="Montgomeryshire Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610270" start="5789" end="5804" title="Radnorshire Challenge Cup" label="Radnorshire Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q10388472" start="6080" end="6091" title="Brian Coyne" label="Brian Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358799" start="6104" end="6116" title="Roger Preece" label="Roger Preece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225135" start="6129" end="6140" title="Darren Ryan" label="Darren Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129335921" start="6153" end="6162" title="Andy Cale" label="Andy Cale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225135" start="6175" end="6186" title="Darren Ryan" label="Darren Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985251" start="6196" end="6211" title="Bernard McNally" label="Bernard McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q126264445" start="6224" end="6236" title="Chris Hughes (football manager)" label="Chris Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476298" start="6251" end="6263" title="Scott Ruscoe" label="Scott Ruscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q658273" start="6520" end="6527" title="Caersws F.C." label="Caersws"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="6618" end="6631" title="Cymru Premier" label="Cymru Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094811" start="6674" end="6683" title="Mid-Wales" label="Mid-Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q319756" start="6690" end="6706" title="Aberystwyth Town" label="Aberystwyth Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="6711" end="6725" title="The New Saints F.C." label="The New Saints"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303802" wikidata="Q752412" url="?curid=303802" title="Phase rule">
<text>In thermodynamics, the phase rule is a general principle governing multi-component, multi-phase systems in thermodynamic equilibrium. For a system without chemical reactions, it relates the number of freely varying intensive properties () to the number of components (), the number of phases (), and number of ways of performing work on the system ():
:formula_1
Examples of intensive properties that count toward are the temperature and pressure. For simple liquids and gases, pressure-volume work is the only type of work, in which case .

The rule was derived by American physicist Josiah Willard Gibbs in his landmark paper titled &quot;On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances&quot;, published in parts between 1875 and 1878.

The number of degrees of freedom (also called the &quot;variance&quot;) is the number of independent intensive properties, &quot;i.e.&quot;, the largest number of thermodynamic parameters such as temperature or pressure that can be varied simultaneously and independently of each other.

An example of a one-component system () is a pure chemical. A two-component system () has two chemically independent components, like a mixture of water and ethanol. Examples of phases that count toward are solids, liquids and gases.

==Foundations==

*A phase is a form of matter that is homogeneous in chemical composition and physical state. Typical phases are solid, liquid and gas. Two immiscible liquids (or liquid mixtures with different compositions) separated by a distinct boundary are counted as two different phases, as are two immiscible solids. 
*The number of components (&quot;C&quot;) is the number of chemically independent constituents of the system, i.e. the minimum number of independent species necessary to define the composition of all phases of the system.
*The number of degrees of freedom (&quot;F&quot;) in this context is the number of intensive variables which are independent of each other.

The basis for the rule is that equilibrium between phases places a constraint on the intensive variables. More rigorously, since the phases are in thermodynamic equilibrium with each other, the chemical potentials of the phases must be equal. The number of equality relationships determines the number of degrees of freedom. For example, if the chemical potentials of a liquid and of its vapour depend on temperature (&quot;T&quot;) and pressure (&quot;p&quot;), the equality of chemical potentials will mean that each of those variables will be dependent on the other. Mathematically, the equation , where , the chemical potential, defines temperature as a function of pressure or vice versa. (Caution: do not confuse as pressure with , number of phases.)

To be more specific, the composition of each phase is determined by intensive variables (such as mole fractions) in each phase. The total number of variables is , where the extra two are temperature &quot;T&quot; and pressure &quot;p&quot;. The number of constraints is , since the chemical potential of each component must be equal in all phases. Subtract the number of constraints from the number of variables to obtain the number of degrees of freedom as .

The rule is valid provided the equilibrium between phases is not influenced by gravitational, electrical or magnetic forces, or by surface area, and only by temperature, pressure, and concentration.

==Consequences and examples==

===Pure substances (one component)===
For pure substances so that . In a single phase () condition of a pure component system, two variables (), such as temperature and pressure, can be chosen independently to be any pair of values consistent with the phase. However, if the temperature and pressure combination ranges to a point where the pure component undergoes a separation into two phases (), decreases from 2 to 1. When the system enters the two-phase region, it is no longer possible to independently control temperature and pressure.
 In the phase diagram to the right, the boundary curve between the liquid and gas regions maps the constraint between temperature and pressure when the single-component system has separated into liquid and gas phases at equilibrium. The only way to increase the pressure on the two phase line is by increasing the temperature. If the temperature is decreased by cooling, some of the gas condenses, decreasing the pressure. Throughout both processes, the temperature and pressure stay in the relationship shown by this boundary curve unless one phase is entirely consumed by evaporation or condensation, or unless the critical point is reached. As long as there are two phases, there is only one degree of freedom, which corresponds to the position along the phase boundary curve.

The critical point is the black dot at the end of the liquid–gas boundary. As this point is approached, the liquid and gas phases become progressively more similar until, at the critical point, there is no longer a separation into two phases. Above the critical point and away from the phase boundary curve, and the temperature and pressure can be controlled independently. Hence there is only one phase, and it has the physical properties of a dense gas, but is also referred to as a supercritical fluid.

Of the other two-boundary curves, one is the solid–liquid boundary or melting point curve which indicates the conditions for equilibrium between these two phases, and the other at lower temperature and pressure is the solid–gas boundary.

Even for a pure substance, it is possible that three phases, such as solid, liquid and vapour, can exist together in equilibrium (). If there is only one component, there are no degrees of freedom () when there are three phases. Therefore, in a single-component system, this three-phase mixture can only exist at a single temperature and pressure, which is known as a triple point. Here there are two equations , which are sufficient to determine the two variables T and p. In the diagram for CO2 the triple point is the point at which the solid, liquid and gas phases come together, at 5.2 bar and 217 K. It is also possible for other sets of phases to form a triple point, for example in the water system there is a triple point where ice I, ice III and liquid can coexist.

If four phases of a pure substance were in equilibrium (), the phase rule would give , which is meaningless, since there cannot be −1 independent variables. This explains the fact that four phases of a pure substance (such as ice I, ice III, liquid water and water vapour) are not found in equilibrium at any temperature and pressure. In terms of chemical potentials there are now three equations, which cannot in general be satisfied by any values of the two variables &quot;T&quot; and &quot;p&quot;, although in principle they might be solved in a special case where one equation is mathematically dependent on the other two. In practice, however, the coexistence of more phases than allowed by the phase rule normally means that the phases are not all in true equilibrium.

===Two-component systems===
For binary mixtures of two chemically independent components, so that . In addition to temperature and pressure, the other degree of freedom is the composition of each phase, often expressed as mole fraction or mass fraction of one component.
As an example, consider the system of two completely miscible liquids such as toluene and benzene, in equilibrium with their vapours. This system may be described by a boiling-point diagram which shows the composition (mole fraction) of the two phases in equilibrium as functions of temperature (at a fixed pressure).

Four thermodynamic variables which may describe the system include temperature (&quot;T&quot;), pressure (&quot;p&quot;), mole fraction of component 1 (toluene) in the liquid phase (&quot;x&quot;1L), and mole fraction of component 1 in the vapour phase (&quot;x&quot;1V). However, since two phases are present () in equilibrium, only two of these variables can be independent (). This is because the four variables are constrained by two relations: the equality of the chemical potentials of liquid toluene and toluene vapour, and the corresponding equality for benzene.

For given &quot;T&quot; and &quot;p&quot;, there will be two phases at equilibrium when the overall composition of the system (system point) lies in between the two curves. A horizontal line (isotherm or tie line) can be drawn through any such system point, and intersects the curve for each phase at its equilibrium composition. The quantity of each phase is given by the lever rule (expressed in the variable corresponding to the &quot;x&quot;-axis, here mole fraction).

For the analysis of fractional distillation, the two independent variables are instead considered to be liquid-phase composition (x1L) and pressure. In that case the phase rule implies that the equilibrium temperature (boiling point) and vapour-phase composition are determined.

Liquid–vapour phase diagrams for other systems may have azeotropes (maxima or minima) in the composition curves, but the application of the phase rule is unchanged. The only difference is that the compositions of the two phases are equal exactly at the azeotropic composition.

=== Aqueous solution of 4 kinds of salts ===
Consider an aqueous solution containing sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride (KCl), sodium bromide (NaBr), and potassium bromide (KBr), in equilibrium with their respective solid phases. Each salt, in solid form, is a different phase, because each possesses a distinct crystal structure and composition. The aqueous solution itself is another phase, because it forms a homogeneous liquid phase separate from the solid salts, with its own distinct composition and physical properties. Thus we have P = 5 phases. 

There are 6 elements present (H, O, Na, K, Cl, Br), but we have 2 constraints:

* The stoichiometry of water: n(H) = 2n(O).
* Charge balance in the solution: n(Na) + n(K) = n(Cl) + n(Br).

giving C = 6 - 2 = 4 components. The Gibbs phase rule states that F = 1. So, for example, if we plot the P-T phase diagram of the system, there is only one line at which all phases coexist. Any deviation from the line would either cause one of the salts to completely dissolve or one of the ions to completely precipitate from the solution.

==Phase rule at constant pressure==
For applications in materials science dealing with phase changes between different solid structures, pressure is often imagined to be constant (for example at 1 atmosphere), and is ignored as a degree of freedom, so the formula becomes:
:formula_2
This is sometimes incorrectly called the &quot;condensed phase rule&quot;, but it is not applicable to condensed systems subject to high pressures (for example, in geology), since the effects of these pressures are important.

== Phase rule in colloidal mixtures ==
In colloidal mixtures quintuple and sixtuple points have been described in violation of Gibbs phase rule but it is argued that in these systems the rule can be generalized to formula_3 where formula_4 accounts for additional parameters of interaction among the components like the diameter of one type of particle in relation to the diameter of the other particles in the solution.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Chapter 9. Thermodynamics Aspects of Stability</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="3" end="17" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q752412" start="23" end="33" title="Phase rule" label="phase rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q51363" start="107" end="132" title="thermodynamic equilibrium" label="thermodynamic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="155" end="172" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q911916" start="215" end="235" title="intensive properties" label="intensive properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117970" start="256" end="266" title="Component (thermodynamics)" label="components"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="285" end="291" title="Phase (matter)" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q900231" start="478" end="498" title="pressure-volume work" label="pressure-volume work"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="585" end="605" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Josiah Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412467" start="641" end="687" title="On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances" label="On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="1233" end="1238" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="1241" end="1247" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="1253" end="1256" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q904929" start="1315" end="1326" title="Homogeneity (physics)" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263816" start="1330" end="1350" title="chemical composition" label="chemical composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11430" start="1355" end="1369" title="physical state" label="physical state"/>
<link wikidata="Q906367" start="1417" end="1427" title="miscibility" label="immiscible"/>
<link wikidata="Q737004" start="2143" end="2161" title="chemical potential" label="chemical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q186693" start="3949" end="3962" title="phase diagram" label="phase diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="4558" end="4572" title="critical point (thermodynamics)" label="critical point"/>
<link wikidata="Q682585" start="5207" end="5226" title="supercritical fluid" label="supercritical fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="5299" end="5312" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q106410" start="5836" end="5848" title="triple point" label="triple point"/>
<link wikidata="Q125745585" start="6205" end="6210" title="ice I" label="ice I"/>
<link wikidata="Q125745585" start="6212" end="6219" title="ice III" label="ice III"/>
<link wikidata="Q125264" start="7245" end="7258" title="mole fraction" label="mole fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="7372" end="7379" title="toluene" label="toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="7384" end="7391" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7462" end="7483" title="Vapor–liquid equilibrium#Boiling-point diagrams" label="boiling-point diagram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8377" end="8385" title="Contour line#Temperature and related subjects" label="isotherm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781829" start="8558" end="8568" title="lever rule" label="lever rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q840492" start="8679" end="8702" title="fractional distillation" label="fractional distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="8878" end="8891" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q186693" start="8953" end="8966" title="phase diagram" label="phase diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q325401" start="8995" end="9004" title="azeotrope" label="azeotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="10368" end="10385" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="10865" end="10883" title="Colloid" label="colloidal mixtures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303803" wikidata="Q2020235" url="?curid=303803" title="Porthmadog F.C.">
<text>Porthmadog Football Club (, also abbreviated Port) are a football team, playing in the . The club was founded in 1872 and plays at Y Traeth, Porthmadog, which accommodates 3,000 spectators (800 seated).

== Management team ==
*Manager – Chris Jones
*Assistant Manager – Haydn Jones
*Coach - Michael Foster
*Fitness Coach - Cedri Roberts

== Management board ==
* Chairman: Phil Jones
* Vice Chairman: Chris Jones
* Director: Richard Jones
* Director: Richard Harvey
* Secretary: Chris Blanchard
* President: Dylan Rees

== History ==
=== Beginning ===
Porthmadog Football Club were founded in October 1872 (originally thought to be 1884 until the actual foundation date was discovered in November 2020) and played their first ever match against Pwllheli. The first captain of the club was Mr R Humphreys. This makes them one of Wales&#x27; oldest clubs. In 1900, the club joined the North Wales League, which it won the league in the 1902–03 season.

The 1950s–70s were successful decades for Port. The club won the Welsh Amateur Cup in 1955–56 and 1956–57. After losing its amateur status, and signing Mel Charles, the team had more success. In 1966, its played against Swansea City in the Welsh Cup and the replay at the Vetch attracted Swansea&#x27;s largest crowd of the season, 10,941. Port then won the Welsh League (North) in five of the next nine years.

It was not until 1989–90 that Port had its next championship win, when it won the Daily Post Welsh Alliance. This was enough to ensure Port&#x27;s place as inaugural members of the Cymru Alliance League in 1990. In 1992, Port became inaugural members of the League of Wales, then known as the Konica League.

=== League of Wales ===
The team struggled to make an impact on the pitch early in 1992–93 the season, but a late surge in the final months, thanks mainly to the signing of striker Dave Taylor, helped the team finish in a respectable ninth place and earned manager Meilyr Owen a manager of the month award. In his second season, Taylor went on to become both the league&#x27;s and Europe&#x27;s top scorer, earning him the European Golden Boot. During his spell at the club, he scored 62 goals in 66 games.

Despite the 70 goals netted by Taylor and Marc Lloyd-Williams, in the 1993–94 season, the team finished in eleventh. Port did, however, break another record—the biggest attendance in the League of Wales. A crowd of 3,250 came to see Bangor City push for the league title. Bangor City won the game 2–0 and therefore won the league and the right to play in Europe.

The third season started with a new manager, following the surprising decision to sack Owen. Ian Edwards, ex-Wales International, became manager, but after a good start, the team dropped from fourth position and he was also sacked. After Mickey Thomas, the former Manchester United, Wrexham and Wales player took over, the team continued to play poorly and was nearly relegated.

The fourth season started with another change of manager, as assistant Colin Hawkins was promoted to the job. While it was a quiet season on the field, events off the field were anything but quiet. The club nearly folded because of financial troubles but was re-launched as a limited company. £10,000 was raised through the sale of shares and extra money was raised through friendly matches, such as against Blackburn Rovers and a team of stars from S4C.

The financial situation improved in 1996–97, and the team started the season well, winning all home games until the New Year and losing to Barry Town by only one goal. One of Port&#x27;s most influential players during the good start was Paul Roberts. Before leaving the club to join Wrexham for £10,000, Roberts had played for Wales Under-21 and was the league&#x27;s top scorer. His chance to play for the Welsh youngsters came after he had scored for Port to beat them in a friendly match [Port 1–0 Wales U21].

After Roberts&#x27; departure, Port performed poorly and finished in tenth place. The season ended on a high note with a win against local rivals Caernarfon Town in the North Wales Coast Challenge Cup Final, following victories over Caernarfon Town and Colwyn Bay in earlier rounds.

The 1997–98 season was Port&#x27;s final in the League of Wales. Despite looking safe at the end of April, a string losses in May proved too much for Port. On 2 May, at Farrar Road, Bangor, Port&#x27;s destiny was decided by a match between Bangor City and Haverfordwest County. Port needed a Bangor win, but the final score was Bangor City 1, Haverfordwest County 2, and Port finished fourth from the bottom.

There was still a chance that the decision to relegate Port to the Cymru Alliance could be overturned, with legal action against the League of Wales considered. It was alleged that the decision to relegate four clubs was taken during the season and was therefore illegal. When Ebbw Vale was banned from the league, Port felt that the battle had been won. But Port was made to join the Cymru Alliance, when the south Wales club decided to appeal against the decision at the last minute.

=== Cymru Alliance ===
After occupying the second spot for most of the 1998–99 season, in the New Year it was reported that Port would not be promoted due to a lack of facilities. Port descended into a mid-table finish for the season. Port won the League Cup after beating Rhydymwyn in the final. The club finished in fifth place in the 1999–2000 season despite a run of victories after Viv Williams took charge following the departure of Hawkins. After another disappointing season in 2000–01, the club then took some positive steps forward in 2001–02, with Williams rebuilding the squad.

Port went on to have one of the most successful seasons in their history in 2002–03, winning every home game and losing only twice after securing promotion with a 3–2 victory away at Buckley. Port was promoted to the Welsh Premier with an advantage of 19 points at the top of the Cymru Alliance. Port was accused of playing Richard Harvey without international clearance after signing him from Cemaes Bay, but was found only technically guilty, as he had played in Wales for a year before being signed. Port went on to add two cups (North Wales Coast Challenge Cup and League Cups) to their haul.

=== Welsh Premier League ===

On 16 January 2007, Port was docked three Welsh Premier League points and fined £13,500 (£1,000 payable upfront with the remaining £12,500 suspended until 1 January 2008) after the Football Association of Wales charged the club with failing to control its supporters after racial abuse was directed at assistant referee Gary Ismial by an individual during the Welsh Premier League match against Cwmbran Town on 9 December 2006. The punishment led to outcry by followers of Welsh football—an on-line petition protesting against the punishment was signed by over 750 people from across Wales and worldwide. Porthmadog banned the individual from all matches at Y Traeth. The club&#x27;s appeal to independent arbitrators was successful—the fine was slashed by £12,500 and the arbitrators ordered the Football Association of Wales to pay £4,000 towards the costs incurred by the club in having to take the matter so far. The arbitrators also decided that the decision to deduct three points should be reversed.

Porthmadog announced on 7 May 2007 that their management team—  Osian Roberts  and Viv Williams—were leaving the club. Roberts had just been appointed the Football Association of Wales&#x27;s Technical Director of Football and could not devote enough time to the job, while Williams cited personal reasons. Former Wales and Manchester United star Clayton Blackmore, who signed for the club as a player earlier in the season, took over as manager but was sacked after three months due to a string of poor results. Following Blackmore&#x27;s departure, Williams agreed to take over management again, initially on a temporary basis. Former Airbus UK Broughton assistant manager Alan Bickerstaff later agreed to join Williams as assistant manager.

The season continued poorly, especially at home, where Porthmadog failed to win a league game until the last day of the season against Rhyl. This win helped take Porthmadog out of the bottom two and into safety. Williams, as agreed, left Porthmadog and became manager at Llangefni, and Bickerstaff has since joined Rhyl.

Former player Paul Whelan was appointed the new manager in May 2008. After only eight months at the helm and with relegation looming, Whelan was replaced by former Welshpool manager Tomi Morgan. With the transfer-window already closed, Morgan was unable to augment the team, which eventually finished the season in sixteenth place, just above the two relegation places again. The goals of Marc Lloyd Williams, who re-signed for the club where he started his career, were the high points of a disappointing season, with the striker scoring 24 from 33 league starts.

The 2009–10 season saw Morgan make numerous changes to the squad and bring in many player from his former club. Despite the new squad, the team failed to make an impact on the pitch, finishing in fifteenth place with fewer points than the previous season. The FAW&#x27;s decision to restructure the Welsh Premier by introducing the Super 12 for the season 2010–11 meant that Porthmadog, along with six others, was relegated to the Cymru Alliance League. Following Morgan&#x27;s departure for Carmarthen during the close-season, the club appointed from within, with midfielder Gareth Parry taking over the reins in June 2010.

== Biggest victories and losses ==
*Biggest League of Wales win: 9–0 v Abergavenny Thursdays in 1993 and v Haverfordwest County in 1994.
*Biggest League of Wales defeat: 0–7 by Total Network Solutions in 2006.

== Honours == 
*Huws Gray Cup 
**Champions: 1998–99, 2002–03 
*Cymru Alliance 
**Champions: 2002–03 
*Welsh Amateur Cup 
**Champions: 1955–56, 1956–57 
*Welsh League North 
**Champions: 1966–67, 1967–68, 1968–69 
*Welsh Alliance 
**Champions: 1989–90
*Ardal Northwest
**Runners-up: 2021–22
*Ardal North Playoff – Winners: 2021–22

== Current squad ==








 
==Fans==
Porthmadog are among the best supported clubs in the Cymru Alliance and also draw support from further afield with supporters clubs in Manchester and Leicestershire.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2020235" start="0" end="24" title="Porthmadog F.C." label="Porthmadog Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020235" start="45" end="49" title="Porthmadog F.C." label="Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="57" end="65" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046181" start="131" end="139" title="Y Traeth" label="Y Traeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q950671" start="141" end="151" title="Porthmadog" label="Porthmadog"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="828" end="833" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487332" start="1103" end="1114" title="Mel Charles" label="Mel Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="1171" end="1183" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="1191" end="1200" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="1621" end="1636" title="League of Wales" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368597" start="1853" end="1864" title="David Taylor (footballer born 1965)" label="Dave Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q233454" start="2095" end="2115" title="European Golden Boot" label="European Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="2413" end="2424" title="Bangor City" label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147258" start="2637" end="2648" title="Ian Edwards (footballer born 1955)" label="Ian Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931375" start="2782" end="2795" title="Mickey Thomas (footballer)" label="Mickey Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="2808" end="2825" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="2827" end="2834" title="Wrexham A.F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="2839" end="2844" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q33685" start="3200" end="3215" title="limited company" label="limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="3332" end="3348" title="Blackburn Rovers" label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="3374" end="3377" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q809114" start="3519" end="3529" title="Barry Town F.C." label="Barry Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q950480" start="4041" end="4056" title="Caernarfon Town F.C." label="Caernarfon Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479641" start="4148" end="4158" title="Colwyn Bay F.C." label="Colwyn Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="4420" end="4431" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q941152" start="4436" end="4456" title="Haverfordwest County F.C." label="Haverfordwest County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291377" start="4867" end="4876" title="Ebbw Vale F.C." label="Ebbw Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321616" start="5350" end="5359" title="Rhydymwyn F.C." label="Rhydymwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="6338" end="6358" title="Welsh Premier League" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q275173" start="6477" end="6506" title="Football Association of Wales" label="Football Association of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146848" start="6691" end="6703" title="Cwmbran Town" label="Cwmbran Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7367" end="7382" title=" Osian Roberts " label=" Osian Roberts "/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="7618" end="7623" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="7628" end="7645" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099281" start="7651" end="7668" title="Clayton Blackmore" label="Clayton Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q553732" start="7941" end="7960" title="Airbus UK F.C." label="Airbus UK Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q595516" start="8184" end="8188" title="Rhyl F.C." label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q617795" start="8320" end="8329" title="Llangefni Town F.C." label="Llangefni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813969" start="8535" end="8544" title="Welshpool Town F.C." label="Welshpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183770" start="8760" end="8779" title="Marc Lloyd Williams" label="Marc Lloyd Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q856468" start="9429" end="9439" title="Carmarthen F.C." label="Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667094" start="9634" end="9655" title="Abergavenny Thursdays F.C." label="Abergavenny Thursdays"/>
<link wikidata="Q941152" start="9670" end="9690" title="Haverfordwest County F.C." label="Haverfordwest County"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="9740" end="9763" title="The New Saints F.C." label="Total Network Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073342" start="10026" end="10041" title="Ardal Leagues" label="Ardal Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073342" start="10065" end="10076" title="Ardal Leagues" label="Ardal North"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303804" wikidata="Q3077090" url="?curid=303804" title="Ford Frick">
<text>Ford Christopher Frick (December 19, 1894 – April 8, 1978) was an American sportswriter and baseball executive. After working as a teacher and as a sportswriter for the &quot;New York American&quot;, he served as public relations director of the National League (NL) and then as the league&#x27;s president from to . He was the third commissioner of Major League Baseball (MLB) from 1951 to .

While Frick was NL president, he had a major role in the establishment of the Baseball Hall of Fame as a museum that honors the best players in baseball history. He extinguished threats of a player strike in response to the racial integration of the major leagues. During Frick&#x27;s term as commissioner, expansion occurred and MLB faced the threat of having its antitrust exemption revoked by Congress. He was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1970. The Ford C. Frick Award recognizes outstanding MLB broadcasters.

==Early life==
Frick was born on a farm in Wawaka, Indiana, and went to high school in Rome City, Indiana. He took classes at International Business College in Fort Wayne, then worked for a company that made engines for windmills. He attended DePauw University, where he played first base for the DePauw baseball team and ran track. He graduated in 1915. He had been a member of Phi Kappa Psi fraternity. Frick went to Colorado to play semipro baseball in Walsenburg.

After his stint as a baseball player, Frick lived in Colorado Springs. He taught English at Colorado Springs High School and at Colorado College. Frick moonlighted for &quot;The Gazette&quot;, covering sports and news until he left to work for the War Department near the conclusion of World War I. When the war was over, Frick worked in Denver for the &quot;Rocky Mountain News&quot;. Frick returned to Colorado Springs to take a job with the &quot;Evening Telegraph&quot;, which later merged with &quot;The Gazette&quot;. Around this time, he had given some thought to starting his own advertising agency.

In 1921, a flood devastated much of Pueblo, Colorado. When other reporters had flown in to cover the flood their airplanes had become stuck in muddy conditions, leaving them stranded in Pueblo. Frick had a pilot fly him there, but instead of landing they circled low over the city while Frick took notes and photographs. He was able to file his story a day earlier than other reporters. The recognition from the flood helped Frick get a position with the &quot;New York American&quot; in 1922. Frick was also a broadcaster for WOR in New York.

==NL President ==
In , he became the NL&#x27;s public relations director, and then became president of the league later that year.

In June 1937, Cardinals pitcher Dizzy Dean began to publicly criticize the NL and Frick. In response, Frick said that he was suspending Dean until the pitcher issued a written apology. Dean indicated that he would not apologize and that he would boycott the 1937 All-Star Game, suspended or not. The Cardinals made peace with Frick so that Dean could return to play. He appeared in the All-Star Game, but he sustained a toe injury in the game. The injury altered his delivery and he later injured his arm, never returning to All-Star form.

A Communist Party USA newspaper known as the &quot;Daily Worker&quot; asked Frick in 1937 about the feasibility of racially integrating baseball. Frick said that there was no rule discriminating against players on the basis of race. He said that professional baseball required ability, good habits and strong character. Disingenuously, he asserted that he was not aware of a case in which race had played a role in the selection of a major league player.

In the late 1930s, Frick played a central role in establishing the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown, New York. He gathered a team of representatives from the major news wire services, including Davis Walsh of the International News Service, Alan J. Gould of the Associated Press, and Henry L. Farrell of United Press International. They took the idea to the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America and that organization became the voting body for Hall of Fame elections.
When several members of the St. Louis Cardinals planned to protest Jackie Robinson&#x27;s breaking of baseball&#x27;s color barrier, Frick threatened any players involved with suspension. While president of the NL, Frick served on DePauw University&#x27;s board of trustees. He was also president of the school&#x27;s alumni association, helping to create the DePauw Alumni Fund.

In , some baseball owners had become displeased with Happy Chandler&#x27;s service as commissioner and did not want to renew his contract. In September, the owners elected Frick to replace Chandler in a twelve-hour meeting that the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; called &quot;their all-time peak in dilly-dallying&quot;. The owners were able to quickly narrow the candidates down from five unnamed nominees to two frontrunners, Frick and Warren Giles. The owners deadlocked until Giles decided to remove his name from consideration. Giles, who had been president and general manager of the Cincinnati Reds, succeeded Frick as NL president.

==Baseball Commissioner==

Frick agreed to a seven-year contract worth $65,000 each year. When he assumed the office, Frick said that he was surprised to be elected even though he knew he was a candidate for the position. Just before his announcement, the major league team owners voted that the commissioner&#x27;s office should be located in a city with two major league teams. Frick decided to relocate the office from Cincinnati to New York.

In 1957, Frick addressed an organized campaign of ballot stuffing for that year&#x27;s All-Star Game in which most of the ballots originated from Cincinnati and had stacked the NL team with Reds. In response, Frick overruled the fan vote, removed two Reds from the starting lineup and appointed two replacements from other teams. He then took the vote away from the fans and kept it that way for the remainder of his tenure.

Frick presided over the expansion of the American and National Leagues from eight to ten teams. Faced with a Congress threatening to revoke baseball&#x27;s antitrust exemption, Frick had initially favored the development of a third major league within organized baseball, but relented when the established league owners objected and pursued their own expansion plans. Following expansion, the regular season was extended to 162 games from 154 in order to maintain a balanced schedule.

Inaction was sometimes cited by Frick&#x27;s critics as one of his weaknesses. Writers often derided Frick for his hands-off approach to baseball matters. Writer Jerome Holtzman described Frick&#x27;s term as commissioner by saying that he &quot;sailed a smooth course and seldom descended from his throne. When asked why he absented himself from the many battles below, he often said, &#x27;It&#x27;s a league matter.&#x27;... In retrospect, he understood his role. He was a caretaker, not a czar.&quot; Frick&#x27;s critics also accused him of favoring the NL in his rulings, such as how the 1960s expansion teams would be stocked.

===The &quot;Asterisk&quot;===
Frick&#x27;s most highly criticized decision as commissioner was to request baseball record-keepers to list the single-season home run records of Babe Ruth and Roger Maris separately in , based on the length of the season played. Frick called a press conference to issue a ruling that a player must hit more than 60 home runs in his first 154 games in order to be considered the record holder, giving birth to a misunderstanding that an asterisk was placed next to Maris&#x27; record when Maris did so in a newly expanded 162-game season. Frick indeed called for some &quot;distinctive mark&quot; next to it in the &quot;record books&quot;—the asterisk as a designation was immediately suggested by New York &quot;Daily News&quot; sportswriter Dick Young—but MLB actually had no direct control over any record books until many years later. It all was merely a suggestion on Frick&#x27;s part; while he and Ruth had been friends, enough for Frick to have been at Ruth&#x27;s deathbed, he lacked any authority as baseball Commissioner to make any of it so. Within a few years, the controversy died down and all prominent baseball record keepers listed Maris as the single-season record holder.

===The Strike Zone Change===
Early in the 1960s, the individual achievements of the batter impressively ruled. Highlighted in all of this was, undoubtedly, Roger Maris&#x27; aforementioned shattering of Babe Ruth&#x27;s single-season home run record. Alarmed by such increased home run numbers across the Majors, Frick convinced the owners to agree to having the strike zone widened before the 1963 season. The change led to a significant decrease in batting averages and scoring. While it consequently resulted in a remarkable era for the decade&#x27;s top pitchers, attendance stagnated. The trend reached its peak in 1968 when American League teams batted a collective .230. 
A year later, the strike zone was corrected back to its previous dimensions.

===Retirement===
In 1960, Frick said that he would probably retire when his contract expired in 1965. He said that his remaining goals for his term as commissioner were to complete the expansion process and to convince Congress to allow each baseball league to set its own television policies.

He maintained involvement with the Baseball Hall of Fame, serving as chairman of the board in 1966 and serving on the Veterans Committee from 1966 to 1969. Frick himself was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in . He was said to have chastised Hall of Fame voters at a meeting of the Baseball Writers&#x27; Association of America after they elected no major league candidates in the 1971 Hall of Fame balloting.

==Legacy==
The Baseball Hall of Fame created the Ford C. Frick Award in , and presents the award annually to a baseball broadcaster for major contributions to the game. Frick was posthumously inducted into the DePauw University Athletic Hall of Fame.

In the 2001 made-for-television film, &quot;61*&quot;, Frick was portrayed by actor Donald Moffat.

==Personal life==
Frick married Eleanor Cowing in 1916. His son Fred attended Fordham Preparatory School with future baseball executive Buzzie Bavasi. Bavasi was planning to attend law school, but Frick introduced him to Larry MacPhail of the Brooklyn Dodgers and Bavasi was given a job in minor league baseball, where he began to work his way up the organization.

Near the end of Frick&#x27;s term as commissioner, he purchased a second home in Broadmoor, Colorado, though he maintained his primary residence in New York.

Frick died on April 8, 1978, at age 83, at a hospital in Bronxville, New York. He had suffered a series of strokes in his later years. Upon his death, commissioner Bowie Kuhn said Frick &quot;brought the game integrity, dedication and a happy tranquility far removed from the turbulence of today.&quot; He is interred in Christ Church Columbarium in Bronxville.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3077090" start="0" end="22" title="Ford Frick" label="Ford Christopher Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q650483" start="75" end="87" title="sportswriter" label="sportswriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="175" end="192" title="New York Journal-American" label="New York American"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="246" end="261" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051088" start="334" end="371" title="Commissioner of Baseball" label="commissioner of Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="472" end="493" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404596" start="857" end="876" title="Ford C. Frick Award" label="Ford C. Frick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975584" start="962" end="977" title="Wawaka, Indiana" label="Wawaka, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455464" start="1006" end="1024" title="Rome City, Indiana" label="Rome City, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048912" start="1045" end="1075" title="International Business College (Fort Wayne, Indiana)" label="International Business College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179599" start="1162" end="1179" title="DePauw University" label="DePauw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378723" start="1298" end="1311" title="Phi Kappa Psi" label="Phi Kappa Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778949" start="1375" end="1385" title="Walsenburg, Colorado" label="Walsenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="1441" end="1457" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532293" start="1480" end="1508" title="General William J. Palmer High School" label="Colorado Springs High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111261" start="1516" end="1532" title="Colorado College" label="Colorado College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736011" start="1562" end="1573" title="The Gazette (Colorado Springs)" label="The Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="1636" end="1650" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1674" end="1685" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883624" start="1747" end="1766" title="Rocky Mountain News" label="Rocky Mountain News"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="2033" end="2049" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="2458" end="2475" title="New York Journal-American" label="New York American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564763" start="2524" end="2527" title="WOR (AM)" label="WOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032684" start="2706" end="2716" title="Dizzy Dean" label="Dizzy Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564039" start="2932" end="2950" title="1937 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1937 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="3217" end="3236" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157607" start="3266" end="3278" title="Daily Worker" label="Daily Worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="3738" end="3779" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025016" start="3783" end="3804" title="Cooperstown, New York" label="Cooperstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3889" end="3900" title="Davis Walsh" label="Davis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153288" start="3908" end="3934" title="International News Service" label="International News Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706945" start="3936" end="3949" title="Alan J. Gould" label="Alan J. Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="3957" end="3973" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3979" end="3995" title="Henry L. Farrell" label="Henry L. Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="3999" end="4025" title="United Press International" label="United Press International"/>
<link wikidata="Q843862" start="4053" end="4098" title="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Baseball Writers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="4200" end="4219" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="4239" end="4254" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="4290" end="4303" title="Baseball color line" label="color barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q573029" start="4606" end="4620" title="Happy Chandler" label="Happy Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="4791" end="4806" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566389" start="4988" end="5000" title="Warren Giles" label="Warren Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="5140" end="5155" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="5688" end="5703" title="ballot stuffing" label="ballot stuffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569020" start="5725" end="5738" title="1957 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="5784" end="5794" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="5828" end="5832" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128779" start="6290" end="6308" title="Continental League" label="third major league"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182752" start="6712" end="6727" title="Jerome Holtzman" label="Jerome Holtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="7362" end="7371" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="7376" end="7387" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q190212" start="7653" end="7661" title="asterisk" label="asterisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="7915" end="7946" title="New York Daily News" label="New York &amp;quot;Daily News&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273574" start="7960" end="7970" title="Dick Young (sportswriter)" label="Dick Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866486" start="9872" end="9899" title="1971 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="1971 Hall of Fame balloting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404596" start="9951" end="9970" title="Ford C. Frick Award" label="Ford C. Frick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="10166" end="10190" title="Television film" label="made-for-television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q248088" start="10198" end="10201" title="61*" label="61*"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240192" start="10238" end="10251" title="Donald Moffat" label="Donald Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468069" start="10332" end="10358" title="Fordham Preparatory School" label="Fordham Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003586" start="10390" end="10403" title="Buzzie Bavasi" label="Buzzie Bavasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q383433" start="10475" end="10489" title="Larry MacPhail" label="Larry MacPhail"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="10497" end="10513" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205350" start="10701" end="10720" title="Broadmoor, Colorado" label="Broadmoor, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q928168" start="10836" end="10856" title="Bronxville, New York" label="Bronxville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740420" start="10943" end="10953" title="Bowie Kuhn" label="Bowie Kuhn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303811" wikidata="Q3624293" url="?curid=303811" title="George Mooring">
<text>Sir Arthur George Rixson Mooring (23 November 1908 – 13 January 1969) was a British colonial civil servant and British Resident to Zanzibar from 1959 to 1964.

==Life==
George Mooring was born in Dunstable, Bedfordshire on 23 November 1908, the son of the editor of the &quot;Bedford Gazette&quot;. He was educated at Bedford Modern School and Queens&#x27; College, Cambridge where he read Modern Languages and as a dedicated rowing man, he coached the Queens&#x27; boat.

He entered the Colonial Service in 1931 and was sent to Nigeria where he served in every Province in the North. He joined the Royal West African Frontier Force, and at the outbreak of war in 1939 was called up and served with them for four years in the Arakan, Burma, fighting like commandos to keep the Japanese away from India. He was mentioned in dispatches and gained the rank of lieutenant colonel. Upon demobilisation he returned to Nigeria, being posted to the Finance Department of the Secretariat in Lagos and after 2 years to Ibadan, where he rose to become Minister of Finance of the Western Region. When the Deputy Governor had to return to the United Kingdom due to sudden illness, Mooring took his place and found himself Acting Governor for the three months interim between Western Governors. He was knighted in 1958.

In 1959 he became the British Resident Zanzibar for 5 years, and was awarded the KCMG in 1960. Independence having been urged by the British government, against his advice, this was granted in 1963 and his tour of duty was cut by a year. The Sultan of Zanzibar awarded him the Brilliant Star of Zanzibar, First Class. A month later revolution broke out, causing a great many deaths and other miseries, and Mooring was called upon by the British Government to help the Sultan and his enormous entourage to settle in England.

During the next 5 years he undertook Economic and Boundary Commission&#x27;s to the Gilbert &amp; Ellice Islands, Sierra Leone and Antigua. He became Chairman of the Civil Service Commission. He had married Patricia Josephine Downman (née Hare-Duke) in 1947 and they had a son, William, born in 1949 and a daughter, Julia, born in 1951. They settled in Earl Soham in Suffolk where Mooring sat on a number of local committees, delighted in his large garden, and enjoyed some ocean-going sailing. He died of cancer in 1969.

Mooring&#x27;s papers are held at the Bodleian Library.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3624293" start="0" end="32" title="George Mooring" label="Sir Arthur George Rixson Mooring"/>
<link wikidata="Q572927" start="111" end="127" title="British Resident" label="British Resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="131" end="139" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q919778" start="196" end="205" title="Dunstable" label="Dunstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="207" end="219" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879170" start="318" end="339" title="Bedford Modern School" label="Bedford Modern School"/>
<link wikidata="Q765642" start="344" end="375" title="Queens&amp;#x27; College, Cambridge" label="Queens&amp;#x27; College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375006" start="599" end="632" title="Royal West African Frontier Force" label="Royal West African Frontier Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q233838" start="726" end="732" title="Rakhine State" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809982" start="810" end="833" title="mentioned in dispatches" label="mentioned in dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="857" end="875" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="1288" end="1296" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q572927" start="1337" end="1345" title="Resident (title)" label="Resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="1346" end="1354" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="1440" end="1458" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475058" start="1549" end="1567" title="Sultan of Zanzibar" label="Sultan of Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="1916" end="1944" title="Gilbert &amp;amp; Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert &amp;amp; Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="1946" end="1958" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="1963" end="1970" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124688" start="1998" end="2022" title="Civil Service Commission" label="Civil Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="2393" end="2409" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303815" wikidata="Q7085085" url="?curid=303815" title="Old State House (Little Rock, Arkansas)">
<text>The Old State House, formerly called the Arkansas State House, is the oldest surviving state capitol building west of the Mississippi River. It was the capitol building of Arkansas from 1842 to 1912, when the new Arkansas State Capitol was completed. 

It was the site of the secession convention, as well as the fourth constitutional convention when delegates agreed to ensure voting rights for freedmen and establish public education.

==History==
===Construction===
Commissioned by Governor John Pope, the State House was constructed between 1833 and 1842. Architect Gideon Shryock, who previously designed the Kentucky State Capitol in Frankfort, chose a Greek Revival style for the building. The original design was too expensive for the territory, so Shryock&#x27;s assistant George Weigart changed the plans and oversaw construction. The Arkansas General Assembly moved into the building while construction was ongoing. On December 4, 1837, in the first session of the General Assembly, Speaker John Wilson killed Representative Joseph J. Anthony in a knife fight on the floor of the state House of Representatives.

===American Civil War===

Unionists prevailed at an initial, March 1861, secession convention after the 1860 election of Abraham Lincoln. However, after South Carolina fired on Fort Sumter and Lincoln called up troops, on the morning of May 6, 1861, a second secession convention assembled at the State House. After intense debate, an ordinance of secession passed with five opposing votes. Four opposing delegates relented after unanimity was urged. Isaac Murphy, a delegate from Madison County, held out despite enormous pressure. After the Union victory at the Battle of Bayou Fourche in September 1863, Federal troops occupied the building for the rest of the war.

===Reconstruction Era===

After the American Civil War ended, the State House was the site of another constitutional convention to determine whether Arkansas would accept the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, permit suffrage for black males over 21, and create public schools for both black and white children. After contentious debate, the proposals were approved in a new constitution that emerged in February 1868, and was ratified in March. Also during Reconstruction, the State House was an object of contention in the so-called Brooks–Baxter War, and was fortified during that struggle. The cannon &quot;Lady Baxter&quot; still remains on the State House grounds. As part of the Arkansas exhibit for the 1876 Philadelphia Centennial Exposition, a three-tiered fountain sat in front of the States exhibit building. The following year in 1877 the fountain was placed on the state house grounds. A recast of the original fountain now sits in its place. In 1885, an iron statue of the Three Graces, representing Law, Justice and Mercy, was placed atop of the State House, however it was removed in 1928.

===Changing use===

The building served as a state capitol until the new capitol building was constructed in 1912. For a time it was used as a medical school. Afterwards, it served as an Arkansas war memorial and was used as an office building for federal and state agencies, as well as a meeting place for patriotic organizations. In 1947 the General Assembly approved acts designating the State House as a museum. The front entrance was the site of President Bill Clinton&#x27;s presidential campaign announcement on October 3, 1991, and the site of his election night celebrations in both of his campaigns for the presidency on November 3, 1992, and November 5, 1996, respectively. The building underwent major renovation in 1996, and it was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1997. The building continues to serve as a museum with exhibits related to Arkansas history and culture. Permanent collections include battle flags, the inaugural gowns of the First Ladies of Arkansas, art pottery, and African-American quilts. Special exhibits are staged periodically as well.

==Interior==
===Floor plans===
==See also==
* David O. Dodd Memorial
* List of National Historic Landmarks in Arkansas
* List of the oldest buildings in Arkansas
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Little Rock, Arkansas

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* 
* Friends of Old State House
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7085085" start="4" end="19" title="Old State House (Little Rock, Arkansas)" label="Old State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085085" start="41" end="61" title="Old State House (Little Rock, Arkansas)" label="Arkansas State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="122" end="139" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q673076" start="213" end="235" title="Arkansas State Capitol" label="Arkansas State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="276" end="285" title="Secession in the United States" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q994779" start="351" end="359" title="Delegate (American politics)" label="delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="396" end="404" title="Freedman" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q364769" start="494" end="503" title="John Pope (Kentucky politician)" label="John Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559661" start="570" end="584" title="Gideon Shryock" label="Gideon Shryock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085082" start="614" end="636" title="Old State Capitol (Kentucky)" label="Kentucky State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28603" start="640" end="649" title="Frankfort, Kentucky" label="Frankfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="659" end="672" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="743" end="752" title="Arkansas Territory" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747168" start="845" end="870" title="Arkansas General Assembly" label="Arkansas General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q100874153" start="1002" end="1013" title="John Wilson (Arkansas politician)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q116251888" start="1036" end="1053" title="Joseph J. Anthony" label="Joseph J. Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="1197" end="1206" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="1245" end="1260" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566712" start="1277" end="1291" title="South Carolina in the American Civil War" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737517" start="1301" end="1312" title="Fort Sumter" label="Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042941" start="1459" end="1481" title="ordinance of secession" label="ordinance of secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q879985" start="1575" end="1587" title="Isaac Murphy" label="Isaac Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61484" start="1605" end="1619" title="Madison County, Arkansas" label="Madison County"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="1667" end="1672" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233920" start="1688" end="1711" title="Battle of Bayou Fourche" label="Battle of Bayou Fourche"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1731" end="1738" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1830" end="1848" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="1969" end="2014" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="2264" end="2278" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975141" start="2341" end="2358" title="Brooks–Baxter War" label="Brooks–Baxter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q984109" start="2517" end="2545" title="1876 Philadelphia Centennial" label="1876 Philadelphia Centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q673076" start="2983" end="3003" title="Arkansas State Capitol" label="new capitol building"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="3365" end="3374" title="List of Presidents of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="3375" end="3387" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="3672" end="3698" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q602300" start="3837" end="3848" title="War flag" label="battle flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q203184" start="3878" end="3890" title="First Ladies" label="First Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3921" end="3937" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022305" start="4043" end="4065" title="David O. Dodd Memorial" label="David O. Dodd Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q737955" start="4068" end="4115" title="List of National Historic Landmarks in Arkansas" label="List of National Historic Landmarks in Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q115773845" start="4118" end="4158" title="List of the oldest buildings in Arkansas" label="List of the oldest buildings in Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063001" start="4161" end="4231" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Little Rock, Arkansas" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Little Rock, Arkansas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303822" wikidata="Q670599" url="?curid=303822" title="John Lambert (martyr)">
<text>John Lambert (died 1538) was an English Protestant martyr burnt to death on 22 November 1538 at Smithfield, London.

==Life==
Lambert was born John Nicholson in Norwich and educated at Queens&#x27; College, Cambridge, where he became a friend and a colleague of Thomas Cromwell. He was made a fellow there on the nomination of Catherine of Aragon. After theological disputes he changed his name and went to Antwerp, where he served as priest to the English factory. Here he became friends with John Frith and William Tyndale, and became a member of the group of humanist theologians that met at the White Horse Tavern—a group that included Edward Fox and Robert Barnes, and the arch-conservative Stephen Gardiner.

Upon his return in 1531, Lambert came under the scrutiny of Archbishop William Warham, but Warham died in 1532. Lambert then earned his living teaching Greek and Latin near the Stock markets. In 1536 he was accused of heresy by the Duke of Norfolk, but escaped until 1538, when he was put on trial for denying the real presence of Christ in the bread and wine of the Eucharist, the doctrine of transubstantiation. Archbishop Thomas Cranmer condemned these views, even though he was later to adopt them himself.

Lambert was eventually burned at the stake, whilst Thomas Cromwell purportedly watched and cried for the duration. Lambert is well known for his words spoken while the flames leapt from his raised hands: &quot;None but Christ, none but Christ!&quot;

==Portrayals==
Ben Price portrayed Lambert in season 3 of Showtime&#x27;s television show &quot;The Tudors&quot;. Tim Scragg played Lambert in Wolf Hall: The Mirror and the Light.

==See also==
*&quot;Foxe&#x27;s Book of Martyrs&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*Henry VIII - A Martyr (includes details on Lambert&#x27;s life, heresy and death)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q670599" start="0" end="12" title="John Lambert (martyr)" label="John Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="40" end="50" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="51" end="57" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182018" start="96" end="114" title="Smithfield, London" label="Smithfield, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="161" end="168" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q765642" start="185" end="216" title="Queens&amp;#x27; College, Cambridge" label="Queens&amp;#x27; College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="262" end="277" title="Thomas Cromwell" label="Thomas Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="293" end="299" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="327" end="346" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="407" end="414" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q427129" start="494" end="504" title="John Frith (martyr)" label="John Frith"/>
<link wikidata="Q219639" start="509" end="524" title="William Tyndale" label="William Tyndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990356" start="599" end="617" title="White Horse Tavern, Cambridge" label="White Horse Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788760" start="640" end="650" title="Edward Foxe" label="Edward Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237075" start="655" end="668" title="Robert Barnes (martyr)" label="Robert Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q719423" start="696" end="712" title="Stephen Gardiner" label="Stephen Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q744845" start="786" end="800" title="William Warham" label="William Warham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="867" end="872" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="877" end="882" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="933" end="939" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503816" start="947" end="962" title="Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1046" end="1052" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="1082" end="1091" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214500" start="1109" end="1127" title="transubstantiation" label="transubstantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q199894" start="1140" end="1154" title="Thomas Cranmer" label="Thomas Cranmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="1278" end="1293" title="Thomas Cromwell" label="Thomas Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886309" start="1493" end="1502" title="Ben Price" label="Ben Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="1536" end="1551" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q326731" start="1574" end="1584" title="The Tudors" label="The Tudors"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1621" end="1656" title="Wolf Hall: The Mirror and the Light" label="Wolf Hall: The Mirror and the Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740670" start="1679" end="1706" title="Foxe&amp;#x27;s Book of Martyrs" label="Foxe&amp;#x27;s Book of Martyrs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303829" wikidata="Q595516" url="?curid=303829" title="Rhyl F.C.">
<text>Rhyl Football Club () was a Welsh football club based in Rhyl, a seaside resort town located in Denbighshire. It withdrew from footballing activities in April 2020 and had its entire footballing record for the 2019–20 season expunged. It was formally dissolved 18 months later in October 2021.

During this period of inactivity a phoenix club now known as C.P.D. Y Rhyl 1879 was incorporated at Companies House by three of the sitting Rhyl FC directors of the time, including the chairman and managing director, on 6 May 2020 They play in the Ardal NW.

Football Association of Wales regulations do not allow clubs to liquidate and retain league status so the new Rhyl Football Club Limited Company had to re–brand as Clwb Pel–droed y Rhyl 1879 and restart life at the lowest rung in recreational football.

The founding date of 1879 used in the club name is inaccurate. The origins of the club can be dated much earlier and co–incide with the advent of the railway in the town.

Despite the club badge stating 1879, primary sources show the club was actually founded on 25 September 1878 during a meeting at Rhyl Town Hall. The team played its home matches at Belle Vue stadium, which can accommodate 3,000 spectators.

==History==
Rhyl Football Club was originally formed on 25 September 1878, following a meeting held at Rhyl Town Hall. At a follow-up meeting a week later, it was decided that the club would play at a field adjacent to the Winter Gardens, and that the club colours would be all black with a white skull and crossbones on the chest. The first club captain was W. C. Langley. The club played in the 1878 Welsh Cup, but lost 1–0 in the First Round against Friars School, Bangor. There were several clubs in Rhyl at the time, one of these being Rhyl Grosvenor FC, who played a floodlit match against Rhyl FC in February 1879. Rhyl Grosvenor amalgamated with Rhyl FC in September 1879, prior to the start of the 1879–80 season.

Rhyl FC became founder members of the Welsh League, formed in 1890, but withdrew the following year. By that point, the club colours were red and black. They reformed as Rhyl Athletic in November 1892 and became founder members of the North Wales Coast League, winning the title in 1894–95. Rhyl Amateur joined forces with Rhyl Town in May 1898 and switched to the Anglo-Welsh competition known as The Combination. Despite financial crises, they remained in membership until the league disbanded at the end of the 1910–11 season. Under the name of Rhyl United, they rejoined the North Wales Coast League, but following the First World War, they moved to the North Wales Alliance, before becoming founder members of the Welsh National League (North) in 1921. Rhyl won the title in 1925–26 and became a limited company in 1928 as Rhyl Athletic. In 1929, Rhyl applied to join the Football League but York City became the only non-league team elected to the Third Division North. With North Wales football in turmoil in the early 1930s, Rhyl sought to realise their ambitions elsewhere. Another unsuccessful application to the Football League was made in 1932 before joining the Birmingham and District League. Seeking relief from the onerous travelling to the Birmingham area, Rhyl Athletic successfully applied to join the Cheshire County League in 1936, at the same time as changing their name back to Rhyl, and began one of the most successful chapters in the club&#x27;s history.

In a post-war purple patch, Rhyl won the league title twice – in 1947–48 and 1950–51 – and the Welsh Cup twice in succession. In 1952, they beat Merthyr Tydfil 4–3 and became the first non-league side in the modern era to retain the trophy, by defeating Chester City 2–1 the following season. Rhyl had been losing finalists to Cardiff City in 1930 and Crewe Alexandra in 1937, but did not feature in the final again until 1993, when they lost 5–0 to Cardiff City. Between 1948 and 1972 Rhyl appeared regularly in the first round proper of the FA Cup. In 1957 Rhyl reached the fourth round proper, beating Notts County 3–1 away before losing 3–0 away to Bristol City; in 1971 they eliminated Hartlepool United and Barnsley before elimination by compatriots Swansea City.

In the Cheshire County League, success eluded them for several years before they won the title in 1972. On the dissolution of the Cheshire County League in 1982, Rhyl became members of the North West Counties League, winning promotion to the Northern Premier League in their first season. In 1992, they reluctantly decided to join the League of Wales, but because their application was received too late, they were placed instead in the Cymru Alliance, the second level of the pyramid system. In 1993–94, they won the title by six points and gained promotion to the League of Wales.

Over the years, the club have produced players of the highest calibre more than once, including Graham Williams (West Bromwich Albion), Barry Horne (Everton), Andy Jones (Charlton Athletic), Andy Holden (Oldham Athletic) and most recently Lee Trundle (Bristol City) after seeing his career revitalised in his short spell with Rhyl in 2000–01. For many years the club struggled in the top flight of Welsh football, but after being taken over by a consortium led by former player Peter Parry, a significant improvement in results saw Rhyl become one of the Welsh Premier League&#x27;s leading clubs.

In season 2003–04, the club won the Welsh Premier League, qualifying for the Champions League qualification rounds (though they lost 7–1 on aggregate, to Skonto Riga of Latvia in the first qualifying round), and were winners of the League Cup and Welsh Cup, although they lost the final of the FAW Premier Cup 4–1 to Wrexham. Rhyl completed a famous quadruple by rounding off the season with a 6–0 win against Halkyn United in the Final of the North Wales Coast Challenge Cup. However, these feats were later tainted by the revelation that leading scorer Andy Moran had been taking the banned stimulant Nandrolone throughout the season. Rhyl won many games with late goals, leading to widespread rumours that other players were also taking the drug. Moran was stripped of his Golden Boot as a result, although the results were allowed to stand.

Rhyl could not reproduce their quadruple heroics in 2004–05. The club finished runners-up in the Welsh Premier League to TNS and also fell to the same team in both the Welsh Cup semi-final and Welsh Premier Cup quarter-final. A defeat to Carmarthen Town in the Final of the Welsh League Cup compounded a trophyless season for The Whites, although European qualification was gained by their runner-up finish in the Welsh Premier League.

In 2005–06, Rhyl recorded their first-ever win in European competition when they defeated Lithuanian side FK Atlantas 2–1 in the home leg of the first qualifying round of the UEFA Cup. Rhyl lost the away leg 3–2, but progressed on the away goals rule, the first Welsh team to make the second qualifying round since Barry Town in 1996–97. They lost in the second round against Norwegian club Viking F.K., 3–1 on aggregate.

The Lilywhites claimed more silverware in the 2005–06 domestic season when they lifted the Welsh Cup, beating Bangor City 2–0 at the Racecourse Ground, and the North Wales Challenge Cup after a 2–1 win over Denbigh Town in the Final. A third-placed finish in the Welsh Premier League meant Rhyl would compete for a third year in a row in European Club competitions.

Rhyl&#x27;s 2006–07 European adventure in the UEFA Cup was ended at the first round with a 2–1 aggregate defeat by Lithuanian side FK Sūduva of Marijampole.

Back in the UEFA Cup in 2007–08, Rhyl achieved a memorable 3–1 home win over FC Haka only to be eliminated on away goals after a 2–0 defeat in the second leg in Finland.

The club participated in the 2008 Intertoto Cup but were defeated in the first round 9–3 on aggregate by Bohemians of Ireland.

In 2009 Rhyl won the Welsh Premier League for the second time comfortably finishing ahead of nearest challengers Llanelli, beating many club records including most wins in a season and most successive league wins. Rhyl took part in the Champions League starting in the second qualifying round against Partizan of Serbia. However, their efforts proved futile as Rhyl fell to Partizan with an aggregate score of 12–0, including an 8–0 rout at the Stadion Partizana.

On 30 July 2009 Rhyl made an announcement that Allan Bickerstaff had left the club and defender Greg Strong was to become player/manager.

On 17 May 2010, it was announced that Rhyl&#x27;s Welsh Premier licence had been revoked. Their appeal was unsuccessful and they were relegated to the Cymru Alliance. The club finished Cymru Alliance runners-up to gap Connah&#x27;s Quay in 2010–11 and 2011–12. GAP secured promotion to the Welsh Premier League in 2012, having failed to obtain a domestic licence in 2011, leaving Rhyl as potential favourites for the title in 2012–13. From the terraces, Mike Jones was announced as the club&#x27;s new general manager.

Rhyl started the 2012–13 season magnificently, winning their first 8 games. On 6 May 2013, having won the league title on 20 April, Rhyl beat Cefn Druids 2–0, thereby becoming the first club to complete a Cymru Alliance season without a defeat. In winning 24 matches and drawing 6, Rhyl scored 100 goals and secured promotion back to the Welsh Premier League after an absence of three years.

On 20 August 2013, Rhyl announced a three-year sponsorship deal with Corbett Sports that would see the Belle Vue ground renamed as the Corbett Sports Stadium.

In May 2015, it was announced that manager Greg Strong had left the club by &quot;mutual consent&quot;. Former player Gareth Owen was then appointed as manager, with Mark Roberts as his assistant, but a disastrous run of form during which the club won only three matches in all competitions meant Owen and Roberts departed in February 2016. They were replaced by 24-year-old academy director Niall McGuinness, whose father Laurie, a former Rhyl coach, was appointed as assistant manager.

On 21 April 2020, the club announced it was going to cease trading and be formally wound up after failing to find a £175,000 investment that would have saved the club. The club&#x27;s directors cited the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as a reason for its demise, with no income to the club following the postponement of all football nationally. The former club&#x27;s league position under manager Eddie Maurice Jones at the time was at its lowest for the past 30 years.

In May 2020 two members of staff, together with members of the Rhyl Fan Association (RFA), formed a phoenix club with the aim of continuing the historical legacy and tradition of the old club. Working in liaison with the RFA, a ballot was held to decide a name for the new entity, which resulted in CPD Y Rhyl 1879 being formally chosen. A few days later, the new club directors secured the use of the old club&#x27;s Belle Vue ground for the 2020–21 season, with an exclusive option to buy the ground in its entirety for the new club.

==Rivalries==
Rhyl shared a fierce rivalry with north Wales coast neighbours Bangor City. Games between the two clubs often drew crowds of over 1,000 and a few have managed to reach over 1,500 spectators, a great rarity in the Welsh Premier League. The police presence was often quite large when the two sides met as away fans travelled in their hundreds. On rare occasions, fighting broke out between the rival fans. In more recent years Rhyl also shared an initially friendlier, but increasingly hot tempered, derby match with close local neighbours Prestatyn Town, mainly due to the two towns being only apart.

==First team honours==

===League===
*Welsh Premier League:
**Winners (2): 2003–04, 2008–09
**Runners-up (2): 2004–05, 2006–07
*Cymru Alliance:
**Winners(2): 1993–94, 2012–13
**Runners-up (2): 2010–11, 2011–12
*Cheshire County League:
**Winners (3): 1947–48, 1950–51, 1971–72
**Runners-up (4): 1948–49, 1949–50, 1951–52, 1955–56
*Cheshire County League Division Two:
**Runners-up (1): 1981–82
*North West Counties League:
**Runners-up (1): 1982–83
*Border Counties Floodlit League:
**Runners-up (1): 1972–73

===Cup===
*Welsh Cup:
**Winners (4): 1951–52, 1952–53, 2003–04, 2005–06
**Runners-up (4): 1926–27, 1929–30, 1936–37, 1992–93
*Welsh League Cup:
**Winners (2): 2002–03, 2003–04
**Runners-up (4): 2004–05, 2006–07, 2007–08, 2009–10
*FAW Premier Cup:
**Runners-up (1): 2003–04
*Cymru Alliance Cup:
** Winners (2): 1992–93, 2011–12
** Runners-up (1): 1993–94
*North Wales FA Challenge Cup:
** Winners (14): 1927–28, 1929–30, 1933–34, 1934–35, 1938–39, 1947–48, 1949–50, 1950–51, 1951–52, 1953–54, 1954–55, 1969–70, 2003–04, 2005–06
*Welsh Amateur Cup:
** Winners (1): 1972–73
*Cheshire League Challenge Cup:
** Winners (3): 1948–49, 1951–52, 1970–71
** Runners-up (2): 1955–56, 1957–58 
*Northern Premier League President&#x27;s Cup:
** Winners (1): 1984–85

==European results==
;Notes
*1R: First round
*1Q: First qualifying round
*2Q: Second qualifying round

==Records==
*Biggest Welsh Premier win: 7–0 v Llanelli, 2000
*Biggest Welsh Premier away win: 7–1 v Cwmbran Town, 2006
*Biggest Welsh Premier defeat: 0–10 at The New Saints, 28 August 2016
*Best FA Cup performance: Third round (1970–71)
*Best FA Trophy performance: Second round (1987–88)

==Managers==

* Frank Barson (1932–1935)
* John Dougary (1951–1954)
* Ernie Jones (1954–1956)
* T. G. Jones (1968)
* Ray Jones (1981–1986)
* John Hulse (2002–2008)
* Allan Bickerstaff (2008–2009)
* Greg Strong (2009–2015)
* Gareth Owen (2015–2016)
* Niall McGuinness (2016–2017)
* Mark Connolly (2017–2018)
* Matthew Jones (2018)
* Gareth Wilson (2018)
* Eddie Maurice Jones (2018–2020)
==References==
==External links==
*Official website
*Unofficial Fans Website
*Rhyl-FC Fans Forum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q595516" start="0" end="18" title="Rhyl F.C." label="Rhyl Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="28" end="33" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="34" end="42" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020203" start="57" end="61" title="Rhyl" label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q650682" start="96" end="108" title="Denbighshire" label="Denbighshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187030" start="330" end="342" title="Phoenix club (sports)" label="phoenix club"/>
<link wikidata="Q108570356" start="356" end="374" title="C.P.D. Y Rhyl 1879" label="C.P.D. Y Rhyl 1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073342" start="543" end="551" title="Ardal Leagues" label="Ardal NW"/>
<link wikidata="Q29481839" start="1109" end="1123" title="Rhyl Town Hall" label="Rhyl Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q815868" start="1161" end="1170" title="Belle Vue, Rhyl" label="Belle Vue"/>
<link wikidata="Q29481839" start="1324" end="1338" title="Rhyl Town Hall" label="Rhyl Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1674" end="1695" title="Friars School, Bangor#Welsh Cup" label="Friars School, Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999652" start="1983" end="1995" title="Welsh Senior League" label="Welsh League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057147" start="2180" end="2204" title="North Wales Coast League" label="North Wales Coast League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229457" start="2343" end="2358" title="The Combination" label="The Combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2568" end="2583" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q109285393" start="2664" end="2693" title="Welsh National League (North)" label="Welsh National League (North)"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="2822" end="2837" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q48954" start="2842" end="2851" title="York City F.C." label="York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634803" start="3120" end="3150" title="West Midlands (Regional) League" label="Birmingham and District League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092950" start="3266" end="3288" title="Cheshire County League" label="Cheshire County League"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="3522" end="3531" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519427" start="3572" end="3586" title="Merthyr Tydfil F.C." label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070732" start="3681" end="3693" title="Chester City F.C." label="Chester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="3754" end="3766" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19587" start="3779" end="3794" title="Crewe Alexandra F.C." label="Crewe Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="3970" end="3976" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315779" start="3981" end="3985" title="1956–57 FA Cup" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="4032" end="4044" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q19456" start="4080" end="4092" title="Bristol City F.C." label="Bristol City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316424" start="4097" end="4101" title="1970–71 FA Cup" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592" start="4118" end="4135" title="Hartlepool United F.C." label="Hartlepool United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19442" start="4140" end="4148" title="Barnsley F.C." label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="4183" end="4195" title="Swansea City F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092950" start="4205" end="4227" title="Cheshire County League" label="Cheshire County League"/>
<link wikidata="Q62222" start="4387" end="4413" title="North West Counties Football League" label="North West Counties League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18502" start="4440" end="4463" title="Northern Premier League" label="Northern Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="4533" end="4548" title="League of Wales" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557436" start="4635" end="4649" title="Cymru Alliance" label="Cymru Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885748" start="4918" end="4929" title="Barry Horne (footballer)" label="Barry Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760823" start="4973" end="4984" title="Andy Holden (footballer)" label="Andy Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398147" start="5021" end="5032" title="Lee Trundle" label="Lee Trundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="5417" end="5437" title="League of Wales" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q223823" start="5535" end="5546" title="Skonto FC" label="Skonto Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="5550" end="5556" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="5628" end="5637" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119083" start="5675" end="5690" title="FAW Premier Cup" label="FAW Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="5698" end="5705" title="Wrexham A.F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642525" start="5791" end="5804" title="Halkyn United F.C." label="Halkyn United"/>
<link wikidata="Q856468" start="6465" end="6480" title="Carmarthen Town A.F.C." label="Carmarthen Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="6754" end="6763" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q756236" start="6770" end="6781" title="FK Atlantas" label="FK Atlantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="6839" end="6847" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q809114" start="6979" end="6989" title="Barry Town United F.C." label="Barry Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="7040" end="7049" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q211177" start="7055" end="7066" title="Viking F.K." label="Viking F.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="7178" end="7187" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="7197" end="7208" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202579" start="7220" end="7237" title="Racecourse Ground" label="Racecourse Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256621" start="7294" end="7306" title="Denbigh Town F.C." label="Denbigh Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="7350" end="7370" title="League of Wales" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="7500" end="7508" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="7569" end="7578" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q757104" start="7585" end="7594" title="FK Sūduva" label="FK Sūduva"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="7624" end="7632" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q275138" start="7689" end="7696" title="FC Haka" label="FC Haka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="7773" end="7780" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q385054" start="7812" end="7830" title="2008 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2008 Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q212708" start="7888" end="7897" title="Bohemian F.C." label="Bohemians"/>
<link wikidata="Q188656" start="8212" end="8220" title="FK Partizan" label="Partizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="8224" end="8230" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123407" start="8356" end="8373" title="Stadion Partizana" label="Stadion Partizana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557436" start="8666" end="8680" title="Cymru Alliance" label="Cymru Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526049" start="8729" end="8751" title="Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay Nomads F.C." label="gap Connah&amp;#x27;s Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q87743866" start="10305" end="10322" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Wales" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108570356" start="10660" end="10672" title="C.P.D. Y Rhyl 1879" label="phoenix club"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="11174" end="11185" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="11324" end="11344" title="Welsh Premier League" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q253365" start="11649" end="11663" title="Prestatyn Town F.C." label="Prestatyn Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="11750" end="11770" title="Welsh Premier League" label="Welsh Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q512134" start="11796" end="11803" title="2008–09 Welsh Premier League" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557436" start="11840" end="11854" title="Cymru Alliance" label="Cymru Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092950" start="11923" end="11945" title="Cheshire County League" label="Cheshire County League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12042" end="12077" title="Cheshire County League Division Two" label="Cheshire County League Division Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q62222" start="12106" end="12132" title="North West Counties League" label="North West Counties League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12161" end="12192" title="Border Counties Floodlit League" label="Border Counties Floodlit League"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="12232" end="12241" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q647072" start="12347" end="12363" title="Welsh League Cup" label="Welsh League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119083" start="12451" end="12466" title="FAW Premier Cup" label="FAW Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18502" start="12904" end="12948" title="Northern Premier League President&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Northern Premier League President&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q291848" start="13124" end="13132" title="Llanelli Town A.F.C." label="Llanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146848" start="13178" end="13190" title="Cwmbran Town F.C." label="Cwmbran Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="13236" end="13250" title="The New Saints F.C." label="The New Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="13273" end="13279" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316424" start="13306" end="13313" title="1970–71 FA Cup" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="13321" end="13330" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838710" start="13358" end="13365" title="1987–88 FA Trophy" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386222" start="13384" end="13396" title="Frank Barson" label="Frank Barson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229851" start="13411" end="13423" title="John Dougary" label="John Dougary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394565" start="13438" end="13449" title="Ernie Jones (footballer, born 1920)" label="Ernie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438867" start="13464" end="13475" title="T. G. Jones" label="T. G. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297680" start="13485" end="13494" title="Ray Jones (footballer, born 1944)" label="Ray Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116284" start="13566" end="13577" title="Greg Strong" label="Greg Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522927" start="13592" end="13603" title="Gareth Owen (footballer, born 1971)" label="Gareth Owen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303830" wikidata="Q1700774" url="?curid=303830" title="John Lambert">
<text>John Lambert may refer to:

*John Lambert (martyr) (died 1538), English Protestant martyred during the reign of Henry VIII
*John Lambert (general) (1619–1684), Parliamentary general in the English Civil War
*John Lambert of Creg Clare (&quot;fl.&quot; c. 1645 – c. 1669), Irish soldier and Royalist
*Sir John Lambert, 1st Baronet (1666–1723), French-born English merchant
*John Lambert (politician) (1746–1823), U.S. senator from and Acting Governor of New Jersey
*John Lambert (British Army officer) (1772–1847), British Army general and cricketer
*John William Lambert (1860–1952), American automotive pioneer
*John Lambert (civil servant) (1815–1892), British civil servant
*John Lambert (composer) (1926–1995), British composer and teacher
*John Lambert (diplomat) (1921–2015), British ambassador
*John Laurence Lambert  (1936–2014), Australian educator and author
*John Lambert (naval historian) (1937–2016), naval illustrator and author
*Jack Lambert (American football) (John Harold Lambert, born 1952), American football player
*John Lambert (basketball) (born 1953), American basketball player

==See also==
*Jack Lambert (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1700774" start="0" end="12" title="John Lambert" label="John Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q670599" start="29" end="50" title="John Lambert (martyr)" label="John Lambert (martyr)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395992" start="124" end="146" title="John Lambert (general)" label="John Lambert (general)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243878" start="208" end="234" title="John Lambert of Creg Clare" label="John Lambert of Creg Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527875" start="300" end="329" title="Sir John Lambert, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Lambert, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q377562" start="373" end="398" title="John Lambert (politician)" label="John Lambert (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700775" start="465" end="500" title="John Lambert (British Army officer)" label="John Lambert (British Army officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146327" start="550" end="570" title="John William Lambert" label="John William Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q18671954" start="613" end="641" title="John Lambert (civil servant)" label="John Lambert (civil servant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485321" start="678" end="701" title="John Lambert (composer)" label="John Lambert (composer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737681" start="745" end="768" title="John Lambert (diplomat)" label="John Lambert (diplomat)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="802" end="824" title="John Laurence Lambert " label="John Laurence Lambert "/>
<link wikidata="Q6243873" start="870" end="900" title="John Lambert (naval historian)" label="John Lambert (naval historian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q941280" start="944" end="976" title="Jack Lambert (American football)" label="Jack Lambert (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809410" start="1037" end="1062" title="John Lambert (basketball)" label="John Lambert (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q359731" start="1118" end="1147" title="Jack Lambert (disambiguation)" label="Jack Lambert (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303832" wikidata="Q105656" url="?curid=303832" title="List of municipalities in Teruel">
<text>This is a list of the municipalities in the province of Teruel in the autonomous community of Aragon, Spain. There are 236 municipalities in the province.

==See also==

*Geography of Spain
*List of cities in Spain
*List of Aragonese comarcas

==External links==

*Population in the province of Teruel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162620" start="44" end="52" title="provinces of Spain" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q54955" start="56" end="62" title="Teruel (province)" label="Teruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="70" end="90" title="autonomous community" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="94" end="100" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="102" end="107" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207461" start="171" end="189" title="Geography of Spain" label="Geography of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17543138" start="191" end="214" title="List of cities in Spain" label="List of cities in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549234" start="216" end="242" title="List of Aragonese comarcas" label="List of Aragonese comarcas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303834" wikidata="Q4943707" url="?curid=303834" title="Boont">
<text>Boont can refer to a few different things:

*Boontling, the language spoken in Boonville, Northern California
*Boonville resident
* Boont ale from Boonville</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4943708" start="45" end="54" title="Boontling" label="Boontling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910515" start="111" end="120" title="Boonville, California" label="Boonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754219" start="132" end="141" title="Boont ale" label="Boont ale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303835" wikidata="Q661242" url="?curid=303835" title="SkyEurope">
<text>SkyEurope Airlines was a low-cost airline headquartered in Bratislava, with its main base at Bratislava Airport (BTS) in Bratislava, Slovakia, and another base in Prague. The carrier filed for bankruptcy on 31 August 2009 and suspended all flights on 1 September 2009. The airline operated short-haul scheduled and charter passenger services.

On 22 June 2009, the airline announced it had been granted creditor protection while it restructured its debts. However, this did not protect the airline from announcing bankruptcy on 31 August 2009 and cancelling all flights immediately.

==History==
===Foundation===
SkyEurope was established in November 2001 and started operations on 13 February 2002 (domestic flight Bratislava-Kosice operated with 30 seat turboprop Embraer 120 ER Brasília). It was founded by Alain Skowronek (Chairman) and Christian Mandl (Chief Executive) and financed by EBRD, ABN AMRO and EU funds. Although some criticized the decision to base an airline in Bratislava, Mandl saw the effect that the low-cost carriers were having in Western Europe and envisioned it going a step further with a low-cost carrier in a low cost country. Mandl and Skowronek were aware of the catchment area of Bratislava Airport with the airport being located within a one-hour drive of Vienna, Brno and Győr and a catchment area of four countries (Austria, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia).

===Growth===
On 27 September 2005, the airline went public on the Vienna and Warsaw stock exchanges. The initial public offering price was 6 EUR, valuing the company at 120 million euro. The IPO on the Vienna and Warsaw stock exchanges was the first by a central European low-cost carrier and the first by any Slovak company. In the following weeks, share price decreased to 5 EUR/share. On 10 November 2005, investment bank CA-IB, member of HVB Group, issued a buy recommendation with target price 6.5 EUR. The bank assumed that first-mover advantage, a term often used during the previous dot-com bubble, would &quot;provide competitive edge&quot;.

In 2006, SkyEurope announced it would cut ticket prices to minus 10 koruna, claiming to become the first airline that pays people for flying with it. The advertised negative price did not include fees charged to the passenger. 2007 marked a year of growth and change for SkyEurope. The airline opened a base at Vienna International Airport in March 2007, placing two new 737-700s operating sixteen routes. In October 2007, SkyEurope closed its hubs in Kraków and Budapest, thus reallocating its aircraft to the hubs in Prague and Vienna.

In 2008, SkyEurope entered into a partnership with České dráhy creating the CD Sky alliance whereby SkyEurope tickets would be sold for a fixed price at railway stations in Brno and Prague. In October – December 2008 SkyEurope transported 726,656 passengers, bringing the 12-month passenger total to 3.577 million. Its major Central European competitor Wizz Air claims to have carried 5.8 million passengers in 2008.

===Demise===
On 29 January 2009, MFD reported the airline cancelled hundreds of already booked flights from Prague.

The loss-making airline was seeking a new ownership structure with additional capital. The airline owed €25 million as a bridge loan to hedge fund York Global Finance II, due on 15 July 2009.

On 8 January 2009, leasing company GECAS ordered SkyEurope to return six Boeing aircraft due to financial problems. On 23 June 2009, SkyEurope went into administration having been granted protection from its creditors by the district court in Bratislava. On 11 August 2009, SkyEurope was not allowed to fly into Vienna International Airport due to unpaid landing fees. Flights were handled at Bratislava Airport instead. SkyEurope filed opening of bankruptcy proceedings on 31 August 2009. All flights were suspended with immediate effect on 1 September 2009.

Due to passengers being stranded, Irish airline Ryanair announced on 1 September 2009 that they had launched rescue fares from Bratislava to Alicante, Barcelona (Girona), Brussels (Charleroi), Rome (Ciampino), Liverpool and London (Stansted). Flights were bookable until 20 September 2009 and certain flights till 17 December 2009. All flights were sold at a price of €25, one way, taxes and charges included. Malév Hungarian Airlines also accepted people holding SkyEurope tickets on their flights for a discounted price. Malév was offering one-way travel options to a total of 12 cities for all those who held a SkyEurope air ticket and were unable to board their flight because of the bankruptcy proceedings launched against the company. The one-way air tickets were priced from €49. Wizz Air also announced rescue flights for passengers stranded at Prague to Amsterdam, Bari, Bourgas, Brussels, Copenhagen, London (Luton), Milan (Bergamo), Naples, Paris (Orly), Rome (Fiumicino), Thessaloniki and Venice (Treviso) and from Bratislava to Rome. Flights were bookable until 15 September 2009 with certain flights available till 26 March 2010 for a total fee of €30 one way. Also Blue Air offered some rescue flights for passengers stranded in Bucharest to Vienna. The extra fee was €60.

==Corporate affairs==
===Overview===
The company never made a profit. At the end of March 2009, it had negative equity with liabilities two times higher than assets. Shares fell from its IPO level of 6 euro per share to a mere 20 cents per share at the end of January 2009. On 30 September 2008, SkyEurope had overdue debt one million EUR on social insurance of its employees. The overdue debt gradually increased to €3.1 million at the end of June 2009. At 31 March, SkyEurope was in technical default on its loan from Bank of Scotland.

According to released &quot;Preliminary results for FY 2008&quot;, &quot;material uncertainties exist regarding the ability of SkyEurope Holding to continue as going concern&quot;. The company failed to publish audited results for financial year 2008 on 30 January 2009, management stated it expected the statements to be published by 17 February 2009 at the latest. On 17 February, SkyEurope announced further postponement, its management expected the audited results to be published by 15 March. On 15 March, SkyEurope announced a third postponement, its management expected the audited results for FY 2008 to be published by 15 April.

In June 2009, in an effort to avoid bankruptcy, SkyEurope announced a restructuring of the company and received bankruptcy protection from the Slovak courts (valid in the whole European Union). However, this failed and on 1 September 2009, the airline went into bankruptcy. In March 2010 liabilities were estimated up to 180 million Euro and assets less than 6 million Euro (including 0,5 million of cash).

Before the IPO, the largest shareholders were East Capital funds (16.72), EBRD (16.03), Christian Mandl (8.53), Peter Struhár (8.31), Alain Skowronek (8.19), DWS funds (7.79), GLG funds (7.17), Griffin funds (7.04), Euroventures Danube (6.68) and Foundation (6.39). Other investors held the remaining 7.15 share.

===Management===
The company&#x27;s last CEO (acting) was Nick Manoudakis, who replaced Jason Bitter. Members of the Supervisory board were its Chairman Iordanis Karatzas (since 1 October 2006), Jeremy Blank (since 1 October 2006), Christophe Aurand (since 1 October 2006, works as CEO of &quot;York UK Advisors&quot;), Hans Källenius (re-elected 30 March 2007, represents minority shareholders) and Josef In-Albon (since 30 March 2007).

===Business figures===


==Destinations==
SkyEurope operated 44 routes to 30 destinations in 17 countries.

==Fleet==
===Last fleet===
The SkyEurope fleet consisted of the following aircraft at that time of closure (as of 1 September 2009):

===Fleet development===
In 2005 SkyEurope and Boeing finalized the order for four Boeing Next-Generation 737-700s worth US$220 million. The order includes purchase rights for up to 16 additional airplanes. This order followed
SkyEurope&#x27;s order with leasing company GECAS for 12 Boeing Next-Generation 737s.

In April 2007, SkyEurope purchased an additional five jets. SkyEurope had an option to order six more jets at the price set in a 2005 deal with Boeing to buy as many as 32 planes by 2011.

At the end of FY 2008, SkyEurope had agreements with GECAS and Dubai Aerospace Enterprise for the operating lease of twelve Boeing 737 aircraft. At 30 September 2008, the Company failed to comply with stipulated financial covenants, such as liquidity and net worth thresholds. As a result, an event of default would allow lessors to terminate the leases with immediate effect and either claim damages and/or require immediate redelivery of the aircraft. On 24 November 2008, SkyEurope received a default notice from GECAS, as a result of late lease payments. On 9 January 2009, GECAS terminated the lease of six aircraft and ordered SkyEurope to immediately return the 737s. On that day, several SkyEurope flights were delayed up to seven hours. Three additional aircraft were returned to the lessor on 5 January 2009.

The airline operated four Boeing 737-700s aircraft, two ex-FlyLal Boeing 737-500 aircraft (on dry-lease from Avia Asset Management), two ex-United Boeing 737-300 and two Air Slovakia Boeing 737-300 (both on dry-lease). SkyEurope also used other airlines for its flights, mainly Air Slovakia, Austrian Airlines and Travel Service Airlines.

==In-flight services==
SkyEurope had a buy on board programme, SkyEurope Delights; in that programme, food was sold while charter flights had complimentary meals.

==References==
==External links==

* (at Archive.org)
*Runway inflight magazine (at Archive.org)
*SkyEurope fleet at airframes.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661242" start="0" end="18" title="SkyEurope" label="SkyEurope Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q190915" start="25" end="41" title="low-cost airline" label="low-cost airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="59" end="69" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q828379" start="93" end="111" title="Bratislava Airport" label="Bratislava Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="163" end="169" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="891" end="895" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q287471" start="897" end="905" title="ABN AMRO" label="ABN AMRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="910" end="912" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q828379" start="1212" end="1230" title="Bratislava Airport" label="Bratislava Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1289" end="1295" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="1297" end="1301" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q134494" start="1306" end="1310" title="Győr" label="Győr"/>
<link wikidata="Q940223" start="1317" end="1331" title="catchment area (human geography)" label="catchment area"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="1509" end="1532" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="1545" end="1548" title="Euro" label="EUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="1585" end="1589" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1606" end="1612" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="1617" end="1623" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q121716" start="1934" end="1955" title="first-mover advantage" label="first-mover advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="1995" end="2009" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q91291914" start="2221" end="2235" title="negative price" label="negative price"/>
<link wikidata="Q32999" start="2367" end="2395" title="Vienna International Airport" label="Vienna International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="2508" end="2514" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q304944" start="2646" end="2657" title="České dráhy" label="České dráhy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="2768" end="2772" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="2777" end="2783" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q335147" start="2948" end="2956" title="Wizz Air" label="Wizz Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191165" start="3046" end="3049" title="Mladá fronta DNES" label="MFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079582" start="3251" end="3262" title="bridge loan" label="bridge loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434137" start="3358" end="3363" title="GECAS" label="GECAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="3396" end="3402" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="3566" end="3576" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q32999" start="3635" end="3663" title="Vienna International Airport" label="Vienna International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q828379" start="3716" end="3734" title="Bratislava Airport" label="Bratislava Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="3932" end="3939" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="4011" end="4021" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="4025" end="4033" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="4035" end="4044" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="4055" end="4063" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="4077" end="4081" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="4094" end="4103" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4108" end="4114" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q208372" start="4294" end="4318" title="Malév Hungarian Airlines" label="Malév Hungarian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q335147" start="4671" end="4679" title="Wizz Air" label="Wizz Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="4737" end="4743" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="4747" end="4756" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="4758" end="4762" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509" start="4764" end="4771" title="Bourgas" label="Bourgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="4773" end="4781" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="4783" end="4793" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4795" end="4801" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="4811" end="4816" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="4828" end="4834" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4836" end="4841" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="4850" end="4854" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="4868" end="4880" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4885" end="4891" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="4911" end="4921" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="4925" end="4929" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q804561" start="5064" end="5072" title="Blue Air" label="Blue Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="5128" end="5137" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="5141" end="5147" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652387" start="5276" end="5291" title="negative equity" label="negative equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="5360" end="5363" title="Initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653906" start="5515" end="5531" title="social insurance" label="social insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q627381" start="5693" end="5709" title="Bank of Scotland" label="Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q565043" start="5872" end="5885" title="going concern" label="going concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="7800" end="7806" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="7859" end="7867" title="Boeing 737 Next Generation" label="737-700s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434137" start="8024" end="8029" title="GECAS" label="GECAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310498" start="8319" end="8345" title="Dubai Aerospace Enterprise" label="Dubai Aerospace Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q375738" start="8354" end="8369" title="operating lease" label="operating lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933764" start="8511" end="8520" title="net worth" label="net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="8649" end="8656" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="9109" end="9117" title="Boeing 737 Next Generation" label="737-700s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130153" start="9135" end="9141" title="FlyLal" label="FlyLal"/>
<link wikidata="Q407787" start="9354" end="9366" title="Air Slovakia" label="Air Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q781770" start="9368" end="9385" title="Austrian Airlines" label="Austrian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853488" start="9390" end="9413" title="Travel Service Airlines" label="Travel Service Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260029" start="9455" end="9467" title="buy on board" label="buy on board"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303837" wikidata="Q233576" url="?curid=303837" title="Epidaurus">
<text>Epidaurus () was a small city (&quot;polis&quot;) in ancient Greece, on the Argolid Peninsula at the Saronic Gulf. Two modern towns bear the name Epidavros: &quot;Palaia Epidavros&quot; and &quot;Nea Epidavros&quot;. Since 2010 they belong to the new municipality of Epidaurus, part of the regional unit of Argolis. The seat of the municipality is the town Lygourio. The nearby sanctuary of Asclepius and ancient theatre were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1988 because of their exemplary architecture and importance in the development and spread of healing sanctuaries and cults across the ancient Greek and Roman worlds.

==Name and etymology==
The name &quot;Epidaurus&quot; is of Greek origin. It was named after the hero Epidauros, son of Apollo. According to Strabo, the city was originally named Ἐπίκαρος (Epíkaros) under the Carians, (Aristotle claimed that Caria, as a naval empire, occupied Epidaurus and Hermione) before taking the name Ἐπίταυρος (Epítauros) when the city was taken by the Ionians and finally becoming Ἐπίδαυρος (Epídauros) after the Dorians conquered the city. Compare the individual elements ἐπί (epí, &quot;upon&quot;), Καρία (Karía, &quot;Carian&quot;), ταῦρος (taûros, &quot;bull&quot;) and Δωριεύς (Dōrieús &quot;Dorian&quot;)/Δωριεῖς (Dōrieîs, &quot;Dorians&quot;).

==History==

Epidaurus was independent of Argos and not included in Argolis until the time of the Romans. With its supporting territory, it formed the small territory called Epidauria. It was reputed to be founded by or named for the hero Epidaurus, and to be the birthplace of Apollo&#x27;s son Asclepius the healer.

==Buildings==

=== Sanctuary of Asclepius===

Epidaurus is best known for its healing sanctuary (&quot;asclepieion&quot;) and the Sanctuary of Asclepius, situated about five miles (8 km) from the town, with its theatre, which is still in use today. The cult of Asclepius at Epidaurus is attested in the 6th century BC, when the older hill-top sanctuary of Apollo Maleatas was no longer spacious enough. It was the most celebrated healing centre of the Classical world, the place where ill people went in the hope of being cured. To find out the right cure for their ailments, they spent a night in the &quot;enkoimeteria&quot;, a big sleeping hall. In their dreams, the god himself would advise them what they had to do to regain their health. Within the sanctuary there was a guest house (&quot;katagogion&quot;) with 160 guest rooms. There are also mineral springs in the vicinity, which may have been used in healing.

Asclepius, the most important healer god of antiquity, brought prosperity to the sanctuary, which flourished until the first half of the first century BC, when it suffered extensive damage when it was sacked by Sulla during the First Mithridatic War. It was revived after a visit by Hadrian in AD 124 and enjoyed renewed prosperity in the following centuries.

In AD 395 the Goths raided the sanctuary. Even after the introduction of Christianity and the silencing of the oracles, the sanctuary at Epidaurus was still known as late as the mid 5th century as a Christian healing centre.

===Theatre===

The prosperity brought by the asclepeion enabled Epidaurus to construct civic monuments, including the huge theatre that delighted Pausanias for its symmetry and beauty, used again today for dramatic performances, the ceremonial &quot;hestiatoreion&quot; (banqueting hall), and a palaestra. The ancient theatre of Epidaurus was designed by Polykleitos the Younger in the 4th century BC. The original 34 rows were extended in Roman times by another 21 rows. As is usual for Greek theatres (and as opposed to Roman ones), the view on a lush landscape behind the &quot;skênê&quot; is an integral part of the theatre itself and is not to be obscured. It seats up to 14,000 people.

The theatre has long had a reputation for its exceptional acoustics, which reportedly allowed almost perfect intelligibility of unamplified spoken words from the proscenium or &quot;skēnē&quot; to all 14,000 spectators, regardless of their seating, a tale often recounted by tour guides. In-situ measurements, however, somewhat moderate these claims: although most sounds can indeed be noticed throughout, intelligibility is not guaranteed, particularly for voice, which requires good projection, which might not have been a problem for Greek actors, who were reputed experts in this aspect. The acoustic properties are caused both by the physical shape, but also the construction material: the rows of limestone seats filter out low-frequency sounds, such as the murmur of the crowd, and also amplify the high-frequency sounds of the stage.

===Other buildings===

The town of Epidaurus had its own theatre which has been excavated since 1990 and found to be well-preserved. Dating from the 4th c. BC it had about 2000 seats. It has been renovated and is open to the public, as part of a scheme to conserve and enhance ancient theatres which has mapped 140 ancient arenas across Greece.

==Municipality==
The municipality Epidavros was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following two former municipalities, that became municipal units:

*Asklipieio 
*Epidavros

The municipality has an area of 340.442 km2, the municipal unit 160.604 km2.

==Gallery==
== See also ==
* List of ancient Greek cities
* Callon of Epidaurus

==References==
==External links==
* Epidaurus UNESCO Listing
* Epidaurus photos and info
* How the sanctuary was built -the building inscriptions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="0" end="9" title="Epidaurus" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="37" end="42" title="polis" label="polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="53" end="67" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q25044670" start="76" end="93" title="Argolid Peninsula" label="Argolid Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q211779" start="101" end="113" title="Saronic Gulf" label="Saronic Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q338813" start="163" end="179" title="Palaia Epidavros" label="Palaia Epidavros"/>
<link wikidata="Q504046" start="196" end="209" title="Nea Epidavros" label="Nea Epidavros"/>
<link wikidata="Q191897" start="307" end="314" title="Argolis" label="Argolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171044" start="357" end="365" title="Lygourio" label="Lygourio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698713" start="378" end="400" title="Temple of Asclepius, Epidaurus" label="sanctuary of Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q608198" start="405" end="420" title="Ancient Theatre of Epidaurus" label="ancient theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="443" end="449" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="450" end="469" title="World Heritage List" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="700" end="705" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726853" start="742" end="751" title="Epidaurus (mythology)" label="Epidauros"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="760" end="766" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="781" end="787" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123411" start="849" end="856" title="Carians" label="Carians"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="859" end="868" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="882" end="887" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="1017" end="1024" title="Ionians" label="Ionians"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="1078" end="1085" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="1360" end="1365" title="Ancient Argos" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q191897" start="1386" end="1393" title="Argolis" label="Argolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1416" end="1422" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="1492" end="1501" title="Epidauria" label="Epidauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726853" start="1557" end="1566" title="Epidaurus (mythology)" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1596" end="1602" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="1614" end="1623" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q731841" start="1740" end="1751" title="asclepieion" label="asclepieion"/>
<link wikidata="Q608198" start="1848" end="1855" title="Ancient Theatre of Epidaurus" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q619242" start="1993" end="2008" title="Apollo Maleatas" label="Apollo Maleatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="2770" end="2775" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647768" start="2787" end="2808" title="First Mithridatic War" label="First Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="2842" end="2849" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="2934" end="2939" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2993" end="3005" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="3031" end="3037" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="3119" end="3128" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="3269" end="3276" title="Theater (structure)" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="3292" end="3301" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q626066" start="3417" end="3424" title="banquet" label="banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q647160" start="3441" end="3450" title="palaestra" label="palaestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q608198" start="3452" end="3484" title="Ancient Theatre of Epidaurus" label="The ancient theatre of Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342867" start="3501" end="3524" title="Polykleitos the Younger" label="Polykleitos the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q348564" start="3727" end="3732" title="Skene (theatre)" label="skênê"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="3897" end="3906" title="acoustics" label="acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q385348" start="4001" end="4011" title="proscenium" label="proscenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q348564" start="4021" end="4026" title="Skene (theatre)" label="skēnē"/>
<link wikidata="Q663210" start="5208" end="5218" title="Asklipieio" label="Asklipieio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154161" start="5339" end="5367" title="List of ancient Greek cities" label="List of ancient Greek cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q105626193" start="5370" end="5389" title="Callon of Epidaurus" label="Callon of Epidaurus"/>
</links>
</doc>
