<doc id="303159" wikidata="Q126236" url="?curid=303159" title="Conquistador">
<text>Conquistadors (, ) or conquistadores (; ; ) is a term used to refer to Spanish and Portuguese colonizers who explored, traded with and colonized parts of the Americas, Africa, Oceania and Asia during the Age of Discovery. Sailing beyond the Iberian Peninsula, they established numerous colonies and trade routes, and brought much of the &quot;New World&quot; under the dominion of Spain and Portugal.

After Christopher Columbus&#x27; arrival in the West Indies in 1492, the Spanish, usually led by hidalgos from the west and south of Spain, began building a colonial empire in the Caribbean using colonies such as Santo Domingo, Cuba, and Puerto Rico as their main bases. From 1519 to 1521, Hernán Cortés led the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, ruled by Moctezuma II. From the territories of the Aztec Empire, conquistadors expanded Spanish rule to northern Central America and parts of what is now the southern and western United States, and from Mexico sailing the Pacific Ocean to the Spanish East Indies. Other conquistadors took over the Inca Empire after crossing the Isthmus of Panama and sailing the Pacific to northern Peru. From 1532 to 1572, Francisco Pizarro succeeded in subduing this empire in a manner similar to Cortés. Subsequently, other conquistadores used Peru as a base for conquering much of Ecuador and Chile. Central Colombia, home of the Muisca was conquered by licentiate Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada, and its northern regions were explored by Rodrigo de Bastidas, Alonso de Ojeda, Juan de la Cosa, Pedro de Heredia and others. For southwestern Colombia, Bolivia, and Argentina, conquistadors from Peru combined parties with other conquistadors arriving more directly from the Caribbean and Río de la Plata-Paraguay respectively. These conquests founded the basis for modern Hispanic America and the Hispanosphere.

Spanish conquistadors also made significant explorations into the Amazon Jungle, Patagonia, the interior of North America, and the discovery and exploration of the Pacific Ocean. Conquistadors founded numerous cities, some of them in locations with pre-existing settlements, such as Cusco and Mexico City. Conquistadors in the service of the Portuguese Crown led numerous conquests and visits in the name of the Portuguese Empire across South America and Africa, going &quot;anticlockwise&quot; along the continent&#x27;s coast right up to the Red Sea, as well as commercial colonies in Asia, founding the origins of modern Portuguese-speaking world. Notable Portuguese conquistadors include Afonso de Albuquerque who led conquests across India, the Persian Gulf, the East Indies, and East Africa; and Filipe de Brito e Nicote who led conquests into Burma.

==Conquest==


Portugal established a route to China in the early 16th century, sending ships via the southern coast of Africa and founding numerous coastal enclaves along the route. Following the discovery in 1492 by Spaniards of the New World with Italian explorer Christopher Columbus&#x27; first voyage there and the first circumnavigation of the world by Ferdinand Magellan in 1521, expeditions led by conquistadors in the 16th century established trading routes linking Europe with all these areas.

The Age of Discovery was hallmarked in 1519, shortly after the European discovery of the Americas, when Hernán Cortés began his conquest of the Aztec Empire. As the Spaniards, motivated by gold and fame, established relations and war with the Aztecs, the slow progression of conquest, erection of towns, and cultural dominance over the natives brought more Spanish troops and support to modern-day Mexico. As trading routes over the seas were established by the works of Columbus, Magellan, and Elcano, land support system was established as the trails of Cortés&#x27; conquest to the capital.

Human infections gained worldwide transmission vectors for the first time: from Africa and Eurasia to the Americas and &quot;vice versa&quot;. The spread of Old World diseases, including smallpox, influenza, and typhus, led to the deaths of many indigenous inhabitants of the New World.

In the 16th century, perhaps 240,000 Spaniards entered American ports. By the late 16th century, gold and silver imports from the Americas provided one-fifth of Spain&#x27;s total budget.

==Background==
Contrary to popular belief, many conquistadors were not trained warriors, but mostly artisans, lesser nobility or farmers seeking an opportunity to advance themselves in the new world since they had limited opportunities in Spain. A few also had crude firearms known as arquebuses. Their units (&quot;compañia&quot;) would often specialize in forms of combat that required long periods of training that were too costly for informal groups. Their armies were mostly composed of Spanish troops, as well as soldiers from other parts of Europe and Africa.

Native allied troops were largely infantry equipped with armament and armour that varied geographically. Some groups consisted of young men without military experience, Catholic clergy who helped with administrative duties, and soldiers with military training. These native forces often included African slaves and Native Americans, some of whom were also slaves. They were not only made to fight in the battlefield but also to serve as interpreters, informants, servants, teachers, physicians, and scribes. India Catalina and Malintzin were Native American women slaves who were forced to work for the Spaniards.

Castilian law prohibited foreigners and non-Catholics from settling in the New World. However, not all conquistadors were Castilian. Many foreigners Hispanicised their names and/or converted to Catholicism to serve the Castilian Crown. For example, Ioánnis Fokás (known as Juan de Fuca) was a Castilian of Greek origin who discovered the strait that bears his name between Vancouver Island and Washington state in 1592. German-born Nikolaus Federmann, Hispanicised as Nicolás de Federmán, was a &quot;conquistador&quot; in Venezuela and Colombia. The Venetian Sebastiano Caboto was Sebastián Caboto, Georg von Speyer Hispanicised as Jorge de la Espira, Eusebio Francesco Chini Hispanicised as Eusebio Kino, Wenceslaus Linck was Wenceslao Linck, Ferdinand Konščak, was Fernando Consag, Amerigo Vespucci was Américo Vespucio, and the Portuguese Aleixo Garcia was known as Alejo García in the Castilian army.

The origin of many people in mixed expeditions was not always distinguished. Various occupations, such as sailors, fishermen, soldiers and nobles employed different languages (even from unrelated language groups), so that crew and settlers of Iberian empires recorded as Galicians from Spain were actually using Portuguese, Basque, Catalan, Italian and Languedoc languages, which were wrongly identified.

Castilian law banned Spanish women from travelling to America unless they were married and accompanied by a husband. Women who travelled thus include María de Escobar, María Estrada, Marina Vélez de Ortega, Marina de la Caballería, Francisca de Valenzuela, Catalina de Salazar. Some conquistadors married Native American women or had illegitimate children.
European young men enlisted in the army because it was one way out of poverty. Catholic priests instructed the soldiers in mathematics, writing, theology, Latin, Greek, and history, and wrote letters and official documents for them. King&#x27;s army officers taught military arts. An uneducated young recruit could become a military leader, elected by their fellow professional soldiers, perhaps based on merit. Others were born into hidalgo families, and as such they were members of the Spanish nobility with some studies but without economic resources. Even some rich nobility families&#x27; members became soldiers or missionaries, but mostly not the firstborn heirs.

The two most famous conquistadors were Hernán Cortés who conquered the Aztec Empire and Francisco Pizarro who led the conquest of the Inca Empire. They were second cousins born in Extremadura, where many of the Spanish conquerors were born.

Catholic religious orders that participated and supported the exploration, evangelizing and pacifying, were mostly Dominicans, Carmelites, Franciscans, and Jesuits, for example Francis Xavier, Bartolomé de Las Casas, Eusebio Kino, Juan de Palafox y Mendoza, or Gaspar da Cruz. In 1536, Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas went to Oaxaca to participate in a series of discussions and debates among the Bishops of the Dominican and Franciscan orders. The two orders had very different approaches to the conversion of the Indians. The Franciscans used a method of mass conversion, sometimes baptizing many thousands of Indians in a day. This method was championed by prominent Franciscans such as Toribio de Benavente.
The conquistadors took many different roles, including religious leader, harem keeper, King or Emperor, deserter and Native American warrior. &quot;Caramuru&quot; was a Portuguese settler in the Tupinambá Indians. Gonzalo Guerrero was a Maya war leader for Nachan Can, Lord of Chactemal. Gerónimo de Aguilar, who had taken holy orders in his native Spain, was captured by Maya lords too, and later was a soldier with Hernán Cortés. Francisco Pizarro had children with more than 40 women, many of whom were ñusta. The chroniclers Pedro Cieza de León, Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés, Diego Durán, Juan de Castellanos, and friar Pedro Simón wrote about the Americas.

After Mexico fell, Hernán Cortés&#x27;s enemies Bishop Fonseca, Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar, Diego Columbus, and Francisco Garay were mentioned in Cortés&#x27; fourth letter to the King in which he describes himself as the victim of a conspiracy.

==History==
===Early Portuguese period===
Infante Dom Henry the Navigator of Portugal, son of King João I, became the main sponsor of exploration travels. In 1415, Portugal conquered Ceuta, its first overseas colony.

Throughout the 15th century, Portuguese explorers sailed the coast of Africa, establishing trading posts for tradable commodities such as firearms, spices, silver, gold, and slaves crossing Africa and India. In 1434 the first consignment of slaves was brought to Lisbon; slave trading was the most profitable branch of Portuguese commerce until the Indian subcontinent was reached. Due to the importation of the slaves as early as 1441, the kingdom of Portugal was able to establish a number of population of slaves throughout the Iberia due to its slave markets&#x27; dominance within Europe. 

Before the Age of Conquest began, the continental Europe already associated darker skin color with slave-class, attributing to the slaves of African origins. This sentiment traveled with the conquistadors when they began their explorations into the Americas. The predisposition inspired a lot of the entradas to seek slaves as part of the conquest.

===Birth of the Spanish Kingdom===
After his father&#x27;s death in 1479, Ferdinand II of Aragón married Isabella I of Castile, unifying both kingdoms and creating the Kingdom of Spain. He later tried to incorporate the kingdom of Portugal by marriage. Notably, Isabella supported Columbus&#x27; first voyage that launched the Spanish conquistadors into action.

The Iberian Peninsula was largely divided before the hallmark of this marriage. Five independent kingdoms: Portugal in the West, Aragon and Navarre in the East, Castile in the large center, and Granada in the south, all had independent sovereignty and competing interests. The conflict between Christians and Muslims to control Iberia, which started with North Africa&#x27;s Muslim invasion in 711, lasted from the years 718 to 1492. Christians, fighting for control, successfully pushed the Muslims back to Granada, which was the Muslims&#x27; last control of the Iberian Peninsula.

The marriage between Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabel of Castile resulted in joint rule by the spouses of the two kingdoms, honoured as the &quot;Catholic Monarchs&quot; by Pope Alexander VI. Together, the Crown Kings saw about the fall of Granada, victory over the Muslim minority, and expulsion or forcibly converted Jews and non-Christians to turn Iberia into a religious homogeneity.

===Treaties===
The 1492 discovery of the New World by Spain rendered desirable a delimitation of the Spanish and Portuguese spheres of exploration, thus dividing the world into two areas of exploration and colonization. This was settled by the Treaty of Tordesillas (7 June 1494) which modified the delimitation authorized by Pope Alexander VI in two bulls issued on 4 May 1493. The treaty gave to Portugal all lands which might be discovered east of a meridian drawn from the Arctic Pole to the Antarctic, at a distance of west of Cape Verde. Spain received the lands west of this line.

The known means of measuring longitude were so inexact that the line of demarcation could not in practice be determined, subjecting the treaty to diverse interpretations. Both the Portuguese claim to Brazil and the Spanish claim to the Moluccas depended on the treaty. It was particularly valuable to the Portuguese as a recognition of their new-found, particularly when, in 1497–1499, Vasco da Gama completed the voyage to India.

Later, when Spain established a route to the Indies from the west, Portugal arranged a second treaty, the Treaty of Zaragoza.

==Spanish exploration==

===Colonization of the Caribbean, Mesoamerica, and South America===
&quot;Sevilla la Nueva&quot;, established in 1509, was the first Spanish settlement on the island of Jamaica, which the Spaniards called &quot;Isla de Santiago&quot;. The capital was in an unhealthy location and consequently moved around 1534 to the place they called &quot;Villa de Santiago de la Vega&quot;, later named Spanish Town, in present-day Saint Catherine Parish.
After first landing on &quot;Guanahani&quot; in the Bahamas, Columbus found the island which he called &quot;Isla Juana&quot;, later named Cuba. In 1511, the first &quot;Adelantado&quot; of Cuba, Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar founded the island&#x27;s first Spanish settlement at Baracoa; other towns soon followed, including Havana, which was founded in 1515.

After he pacified Hispaniola, where the native Indians had revolted against the administration of governor Nicolás de Ovando, Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar led the conquest of Cuba in 1511 under orders from Viceroy Diego Columbus and was appointed governor of the island. As governor he authorized expeditions to explore lands further west, including the 1517 Francisco Hernández de Córdoba expedition to Yucatán. Diego Velázquez, ordered expeditions, one led by his nephew, Juan de Grijalva, to Yucatán and the Hernán Cortés expedition of 1519. He initially backed Cortés&#x27;s expedition to Mexico, but because of his personal enmity for Cortés later ordered Pánfilo de Narváez to arrest him. Grijalva was sent out with four ships and some 240 men.
Hernán Cortés, led an expedition (entrada) to Mexico, which included Pedro de Alvarado and Bernardino Vázquez de Tapia. The Spanish campaign against the Aztec Empire had its final victory on 13 August 1521, when a coalition army of Spanish forces and native Tlaxcalan warriors led by Cortés and Xicotencatl the Younger captured the emperor Cuauhtemoc and Tenochtitlan, the capital of the Aztec Empire. The fall of Tenochtitlan marks the beginning of Spanish rule in central Mexico, and they established their capital of Mexico City on the ruins of Tenochtitlan. The Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire was one of the most significant events in world history.

In 1516, Juan Díaz de Solís, discovered the estuary formed by the confluence of the Uruguay River and the Paraná River.

In 1517, Francisco Hernández de Córdoba sailed from Cuba in search of slaves along the coast of Yucatán. The expedition returned to Cuba to report on the discovery of this new land.
After receiving notice from Juan de Grijalva of gold in the area of what is now Tabasco, the governor of Cuba, Diego de Velasquez, sent a larger force than had previously sailed, and appointed Cortés as Captain-General of the Armada. Cortés then applied all of his funds, mortgaged his estates and borrowed from merchants and friends to outfit his ships. Velásquez may have contributed to the effort, but the government of Spain offered no financial support.

Pedro Arias Dávila, Governor of the Island La Española was descended from a converso&#x27;s family. In 1519 Dávila founded Darién, then in 1524 he founded Panama City and moved his capital there laying the basis for the exploration of South America&#x27;s west coast and the subsequent conquest of Peru. Dávila was a soldier in wars against Moors at Granada in Spain, and in North Africa, under Pedro Navarro intervening in the Conquest of Oran. At the age of nearly seventy years he was made commander in 1514 by Ferdinand of the largest Spanish expedition.
Dávila sent Gil González Dávila to explore northward, and Pedro de Alvarado to explore Guatemala. In 1524 he sent another expedition with Francisco Hernández de Córdoba, executed there in 1526 by Dávila, by then aged over 85. Dávila&#x27;s daughters married Rodrigo de Contreras and conquistador of Florida and Mississippi, the Governor of Cuba Hernando de Soto.
Dávila made an agreement with Francisco Pizarro and Diego de Almagro, which brought about the discovery of Peru, but withdrew in 1526 for a small compensation, having lost confidence in the outcome. In 1526 Dávila was superseded as Governor of Panama by Pedro de los Ríos, but became governor in 1527 of León in Nicaragua.

An expedition commanded by Pizarro and his brothers explored south from what is today Panama, reaching Inca territory by 1526. After one more expedition in 1529, Pizarro received royal approval to conquer the region and be its viceroy. The approval read: &quot;In July 1529 the queen of Spain signed a charter allowing Pizarro to conquer the Inca. Pizarro was named governor and captain of all conquests in New Castile.&quot; The Viceroyalty of Peru was established in 1542, encompassing all Spanish holdings in South America.
In early 1536, the Adelantado of Canary Islands, Pedro Fernández de Lugo, arrived to Santa Marta, a city founded in 1525 by Rodrigo de Bastidas in modern-day Colombia, as governor. After some expeditions to the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, Fernández de Lugo sent an expedition to the interior of the territory, initially looking for a land path to Peru following the Magdalena River. This expedition was commanded by Licentiate Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada, who ended up discovering and conquering the indigenous Muisca, and establishing the New Kingdom of Granada, which almost two centuries would be a viceroyalty. Jiménez de Quesada also founded the capital of Colombia, Santafé de Bogotá.
Juan Díaz de Solís arrived again to the renamed Río de la Plata, literally river of the silver, after the Incan conquest. He sought a way to transport the Potosi&#x27;s silver to Europe. For a long time due to the Incan silver mines, Potosí was the most important site in Colonial Spanish America, located in the current department of Potosí in Bolivia and it was the location of the Spanish colonial mint. The first settlement in the way was the fort of Sancti Spiritu, established in 1527 next to the Paraná River. Buenos Aires was established in 1536, establishing the Governorate of the Río de la Plata.
Africans were also conquistadors in the early conquest campaigns in the Caribbean and Mexico. In the 1500s there were enslaved black and free black sailors on Spanish ships crossing the Atlantic and developing new routes of conquest and trade in the Americas. After 1521, the wealth and credit generated by the acquisition of the Aztec Empire funded auxiliary forces of black conquistadors that could number as many as five hundred. Spaniards recognized the value of these fighters. 

One of the black conquistadors who fought against the Aztecs and survived the destruction of their empire was Juan Garrido. Born in Africa, Garrido lived as a young slave in Portugal before being sold to a Spaniard and acquiring his freedom fighting in the conquests of Puerto Rico, Cuba, and other islands. He fought as a free servant or auxiliary, participating in Spanish expeditions to other parts of Mexico (including Baja California) in the 1520s and 1530s. Granted a house plot in Mexico City, he raised a family there, working at times as a guard and town crier. He claimed to have been the first person to plant wheat in Mexico.
Sebastian Toral was an African slave and one of the first black conquistadors in the New World. While a slave, he went with his Spanish owner on a campaign. He was able to earn his freedom during this service. He continued as a free conquistador with the Spaniards to fight the Maya in Yucatán in 1540. After the conquests he settled in the city of Mérida in the newly formed colony of Yucatán with his family. In 1574, the Spanish crown ordered that all slaves and free blacks in the colony had to pay a tribute to the crown. However, Toral wrote in protest of the tax based on his services during his conquests. The Spanish king responded that Toral need not pay the tax because of his service. Toral died a veteran of three transatlantic voyages and two Conquest expeditions, a man who had successfully petitioned the great Spanish King, walked the streets of Lisbon, Seville, and Mexico City, and helped found a capital city in the Americas.

Juan Valiente was born in West Africa and purchased by Portuguese traders from African slavers. Around 1530 he was purchased by Alonso Valiente to be a slaved domestic servant in Puebla, Mexico. In 1533, Juan Valiente made a deal with his owner to allow him to be a conquistador for four years with the agreement that all earnings would come back to Alonso. He fought for many years in Chile and Peru. By 1540, he was a captain, horseman, and partner in Pedro de Valdivia&#x27;s company in Chile. He was later awarded an estate in Santiago; a city he would help Valdivia found. Both Alonso and Valiente tried to contact the other to make an agreement about Valiente&#x27;s manumission and send Alonso his awarded money. They were never able to reach each other and Valiente died in 1553 in the Battle of Tucapel.

Other black conquistadors include Juan García Pizarro, Pedro Fulupo, Juan Bardales, Antonio Pérez, and Juan Portugués. Juan García Pizarro was a free black or mulatto who fought in Peru. Pedro Fulupo was a black slave that fought in Costa Rica. Juan Bardales was an African slave that fought in Honduras and Panama. For his service he was granted manumission and a pension of 50 pesos. Antonio Pérez was from North Africa, and a free black. He joined the conquest in Venezuela and was made a captain. Juan Portugués fought in the conquests in Venezuela.

===North America colonization===

During the 1500s, the Spanish began to travel through and colonize North America. They were looking for gold in foreign kingdoms. By 1511 there were rumours of undiscovered lands to the northwest of Hispaniola. Juan Ponce de León equipped three ships with at least 200 men at his own expense and set out from Puerto Rico on 4 March 1513 to Florida and surrounding coastal area. Another early motive was the search for the Seven Cities of Gold, or &quot;Cibola&quot;, rumoured to have been built by Native Americans somewhere in the desert Southwest. In 1536 Francisco de Ulloa, the first documented European to reach the Colorado River, sailed up the Gulf of California and a short distance into the river&#x27;s delta.

The Basques were fur trading, fishing cod and whaling in Terranova (Labrador and Newfoundland) in 1520, and in Iceland by at least the early 17th century. They established whaling stations at the former, mainly in Red Bay, and probably established some in the latter as well. In Terranova they hunted bowheads and right whales, while in Iceland they appear to have only hunted the latter. The Spanish fishery in Terranova declined over conflicts between Spain and other European powers during the late 16th and early 17th centuries.

In 1524, the Portuguese Estêvão Gomes, who had sailed in Ferdinand Magellan&#x27;s fleet, explored Nova Scotia, sailing South through Maine, where he entered New York Harbor and the Hudson River and eventually reached Florida in August 1525. As a result of his expedition, the 1529 Diego Ribeiro world map outlined the East coast of North America almost perfectly.
The Spaniard Cabeza de Vaca was the leader of the Narváez expedition of 600 men that between 1527 and 1535 explored the mainland of North America. From Tampa Bay, Florida, on 15 April 1528, they marched through Florida. Traveling mostly on foot, they crossed Texas, New Mexico and Arizona, and Mexican states of Tamaulipas, Nuevo León and Coahuila. After several months of fighting native inhabitants through wilderness and swamp, the party reached Apalachee Bay with 242 men. They believed they were near other Spaniards in Mexico, but there was in fact 1500 miles of coast between them. They followed the coast westward, until they reached the mouth of the Mississippi River near to Galveston Island.
Later they were enslaved for a few years by various Native American tribes of the upper Gulf Coast. They continued through Coahuila and Nueva Vizcaya; then down the Gulf of California coast to what is now Sinaloa, Mexico, over a period of roughly eight years. They spent years enslaved by the Ananarivo of the Louisiana Gulf Islands. Later they were enslaved by the &quot;Hans&quot;, the &quot;Capoques&quot; and others. In 1534 they escaped into the American interior, contacting other Native American tribes along the way. Only four men, Cabeza de Vaca, Andrés Dorantes de Carranza, Alonso del Castillo Maldonado, and an enslaved Moroccan Berber named Estevanico, survived and escaped to reach Mexico City. In 1539, Estevanico was one of four men who accompanied Marcos de Niza as a guide in search of the fabled Seven Cities of Cibola, preceding Coronado. When the others were struck ill, Estevanico continued alone, opening up what is now New Mexico and Arizona. He was killed at the Zuni village of Hawikuh in present-day New Mexico.
The viceroy of New Spain Antonio de Mendoza, for whom is named the Codex Mendoza, commissioned several expeditions to explore and establish settlements in the northern lands of New Spain in 1540–1542. Francisco Vázquez de Coronado reached Quivira in central Kansas. Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo explored the western coastline of Alta California in 1542–1543. Vázquez de Coronado&#x27;s 1540–1542 expedition began as a search for the fabled Cities of Gold, but after learning from natives in New Mexico of a large river to the west, he sent García López de Cárdenas to lead a small contingent to find it. With the guidance of Hopi Indians, Cárdenas and his men became the first outsiders to see the Grand Canyon. However, Cárdenas was reportedly unimpressed with the canyon, assuming the width of the Colorado River at six feet (1.8 m) and estimating rock formations to be the size of a person. After unsuccessfully attempting to descend to the river, they left the area, defeated by the difficult terrain and torrid weather.

In 1540, Hernando de Alarcón and his fleet reached the mouth of the Colorado River, intending to provide additional supplies to Coronado&#x27;s expedition. Alarcón may have sailed the Colorado as far upstream as the present-day California–Arizona border. However, Coronado never reached the Gulf of California, and Alarcón eventually gave up and left. Melchior Díaz reached the delta in the same year, intending to establish contact with Alarcón, but the latter was already gone by the time of Díaz&#x27;s arrival. Díaz named the Colorado River &quot;Río del Tizón&quot;, while the name &quot;Colorado&quot; (&quot;Red River&quot;) was first applied to a tributary of the Gila River.
In 1540, expeditions under Hernando de Alarcon and Melchior Diaz visited the area of Yuma and immediately saw the natural crossing of the Colorado River from Mexico to California by land as an ideal spot for a city, as the Colorado River narrows to slightly under 1000 feet wide in one small point. Later military expeditions that crossed the Colorado River at the Yuma Crossing include Juan Bautista de Anza&#x27;s (1774).

The marriage between Luisa de Abrego, a free black domestic servant from Seville and Miguel Rodríguez, a white Segovian conquistador in 1565 in St. Augustine (Spanish Florida), is the first known and recorded Christian marriage anywhere in the continental United States.

The Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition explored New Mexico in 1581–1582. They explored a part of the route visited by Coronado in New Mexico and other parts in the southwestern United States between 1540 and 1542.

The viceroy of New Spain Don Diego García Sarmiento sent another expedition in 1648 to explore, conquer and colonize the Californias.

===Asia and Oceania colonization, and Pacific exploration===
In 1525, King Charles I of Spain ordered an expedition led by friar García Jofre de Loaísa to go to Asia by trying to accomplished the task first set by Christopher Columbus in 1492 and then Ferdinand Magellan in 1521, through a western passage to the Pacific ocean, to colonize the Maluku Islands (known as the &quot;Spice Islands&quot;, now part of present-day Indonesia), thus crossing first the Atlantic and then the Pacific oceans. In 1542 and 1543, Ruy López de Villalobos and his crew sailed to the Philippines to find the islands where Magellan had landed in 1521, and established trade settlements in the region. From 1546 to 1547 Francis Xavier worked in Maluku among the peoples of Ambon Island, Ternate, and Morotai, and laid the foundations for the Christian religion there.
In 1564, a quest led by Miguel López de Legazpi was commissioned by the Viceroy of New Spain, Luís de Velasco, to explore the Maluku Islands where Magellan and Villalobos had landed in 1521 and 1543, respectively. The expedition was ordered by King Philip II of Spain, after whom the Philippines had earlier been named by Villalobos. After winning a series of conflict between the native tribes of the Philippines and the Spaniards. López de Legazpi established settlements in the northern and central parts of the Philippines, and the Pacific Islands in 1571 and he became the first governor-general of the Spanish East Indies. 
The Spanish settled and took control of Tidore in 1603 to trade spices and counter Dutch encroachment in the archipelago of Maluku. The Spanish presence lasted until 1663, when the settlers and military were moved back to the Philippines. Part of the Ternatean population chose to leave with the Spanish, settling near Manila in what later became the municipality of Ternate. A Pacific trade known as the Manila Galleons was established between the Philippines and Mexico. Spanish galleons traveled across the Pacific Ocean between Acapulco in Mexico and Manila for almost three centuries. 
In 1542, Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo traversed the coast of California and named many of its features. In 1601, Sebastián Vizcaíno mapped the coastline in detail and gave new names to many features. Martín de Aguilar, lost from the expedition led by Sebastián Vizcaíno, explored the Pacific coast as far north as Coos Bay in present-day Oregon.

Since the 1549 arrival to Kagoshima (Kyushu) of a group of Jesuits with St. Francis Xavier missionary and Portuguese traders, Spain sent missionaries to Japan after gaining some trade interests. In this first group of Jesuit missionaries were included Spaniards Cosme de Torres and Juan Fernandez.

In 1611, Sebastián Vizcaíno surveyed the east coast of Japan and from the year of 1611 to 1614 and he was ambassador of King Felipe III in the Spanish East Indies in Southeast Asia, only to return to Acapulco in the year of 1614. In 1608, he was sent to search for two mythical islands called Rico de Oro (island of gold) and Rico de Plata (island of silver).

==Portuguese exploration==

As a seafaring people in the south-westernmost region of Europe, the Portuguese became natural leaders of exploration during the Middle Ages. Faced with the options of either accessing other European markets by sea, by exploiting its seafaring prowess, or by land, and facing the task of crossing Castile and Aragon territory, it is not surprising that goods were sent via the sea to England, Flanders, Italy, and the Hanseatic League towns.

One important reason was the need for alternatives to the expensive eastern trade routes that followed the Silk Road. Those routes were dominated first by the republics of Venice and Genoa, and then by the Ottoman Empire after the conquest of Constantinople in 1453. The Ottomans barred European access. For decades the Spanish Netherlands ports produced more revenue than the colonies since all goods brought from Spain, Mediterranean possessions, and the colonies were sold directly there to neighbouring European countries: wheat, olive oil, wine, silver, spice, wool, and silk were big businesses.

The gold brought home from Guinea stimulated the commercial energy of the Portuguese, and its European neighbours, especially Spain. Apart from their religious and scientific aspects, these voyages of discovery were highly profitable.

They had benefited from Guinea&#x27;s connections with neighbouring Iberians and north African Muslim states. Due to these connections, mathematicians and experts in naval technology appeared in Portugal. Portuguese and foreign experts made several breakthroughs in the fields of mathematics, cartography, and naval technology.

Under Afonso V (1443–1481), surnamed the African, the Gulf of Guinea was explored as far as Cape St. Catherine (&quot;Cabo Santa Caterina&quot;), and three expeditions in 1458, 1461 and 1471, were sent to Morocco; in 1471 Arzila (Asila) and Tangier were captured from the Moors. Portuguese explored the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans before the Iberian Union period (1580–1640). Under John II (1481–1495) the fortress of São Jorge da Mina, the modern Elmina, was founded for the protection of the Guinea trade. Diogo Cão, or Can, discovered the Congo in 1482 and reached Cape Cross in 1486.

In 1483, Diogo Cão sailed up the uncharted Congo River, finding Kongo villages and becoming the first European to encounter the Kongo Kingdom.

On 7 May 1487, two Portuguese envoys, Pero da Covilhã and Afonso de Paiva, were sent traveling secretly overland to gather information on a possible sea route to India, but also to inquire about Prester John. Covilhã managed to reach Ethiopia. Although well received, he was forbidden to depart. Bartolomeu Dias crossed the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, thus proving that the Indian Ocean was accessible by sea.
In 1498, Vasco da Gama reached India. In 1500, Pedro Álvares Cabral discovered Brazil, claiming it for Portugal. In 1510, Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Goa in India, Ormuz in the Persian Strait, and Malacca. The Portuguese sailors sailed eastward to such places as Taiwan, Japan, and the island of Timor. Several writers have also suggested the Portuguese were the first Europeans to discover Australia and New Zealand.

Álvaro Caminha, in Cape Verde islands, who received the land as a grant from the crown, established a colony with Jews forced to stay on São Tomé Island. Príncipe island was settled in 1500 under a similar arrangement. Attracting settlers proved difficult; however, the Jewish settlement was a success and their descendants settled many parts of Brazil.

From their peaceful settlings in secured islands along Atlantic Ocean (archipelagos and islands such as Madeira, the Azores, Cape Verde, São Tomé, Príncipe, and Annobón) they travelled to coastal enclaves trading almost every goods of African and Islander areas like spices (hemp, opium, garlic), wine, dry fish, dried meat, toasted flour, leather, fur of tropical animals and seals, whaling ... but mainly ivory, black slaves, gold and hardwoods. They maintaining trade ports in Congo (M&#x27;banza), Angola, Natal (City of Cape Good Hope, in Portuguese &quot;Cidade do Cabo da Boa Esperança&quot;), Mozambique (Sofala), Tanzania (Kilwa Kisiwani), Kenya (Malindi) to Somalia. The Portuguese following the maritime trade routes of Muslims and Chinese traders, sailed the Indian Ocean. They were on Malabar Coast since 1498 when Vasco da Gama reached Anjadir, Kannut, Kochi and Calicut.

Da Gama in 1498 marked the beginning of Portuguese influence in Indian Ocean. In 1503 or 1504, Zanzibar became part of the Portuguese Empire when Captain Ruy Lourenço Ravasco Marques landed and demanded and received tribute from the sultan in exchange for peace. Zanzibar remained a possession of Portugal for almost two centuries. It initially became part of the Portuguese province of Arabia and Ethiopia and was administered by a governor general. Around 1571, Zanzibar became part of the western division of the Portuguese empire and was administered from Mozambique. It appears, however, that the Portuguese did not closely administer Zanzibar. The first English ship to visit Unguja, the &quot;Edward Bonaventure&quot; in 1591, found that there was no Portuguese fort or garrison. The extent of their occupation was a trade depot where produce was purchased and collected for shipment to Mozambique. &quot;In other respects, the affairs of the island were managed by the local &#x27;king,&#x27; the predecessor of the Mwinyi Mkuu of Dunga.&quot; This hands-off approach ended when Portugal established a fort on Pemba around 1635 in response to the Sultan of Mombasa&#x27;s slaughter of Portuguese residents several years earlier.

===After 1500: West and East Africa, Asia, and the Pacific===
In west Africa &quot;Cidade de Congo de São Salvador&quot; was founded some time after the arrival of the Portuguese, in the pre-existing capital of the local dynasty ruling at that time (1483), in a city of the Luezi River valley. Portuguese were established supporting one Christian local dynasty ruling suitor.

When Afonso I of Kongo was established the Roman Catholic Church in Kongo kingdom. By 1516, Afonso I sent various of his children and nobles to Europe to study, including his son Henrique Kinu a Mvemba, who was elevated to the status of bishop in 1518. Afonso I wrote a series of letters to the kings of Portugal Manuel I and João III of Portugal concerning to the behavior of the Portuguese in his country and their role in the developing slave trade, complaining of Portuguese complicity in purchasing illegally enslaved people and the connections between Afonso&#x27;s men, Portuguese mercenaries in Kongo&#x27;s service and the capture and sale of slaves by Portuguese.

The aggregate of Portugal&#x27;s colonial holdings in India were Portuguese India. The period of European contact of Ceylon began with the arrival of Portuguese soldiers and explorers of the expedition of Lourenço de Almeida, the son of Francisco de Almeida, in 1505. The Portuguese founded a fort at the port city of Colombo in 1517 and gradually extended their control over the coastal areas and inland. In a series of military conflicts, political manoeuvres and conquests, the Portuguese extended their control over the Sinhalese kingdoms, including Jaffna (1591), Raigama (1593), Sitawaka (1593), and Kotte (1594,) but the aim of unifying the entire island under Portuguese control failed. The Portuguese, led by Pedro Lopes de Sousa, launched a full-scale military invasion of the Kingdom of Kandy in the Danture campaign of 1594. The invasion was a disaster for the Portuguese, with their entire army wiped out by Kandyan guerrilla warfare.

More envoys were sent in 1507 to Ethiopia, after Socotra was taken by the Portuguese. As a result of this mission, and facing Muslim expansion, Queen Regent Eleni of Ethiopia sent ambassador Mateus to King Manuel I of Portugal and to the Pope, in search of a coalition. Mateus reached Portugal via Goa, having returned with a Portuguese embassy, along with priest Francisco Álvares in 1520. Francisco Álvares book, which included the testimony of Covilhã, the &quot;Verdadeira Informação das Terras do Preste João das Indias&quot; (&quot;A True Relation of the Lands of Prester John of the Indies&quot;) was the first direct account of Ethiopia, greatly increasing European knowledge at the time, as it was presented to the pope, published and quoted by Giovanni Battista Ramusio.

In 1509, the Portuguese under Francisco de Almeida won a critical victory in the Battle of Diu against a joint Mamluk and Arab fleet sent to counteract their presence in the Arabian Sea. The retreat of the Mamluks and Arabs enabled the Portuguese to implement their strategy of controlling the Indian Ocean.
Afonso de Albuquerque set sail in April 1511 from Goa to Malacca with a force of 1,200 men and seventeen or eighteen ships. Following his capture of the city on 24 August 1511, it became a strategic base for Portuguese expansion in the East Indies; consequently the Portuguese were obliged to build a fort they named &quot;A Famosa&quot; to defend it. That same year, the Portuguese, desiring a commercial alliance, sent an ambassador, Duarte Fernandes, to the Kingdom of Ayutthaya, where he was well received by King Ramathibodi II. In 1526, a large force of Portuguese ships under the command of Pedro Mascarenhas was sent to conquer Bintan, where Sultan Mahmud was based. Earlier expeditions by Diogo Dias and Afonso de Albuquerque had explored that part of the Indian Ocean, and discovered several islands new to Europeans. Mascarenhas served as Captain-Major of the Portuguese colony of Malacca from 1525 to 1526, and as viceroy of Goa, capital of the Portuguese possessions in Asia, from 1554 until his death in 1555. He was succeeded by Francisco Barreto, who served with the title of &quot;governor-general&quot;.

To enforce a trade monopoly, Muscat, and Hormuz in the Persian Gulf, were seized by Afonso de Albuquerque in 1507, and in 1507 and 1515, respectively. He also entered into diplomatic relations with Persia. In 1513 while trying to conquer Aden, an expedition led by Albuquerque cruised the Red Sea inside the Bab al-Mandab, and sheltered at Kamaran island. In 1521, a force under António Correia conquered Bahrain, ushering in a period of almost eighty years of Portuguese rule of the Persian Gulf. In the Red Sea, Massawa was the most northerly point frequented by the Portuguese until 1541, when a fleet under Estevão da Gama penetrated as far as Suez.

== Campaigns Against the Manchus in China ==

In 1511, the Portuguese were the first Europeans to reach the city of Guangzhou by the sea, and they settled on its port for a commercial monopoly of trade with other nations. They were later expelled from their settlements, but they were allowed the use of Macau, which was also occupied in 1511, and to be appointed in 1557 as the base for doing business with Guangzhou. The quasi-monopoly on foreign trade in the region would be maintained by the Portuguese until the early seventeenth century, when the Spanish and Dutch arrived.

By 1619, several Ming officials who supported the use of the new technology were Christian converts of the Jesuit mission, such as the influential minister Xu Guangqi and Sun Yuanhua in Shandong. The Tianqi Emperor approved in having a company of Portuguese gunners approved in 1620 only to have them returned the way they had come in 1621, owing to local resistance upon various pretexts. After the fall of Guangning (now Beizhen in Liaoning), Ignatius Sun&#x27;s extremely thorough memorials on the superiority of Western cannon and fortification attracted attention at the highest levels of the War Ministry. The Tianqi Emperor permitted a second Portuguese expedition to reach his capital in the spring of 1622.The first pieces produced there could throw a forty-pound shot. In 1623 some &quot;hongyipao&quot; were deployed to China&#x27;s northern frontier at Sun&#x27;s request under generals such as Sun Chengzong and Yuan Chonghuan. They were used to repel Nurhaci at the Battle of Ningyuan in 1626.

The Portuguese Diogo Rodrigues explored the Indian Ocean in 1528, he explored the islands of Réunion, Mauritius, and Rodrigues, naming it the Mascarene or Mascarenhas Islands, after his countryman Pedro Mascarenhas, who had been there before. The Portuguese presence disrupted and reorganised the Southeast Asian trade, and in eastern Indonesia they introduced Christianity. After the Portuguese annexed Malacca in August 1511, one Portuguese diary noted &#x27;it is thirty years since they became Moors&#x27;– giving a sense of the competition then taking place between Islamic and European influences in the region. Afonso de Albuquerque learned of the route to the Banda Islands and other &quot;Spice Islands&quot;, and sent an exploratory expedition of three vessels under the command of António de Abreu, Simão Afonso Bisigudo and Francisco Serrão. On the return trip, Francisco Serrão was shipwrecked at Hitu Island (northern Ambon) in 1512. There he established ties with the local ruler who was impressed with his martial skills. The rulers of the competing island states of Ternate and Tidore also sought Portuguese assistance and the newcomers were welcomed in the area as buyers of supplies and spices during a lull in the regional trade due to the temporary disruption of Javanese and Malay sailings to the area following the 1511 conflict in Malacca. The spice trade soon revived but the Portuguese would not be able to fully monopolize nor disrupt this trade.

Allying himself with Ternate&#x27;s ruler, Serrão constructed a fortress on that tiny island and served as the head of a mercenary band of Portuguese seamen under the service of one of the two local feuding sultans who controlled most of the spice trade. Such an outpost far from Europe generally only attracted the most desperate and avaricious, and as such the feeble attempts at Christianization only strained relations with Ternate&#x27;s Muslim ruler. Serrão urged Ferdinand Magellan to join him in Maluku, and sent the explorer information about the Spice Islands. Both Serrão and Magellan, however, perished before they could meet one another, with Magellan dying in battle in Macatan. In 1535 Sultan Tabariji was deposed and sent to Goa in chains, where he converted to Christianity and changed his name to Dom Manuel. After being declared innocent of the charges against him he was sent back to reassume his throne, but died en route at Malacca in 1545. He had however, already bequeathed the island of Ambon to his Portuguese godfather Jordão de Freitas. Following the murder of Sultan Hairun at the hands of the Europeans, the Ternateans expelled the hated foreigners in 1575 after a five-year siege.
The Portuguese first landed in Ambon in 1513, but it only became the new centre for their activities in Maluku following the expulsion from Ternate. European power in the region was weak and Ternate became an expanding, fiercely Islamic and anti-European state under the rule of Sultan Baab Ullah (r. 1570–1583) and his son Sultan Said. The Portuguese in Ambon, however, were regularly attacked by native Muslims on the island&#x27;s northern coast, in particular Hitu which had trading and religious links with major port cities on Java&#x27;s north coast. Altogether, the Portuguese never had the resources or manpower to control the local trade in spices, and failed in attempts to establish their authority over the crucial Banda Islands, the nearby centre of most nutmeg and mace production. Following Portuguese missionary work, there have been large Christian communities in eastern Indonesia particularly among the Ambonese. By the 1560s there were 10,000 Catholics in the area, mostly on Ambon, and by the 1590s there were 50,000 to 60,000, although most of the region surrounding Ambon remained Muslim.

Mauritius was visited by the Portuguese between 1507 (by Diogo Fernandes Pereira) and 1513. The Portuguese took no interest in the isolated Mascarene islands. Their main African base was in Mozambique, and therefore the Portuguese navigators preferred to use the Mozambique Channel to go to India. The Comoros at the north proved to be a more practical port of call.

===North America===

Based on the Treaty of Tordesillas, Manuel I claimed territorial rights in the area visited by John Cabot in 1497 and 1498. To that end, in 1499 and 1500, the Portuguese mariner João Fernandes Lavrador visited the northeast Atlantic coast and Greenland and the north Atlantic coast of Canada, which accounts for the appearance of &quot;Labrador&quot; on topographical maps of the period. Subsequently, in 1501 and 1502 the Corte-Real brothers explored and charted Greenland and the coasts of present-day Newfoundland and Labrador, claiming these lands as part of the Portuguese Empire. Whether or not the Corte-Reals expeditions were also inspired by or continuing the alleged voyages of their father, João Vaz Corte-Real (with other Europeans) in 1473, to &quot;Terra Nova do Bacalhau&quot; (&quot;Newfoundland of the Codfish&quot;), remains controversial, as the 16th century accounts of the 1473 expedition differ considerably. In 1520–1521, João Álvares Fagundes was granted donatary rights to the inner islands of the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Accompanied by colonists from mainland Portugal and the Azores, he explored Newfoundland and Nova Scotia (possibly reaching the Bay of Fundy on the Minas Basin), and established a fishing colony on Cape Breton Island, that would last some years or until at least 1570s, based on contemporary accounts.

===South America===
Brazil was claimed by Portugal in April 1500, on the arrival of the Portuguese fleet commanded by Pedro Álvares Cabral. The Portuguese encountered natives divided into several tribes. The first settlement was founded in 1532.
Some European countries, especially France, were also sending excursions to Brazil to extract brazilwood. Worried about the foreign incursions and hoping to find mineral riches, the Portuguese crown decided to send large missions to take possession of the land and combat the French. In 1530, an expedition led by Martim Afonso de Sousa arrived to patrol the entire coast, ban the French, and to create the first colonial villages, like São Vicente, at the coast. As time passed, the Portuguese created the Viceroyalty of Brazil. Colonization was effectively begun in 1534, when Dom João III divided the territory into twelve hereditary captaincies, a model that had previously been used successfully in the colonization of the Madeira Island, but this arrangement proved problematic and in 1549 the king assigned a Governor-General to administer the entire colony, Tomé de Sousa.

The Portuguese frequently relied on the help of Jesuits and European adventurers who lived together with the aborigines and knew their languages and culture, such as João Ramalho, who lived among the Guaianaz tribe near today&#x27;s São Paulo, and Diogo Álvares Correia, who lived among the Tupinamba natives near today&#x27;s Salvador de Bahia.

The Portuguese assimilated some of the native tribes while others were enslaved or exterminated in long wars or by European diseases to which they had no immunity. By the mid-16th century, sugar had become Brazil&#x27;s most important export and the Portuguese imported African slaves to produce it.
Mem de Sá was the third Governor-General of Brazil in 1556, succeeding Duarte da Costa, in Salvador of Bahia when France founded several colonies.
Mem de Sá was supporting of Jesuit priests, Fathers Manuel da Nóbrega and José de Anchieta, who founded São Vicente in 1532, and São Paulo, in 1554.
French colonists tried to settle in present-day Rio de Janeiro, from 1555 to 1567, the so-called France Antarctique episode, and in present-day São Luís, from 1612 to 1614 the so-called France Équinoxiale. Through wars against the French the Portuguese slowly expanded their territory to the southeast, taking Rio de Janeiro in 1567, and to the northwest, taking São Luís in 1615.

The Dutch sacked Bahia in 1604, and temporarily captured the capital Salvador.

In the 1620s and 1630s, the Dutch West India Company established many trade posts or colonies. The Spanish silver fleet, which carried silver from Spanish colonies to Spain, were seized by Piet Heyn in 1628. In 1629 Suriname and Guyana were established. In 1630 the West India Company conquered part of Brazil, and the colony of New Holland (capital Mauritsstad, present-day Recife) was founded.

John Maurice of Nassau prince of Nassau-Siegen, was appointed as the governor of the Dutch possessions in Brazil in 1636 by the Dutch West India Company on recommendation of Frederick Henry. He landed at Recife, the port of Pernambuco and the chief stronghold of the Dutch, in January 1637. By a series of successful expeditions, he gradually extended the Dutch possessions from Sergipe on the south to São Luís de Maranhão in the north.

In 1624, most of the inhabitants of the town Pernambuco (Recife), in the future Dutch colony of Brazil were Sephardic Jews who had been banned by the Portuguese Inquisition to this town at the other side of the Atlantic Ocean. As some years afterward the Dutch in Brazil appealed to Holland for craftsmen of all kinds, many Jews went to Brazil; about 600 Jews left Amsterdam in 1642, accompanied by two distinguished scholars – Isaac Aboab da Fonseca and Moses Raphael de Aguilar. In the struggle between Holland and Portugal for the possession of Brazil the Dutch were supported by the Jews.

From 1630 to 1654, the Dutch set up more permanently in the &quot;Nordeste&quot; and controlled a long stretch of the coast most accessible to Europe, without, however, penetrating the interior. But the colonists of the Dutch West India Company in Brazil were in a constant state of siege, in spite of the presence in Recife of John Maurice of Nassau as governor. After several years of open warfare, the Dutch formally withdrew in 1661.

Portuguese sent military expeditions to the Amazon rainforest and conquered Dutch strongholds there, founding villages and forts from 1669. In 1680 they reached the far south and founded Sacramento on the bank of the Rio de la Plata, in the Eastern Strip region (present-day Uruguay).

In the 1690s, gold was discovered by explorers in the region that would later be called Minas Gerais (General Mines) in current Mato Grosso and Goiás.

Before the Iberian Union period (1580–1640), Spain tried to prevent Portuguese expansion into Brazil with the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas. After the Iberian Union period, the Eastern Strip were settled by Portugal. This was disputed in vain, and in 1777 Spain confirmed Portuguese sovereignty.

==Iberian Union period (1580–1640)==
In 1578, the Saadi sultan Ahmad al-Mansur, contemporary of Queen Elizabeth I, defeated Portugal at the Battle of Ksar El Kebir, beating the young king Sebastian I, a devout Christian who believed in the crusade to defeat Islam. Portugal had landed in North Africa after Abu Abdallah asked him to help recover the Saadian throne. Abu Abdallah&#x27;s uncle, Abd Al-Malik, had taken it from Abu Abdallah with Ottoman Empire support. The defeat of Abu Abdallah and the death of Portugal&#x27;s king led to the end of the Portuguese Aviz dynasty and later to the integration of Portugal and its empire at the Iberian Union for 60 years under Sebastian&#x27;s uncle Philip II of Spain. Philip was married to his relative Mary I cousin of his father, due to this, Philip was King of England and Ireland in a dynastic union with Spain.
As a result of the Iberian Union, Phillip II&#x27;s enemies became Portugal&#x27;s enemies, such as the Dutch in the Dutch–Portuguese War, England or France. The English-Spanish wars of 1585–1604 were clashes not only in English and Spanish ports or on the sea between them but also in and around the present-day territories of Florida, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and Panama. War with the Dutch led to invasions of many countries in Asia, including Ceylon and commercial interests in Japan, Africa (Mina), and South America. Even though the Portuguese were unable to capture the entire island of Ceylon, they were able to control its coastal regions for a considerable time.

From 1580 to 1670 mostly, the Bandeirantes in Brazil focused on slave hunting, then from 1670 to 1750 they focused on mineral wealth. Through these expeditions and the Dutch–Portuguese War, Colonial Brazil expanded from the small limits of the Tordesilhas Line to roughly the same borders as current Brazil.
In the 17th century, taking advantage of this period of Portuguese weakness, the Dutch occupied many Portuguese territories in Brazil. John Maurice, Prince of Nassau-Siegen was appointed as the governor of the Dutch possessions in Brazil in 1637 by the Dutch West India Company. He landed at Recife, the port of Pernambuco, in January 1637. In a series of expeditions, he gradually expanded from Sergipe on the south to São Luís de Maranhão in the north. He likewise conquered the Portuguese possessions of Elmina Castle, Saint Thomas, and Luanda and Angola. The Dutch intrusion into Brazil was long lasting and troublesome to Portugal. The Seventeen Provinces captured a large portion of the Brazilian coast including the provinces of Bahia, Pernambuco, Paraíba, Rio Grande do Norte, Ceará, and Sergipe, while Dutch privateers sacked Portuguese ships in both the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. The large area of Bahia and its city, the strategically important Salvador, was recovered quickly by an Iberian military expedition in 1625.

After the dissolution of the Iberian Union in 1640, Portugal re-established authority over its lost territories including remaining Dutch controlled areas. The other smaller, less developed areas were recovered in stages and relieved of Dutch piracy in the next two decades by local resistance and Portuguese expeditions.

Spanish Formosa was established in Taiwan, first by Portugal in 1544 and later renamed and repositioned by Spain in Keelung. It became a natural defence site for the Iberian Union. The colony was designed to protect Spanish and Portuguese trade from interference by the Dutch base in the south of Taiwan. The Spanish colony was short-lived due to the unwillingness of Spanish colonial authorities in Manila to defend it.

==Disease in the Americas==
While technological superiority, military strategy and forging local alliances played an important role in the victories of the conquistadors in the Americas, their conquest was greatly facilitated by Old World diseases: smallpox, chicken pox, diphtheria, typhus, influenza, measles, malaria, and yellow fever. The diseases were carried to distant tribes and villages. This typical path of disease transmission moved much faster than the conquistadors, so that as they advanced, resistance weakened. Epidemic disease is commonly cited as the primary reason for the population collapse. The American natives lacked immunity to these infections.

When Francisco Coronado and the Spaniards first explored the Rio Grande Valley in 1540, in modern New Mexico, some of the chieftains complained of new diseases that affected their tribes. Cabeza de Vaca reported that in 1528, when the Spanish landed in Texas, &quot;half the natives died from a disease of the bowels and blamed us&quot;. When the Spanish conquistadors arrived in the Incan empire, a large portion of the population had already died in a smallpox epidemic. The first epidemic was recorded in 1529 and killed the emperor Huayna Capac, the father of Atahualpa. Further epidemics of smallpox broke out in 1533, 1535, 1558 and 1565, as well as typhus in 1546, influenza in 1558, diphtheria in 1614 and measles in 1618.
Recently developed tree-ring evidence shows that the illness which reduced the population in Aztec Mexico was aided by a great drought in the 16th century, and which continued through the arrival of the Spanish conquest. This has added to the body of epidemiological evidence indicating that cocoliztli epidemics (Nahuatl name for viral haemorrhagic fever) were indigenous fevers transmitted by rodents and aggravated by the drought. The cocoliztli epidemic from 1545 to 1548 killed an estimated 5 to 15 million people, or up to 80% of the native population. The cocoliztli epidemic from 1576 to 1578 killed an estimated, additional 2 to 2.5 million people, or about 50% of the remainder.

The American researcher Henry Dobyns said that 95% of the total population of the Americas died in the first 130 years, and that 90% of the population of the Inca Empire died in epidemics. Cook and Borah of the University of California at Berkeley believe that the indigenous population in Mexico declined from 25.2 million in 1518 to 700,000 people in 1623, less than 3% of the original population.

==Mythic lands==
The conquistadors found new animal species, but reports confused these with monsters such as giants, dragons, or ghosts. Stories about castaways on mysterious islands were common.

An early motive for exploration was the search for Cipango, the place where gold was born. Cathay and Cibao were later goals. The Seven Cities of Gold, or &quot;Cibola&quot;, was rumoured to have been built by Native Americans somewhere in the desert Southwest. As early as 1611, Sebastián Vizcaíno surveyed the east coast of Japan and searched for two mythical islands called Rico de Oro (&#x27;Rich in Gold&#x27;) and Rico de Plata (&#x27;Rich in Silver&#x27;).

Books such as The Travels of Marco Polo fuelled rumours of mythical places. Stories included the half-fabulous Christian Empire of &quot;Prester John&quot;, the kingdom of the White Queen on the &quot;Western Nile&quot; (Sénégal River), the Fountain of Youth, cities of Gold in North and South America such as Quivira, Zuni-Cibola Complex, and El Dorado, and wonderful kingdoms of the Ten Lost Tribes and women called Amazons. In 1542, Francisco de Orellana reached the Amazon River, naming it after a tribe of warlike women he claimed to have fought there. Others claimed that the similarity between &quot;Indio&quot; and &quot;Iudio&quot;, the Spanish-language word for &#x27;Jew&#x27; around 1500, revealed the indigenous peoples&#x27; origin. Portuguese traveller Antonio de Montezinos reported that some of the Lost Tribes were living among the Native Americans of the Andes in South America. Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés wrote that Ponce de León was looking for the waters of Bimini to cure his aging. A similar account appears in Francisco López de Gómara&#x27;s &quot;Historia General de las Indias&quot; of 1551. Then in 1575, Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda, a shipwreck survivor who had lived with the Native Americans of Florida for 17 years, published his memoir in which he locates the Fountain of Youth in Florida, and says that Ponce de León was supposed to have looked for them there. This land somehow also became confused with the Boinca or Boyuca mentioned by Juan de Solis, although Solis&#x27;s navigational data placed it in the Gulf of Honduras.

Sir Walter Raleigh and some Italian, Spanish, Dutch, French and Portuguese expeditions were looking for the wonderful Guiana empire that gave its name to the present day countries of the Guianas.

Several expeditions went in search of these fabulous places, but returned empty-handed, or brought less gold than they had hoped. They found other precious metals such as silver, which was particularly abundant in Potosí, in modern-day Bolivia. They discovered new routes, ocean currents, trade winds, crops, spices and other products. In the sail era knowledge of winds and currents was essential, for example, the Agulhas current long prevented Portuguese sailors from reaching India. Various places in Africa and the Americas have been named after the imagined cities made of gold, rivers of gold and precious stones.

Shipwrecked off Santa Catarina island in present-day Brazil, Aleixo Garcia living among the Guaranís heard tales of a &quot;White King&quot; who lived to the west, ruling cities of incomparable riches and splendour. Marching westward in 1524 to find the land of the &quot;White King&quot;, he was the first European to cross South America from the East. He discovered a great waterfall and the Chaco Plain. He managed to penetrate the outer defences of the Inca Empire on the hills of the Andes, in present-day Bolivia, the first European to do so, eight years before Francisco Pizarro.
Garcia looted a booty of silver. When the army of Huayna Cápac arrived to challenge him, Garcia then retreated with the spoils, only to be assassinated by his Indian allies near San Pedro on the Paraguay River.

==Secrecy==
The Spanish discovery of what they thought at that time was India, and the constant competition of Portugal and Spain led to a desire for secrecy about every trade route and every colony. As a consequence, many documents that could reach other European countries included fake dates and faked facts, to mislead any other nation&#x27;s possible efforts. For example, the Island of California refers to a famous cartographic error propagated on many maps during the 17th and 18th centuries, despite contradictory evidence from various explorers. The legend was initially infused with the idea that California was a terrestrial paradise, peopled by black Amazons.

The tendency to secrecy and falsification of dates casts doubts about the authenticity of many primary sources. Several historians have hypothesized that John II may have known of the existence of Brazil and North America as early as 1480, thus explaining his wish in 1494 at the signing of the Treaty of Tordesillas, to push the line of influence further west. Many historians suspect that the real documents would have been placed in the Library of Lisbon. Unfortunately, a fire following the 1755 Lisbon earthquake destroyed nearly all of the library&#x27;s records, but an extra copy available in Goa was transferred to Lisbon&#x27;s Tower of Tombo, during the following 100 years. The Corpo Cronológico (Chronological Corpus), a collection of manuscripts on the Portuguese explorations and discoveries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, was inscribed on UNESCO&#x27;s Memory of the World Register in 2007 in recognition of its historical value &quot;for acquiring knowledge of the political, diplomatic, military, economic and religious history of numerous countries at the time of the Portuguese Discoveries.&quot;

==Financing and governance==


Ferdinand II King of Aragon and Regent of Castile, incorporated the American territories into the Kingdom of Castile and then withdrew the authority granted to governor Christopher Columbus and the first conquistadors. He established direct royal control with the Council of the Indies, the most important administrative organ of the Spanish Empire, both in the Americas and in Asia. After unifying Castile, Ferdinand introduced to Castile many laws, regulations and institutions such as the Inquisition, that were typical in Aragon. These laws were later used in the new lands.

The Laws of Burgos, created in 1512–1513, were the first codified set of laws governing the behavior of settlers in Spanish colonial America, particularly with regards to Native Americans. They forbade the maltreatment of indigenous people, and endorsed their conversion to Catholicism.

The evolving structure of colonial government was not fully formed until the third quarter of the 16th century; however, &quot;los Reyes Católicos&quot; designated Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca to study the problems related to the colonization process. Rodríguez de Fonseca effectively became minister for the Indies and laid the foundations for the creation of a colonial bureaucracy, combining legislative, executive and judicial functions. Rodríguez de Fonseca presided over the council, which contained a number of members of the Council of Castile (&quot;Consejo de Castilla&quot;), and formed a &quot;Junta de Indias&quot; of about eight counsellors. Emperor Charles V was already using the term &quot;Council of the Indies&quot; in 1519.
The Crown reserved for itself important tools of intervention. The &quot;capitulacion&quot; clearly stated that the conquered territories belonged to the Crown, not to the individual. On the other hand, &quot;concessions&quot; allowed the Crown to guide the Companies conquests to certain territories, depending on their interests. In addition, the leader of the expedition received clear instructions about their duties towards the army, the native population, the type of military action. A written report about the results was mandatory. The army had a royal official, the &quot;veedor&quot;. The &quot;veedor&quot; or notary, ensured they complied with orders and instructions and preserved the King&#x27;s share of the booty.

In practice the Capitán had almost unlimited power. Besides the Crown and the conquistador, they were very important the backers who were charged with anticipating the money to the Capitán and guarantee payment of obligations.

Armed groups sought supplies and funds in various ways. Financing was requested from the King, delegates of the Crown, the nobility, rich merchants or the troops themselves. The more professional campaigns were funded by the Crown. Campaigns were sometimes initiated by inexperienced governors, because in Spanish Colonial America, offices were bought or handed to relatives or cronies. Sometimes, an expedition of conquistadors were a group of influential men who had recruited and equipped their fighters, by promising a share of the booty.

Aside from the explorations predominated by Spain and Portugal, other parts of Europe also aided in colonization of the New World. King Charles I was documented to receive loans from the German Welser family to help finance the Venezuela expedition for gold. With numerous armed groups aiming to launch explorations well into the Age of Conquest, the Crown became indebted, allowing opportunity for foreign European creditors to finance the explorations.

The conquistador borrowed as little as possible, preferring to invest all their belongings. Sometimes, every soldier brought his own equipment and supplies, other times the soldiers received gear as an advance from the conquistador.
The Pinzón brothers, seamen of the Tinto–Odiel participated in Columbus&#x27;s undertaking. They also supported the project economically, supplying money from their personal fortunes.

Sponsors included governments, the king, viceroys, and local governors backed by rich men. The contribution of each individual conditioned the subsequent division of the booty, receiving a portion the pawn (lancero, piquero, alabardero, rodelero) and twice a man on horseback (caballero) owner of a horse. Sometimes part of the booty consisted of women and/or slaves. Even the dogs, important weapons of war in their own right, were in some cases rewarded. The division of the booty produced conflicts, such as the one between Pizarro and Almagro.

===Conflicts among conquistadors===
The division of the booty produced bloody conflicts, such as the one between Pizarro and De Almagro. After present-day Peruvian territories fell to Spain, Francisco Pizarro dispatched &quot;El Adelantado&quot;, Diego de Almagro, before they became enemies to the Inca Empire&#x27;s northern city of Quito to claim it. Their fellow conquistador Sebastián de Belalcázar, who had gone forth without Pizarro&#x27;s approval, had already reached Quito. The arrival of Pedro de Alvarado from the lands known today as Mexico in search of Inca gold further complicated the situation for De Almagro and Belalcázar. De Alvarado left South America in exchange for monetary compensation from Pizarro. De Almagro was executed in 1538, by Hernando Pizarro&#x27;s orders. In 1541, supporters of Diego Almagro II assassinated Francisco Pizarro in Lima. In 1546, De Belalcázar ordered the execution of Jorge Robledo, who governed a neighbouring province in yet another land-related vendetta. De Belalcázar was tried in absentia, convicted and condemned for killing Robledo and for other offenses pertaining to his involvement in the wars between armies of conquistadors. Pedro de Ursúa was killed by his subordinate Lope de Aguirre who crowned himself king while searching for &quot;El Dorado&quot;. In 1544, Lope de Aguirre and Melchor Verdugo (a &quot;converso&quot; Jew) were at the side of Peru&#x27;s first viceroy Blasco Núñez Vela, who had arrived from Spain with orders to implement the New Laws and suppress the encomiendas. Gonzalo Pizarro, another brother of Francisco Pizarro, rose in revolt, killed viceroy Blasco Núñez Vela and most of his Spanish army in the battle in 1546, and Gonzalo attempted to have himself crowned king.

The Emperor commissioned bishop Pedro de la Gasca to restore the peace, naming him president of the &quot;Audiencia&quot; and providing him with unlimited authority to punish and pardon the rebels. Gasca repealed the New Laws, the issue around which the rebellion had been organized. Gasca convinced Pedro de Valdivia, explorer of Chile, Alonso de Alvarado another searcher for &quot;El Dorado&quot;, and others that if he were unsuccessful, a royal fleet of 40 ships and 15,000 men was preparing to sail from Seville in June.

==Military advantages==


Though vastly outnumbered on foreign and unknown territory, Conquistadors had several military advantages over the native peoples they conquered, military strategies and tactics that were mostly learned from the 781 year war of the Reconquista. 
===Strategy===
One factor was the ability of the conquistadors to manipulate the political situation between indigenous peoples and make alliances against larger empires. To beat the Inca civilization, they supported one side of a civil war. The Spanish overthrew the Aztec civilization by allying with natives who had been subjugated by more powerful neighbouring tribes and kingdoms. These tactics had been used by the Spanish, for example, in the Granada War, the conquest of the Canary Islands and conquest of Navarre. Throughout the conquest, the indigenous people greatly outnumbered the conquistadors; the conquistador troops never exceeded 2% of the native population. The army with which Hernán Cortés besieged Tenochtitlan was composed of 200,000 soldiers, of which fewer than 1% were Spaniards.

===Tactics===
Spanish and Portuguese forces were capable of quickly moving long distances in foreign land, allowing for speed of maneuver to catch outnumbering forces by surprise. Wars were mainly between clans, expelling intruders. On land, these wars combined some European methods with techniques from Muslim bandits in Al-Andalus. These tactics consisted of small groups who attempted to catch their opponents by surprise, through an ambush.

In Mombasa, Vasco da Gama resorted to attacking Arab merchant ships, which were generally unarmed trading vessels without heavy cannons.

===Weapons and animals===

====Weapons====
Spanish conquistadors in the Americas made extensive use of swords, pikes, and crossbows, with arquebuses becoming widespread only from the 1570s. A scarcity of firearms did not prevent conquistadors to pioneer the use of mounted arquebusiers, an early form of dragoon. In the 1540s Francisco de Carvajal&#x27;s use of firearms in the Spanish civil war in Peru prefigured the volley fire technique that developed in Europe many decades after.

====Animals====

Animals were another important factor for Spanish triumph. On the one hand, the introduction of the horse and other domesticated pack animals allowed them greater mobility unknown to the Indian cultures. However, in the mountains and jungles, the Spaniards were less able to use narrow Amerindian roads and bridges made for pedestrian traffic, which were sometimes no wider than a few feet. In places such as Argentina, New Mexico and California, the indigenous people learned horsemanship, cattle raising, and sheep herding. The use of the new techniques by indigenous groups later became a disputed factor in native resistance to the colonial and American governments.

The Spaniards were also skilled at breeding dogs for war, hunting and protection. The mastiffs, Spanish war dogs, and sheep dogs they used in battle were effective as a psychological weapon against the natives, who, in many cases, had never seen domesticated dogs. Although some indigenous peoples did have domestic dogs during the conquest of the Americas, Spanish conquistadors used Spanish Mastiffs and other Molossers in battle against the Taíno, Aztecs, and Maya. These specially trained dogs were feared because of their strength and ferocity. The strongest big breeds of broad-mouthed dogs were specifically trained for battle. These war dogs were used against barely clothed troops. They were armoured dogs trained to kill and disembowel.

The most famous of these dogs of war was a mascot of Ponce de Leon called &quot;Becerrillo&quot;, the first European dog known to reach North America; another famous dog called &quot;Leoncico&quot;, the son of &quot;Becerillo&quot;, and the first European dog known to see the Pacific Ocean, was a mascot of Vasco Núñez de Balboa and accompanied him on several expeditions.

==Nautical science==
The successive expeditions and experience of the Spanish and Portuguese pilots led to a rapid evolution of European nautical science.

===Navigation===
In the thirteenth century they were guided by the sun position. For celestial navigation like other Europeans, they used Greek tools, like the astrolabe and quadrant, which they made easier and simpler. They also created the cross-staff, or &quot;cane of Jacob&quot;, for measuring at sea the height of the sun and other stars. The Southern Cross became a reference upon the arrival of João de Santarém and Pedro Escobar in the Southern hemisphere in 1471, starting its use in celestial navigation. The results varied throughout the year, which required corrections. To address this the Portuguese used the astronomical tables (Ephemeris), a precious tool for oceanic navigation, which spread widely in the fifteenth century. These tables revolutionized navigation, enabling latitude calculations. The tables of the Almanach Perpetuum, by astronomer Abraham Zacuto, published in Leiria in 1496, were used along with its improved astrolabe, by Vasco da Gama and Pedro Álvares Cabral.

===Ship design===

The ship that truly launched the first phase of the discoveries along the African coast was the Portuguese caravel. Iberians quickly adopted it for their merchant navy. It was a development based on African fishing boats. They were agile and easier to navigate, with a tonnage of 50 to 160 tons and one to three masts, with lateen triangular sails allowing luffing. The caravel particularly benefited from a greater capacity to tack. The limited capacity for cargo and crew were their main drawbacks, but have not hindered its success. Limited crew and cargo space was acceptable, initially, because as exploratory ships, their &quot;cargo&quot; was what was in the explorer&#x27;s discoveries about a new territory, which only took up the space of one person. Among the famous caravels are &quot;Berrio&quot; and &quot;Caravela Annunciation&quot;. Columbus also used them in his travels.

Long oceanic voyages led to larger ships. &quot;Nau&quot; was the Portuguese archaic synonym for any large ship, primarily merchant ships. Due to the piracy that plagued the coasts, they began to be used in the navy and were provided with cannon windows, which led to the classification of &quot;naus&quot; according to the power of its artillery. The carrack or nau was a three- or four-masted ship. It had a high rounded stern with large aftcastle, forecastle and bowsprit at the stem. It was first used by the Portuguese, and later by the Spanish. They were also adapted to the increasing maritime trade. They grew from 200 tons capacity in the 15th century to 500. In the 16th century they usually had two decks, stern castles fore and aft, two to four masts with overlapping sails. In India travels in the sixteenth century used carracks, large merchant ships with a high edge and three masts with square sails, that reached 2,000 tons.

===Winds and currents===
Besides coastal exploration, Portuguese ships also made trips further out to gather meteorological and oceanographic information. These voyages revealed the archipelagos of Bissagos Islands where the Portuguese were defeated by native people in 1535, Madeira, the Azores, Cape Verde, Sao Tome, Trindade and Martim Vaz, Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago, Fernando de Noronha, Corisco, Elobey Grande, Elobey Chico Annobón Island, Ascension Island, Bioko Island, Falkland Islands, Príncipe Island, Saint Helena Island, Tristan da Cunha Island and Sargasso Sea.

The knowledge of wind patterns and currents, the trade winds and the oceanic gyres in the Atlantic, and the determination of latitude led to the discovery of the best ocean route back from Africa: crossing the Central Atlantic to the Azores, using the winds and currents that spin clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere because of atmospheric circulation and the effect of Coriolis, facilitating the way to Lisbon and thus enabling the Portuguese to venture farther from shore, a manoeuvre that became known as the &quot;volta do mar&quot; (&quot;return of the sea&quot;). In 1565, the application of this principle in the Pacific Ocean led the Spanish discovering the Manila galleon trade route.

===Cartography===

In 1339, Angelino Dulcert of Majorca produced the portolan chart map. Evidently drawing from the information provided in 1336 by Lanceloto Malocello sponsored by King Dinis of Portugal. It showed Lanzarote island, named &quot;Insula de Lanzarotus Marocelus&quot; and marked by a Genoese shield, as well as the island of &quot;Forte Vetura&quot; (Fuerteventura) and &quot;Vegi Mari&quot; (Lobos), although Dulcert also included some imaginary islands himself, notably Saint Brendan&#x27;s Island, and three islands he names &quot;Primaria&quot;, &quot;Capraria&quot;, and &quot;Canaria&quot;.

Mestre Jacome was a Majorcan cartographer induced by Portuguese prince Henry the Navigator to move to Portugal in the 1420s to train Portuguese map-makers in Majorcan-style cartography. &#x27;Jacome of Majorca&#x27; is even sometimes described as the head of Henry&#x27;s observatory and &quot;school&quot; at Sagres.

It is thought that Jehuda Cresques, son of Jewish cartographer Abraham Cresques of Palma in Majorca, and Italian-Majorcan Angelino Dulcert were cartographers at the service of Prince Henry. Majorca had many skilled Jewish cartographers. However, the oldest signed Portuguese sea chart is a Portolan made by Pedro Reinel in 1485 representing the Western Europe and parts of Africa, reflecting the explorations made by Diogo Cão. Reinel was also author of the first nautical chart known with an indication of latitudes in 1504 and the first representation of a wind rose.

With his son, cartographer Jorge Reinel and Lopo Homem, they participated in the making of the atlas known as &quot;Lopo Homem-Reinés Atlas&quot; or &quot;Miller Atlas&quot;, in 1519. They were considered the best cartographers of their time. Emperor Charles V wanted them to work for him. In 1517 King Manuel I of Portugal handed Lopo Homem a charter giving him the privilege to certify and amend all compass needles in vessels.

The third phase of nautical cartography was characterized by the abandonment of Ptolemy&#x27;s representation of the East and more accuracy in the representation of lands and continents. Fernão Vaz Dourado (Goa ≈1520 – ≈1580), produced work of extraordinary quality and beauty, giving him a reputation as one of the best cartographers of the time. Many of his charts are large scale.

== People ==
===People in the service of Spain===

* Cristopher Columbus (West Indies, 1492–1504)
* Alonso Fernández de Lugo (Canary Islands, 1492–1496)
* Alonso de Ojeda (Venezuela, 1493-1510)
* Hernán Cortés (Mexico, 1518–1522, Baja California, 1532–1536)
* Pedro de Alvarado (Mexico, 1519–1521, Guatemala, El Salvador 1523–1527, Peru, 1533–1535, Mexico, 1540–1541)
* Miguel Díez de Aux (Mexico, 1519-1541)
* Francisco Pizarro (Peru, 1509–1535)
* Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada (Colombia, 1536–1539, Venezuela, 1569–1572)
* Pedro Fernández de Lugo (Canary Island, Colombia 1509–1536)
* Pedro de Candia (Panama, 1527, Colombia and Ecuador, 1528, Peru, 1530)
* Francisco Vásquez de Coronado (United States, 1540–1542)
* Juan de Oñate (New Mexico, United States, 1598–1608)
* Juan Roque (Zape Confraternity)
* Juan Vásquez de Coronado y Anaya (Costa Rica)
* Diego de Almagro (Peru, 1524–1535, Chile, 1535–1537)
* Rodrigo de Bastidas (Colombia and Panama, 1500–1527)
* Vasco Núñez de Balboa (Panama, 1510–1519)
* Juan Ponce de León (Puerto Rico, 1508, Florida, 1513–1521)
* Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca (United States, 1527–1536, 1540–1542)
* Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón (United States, 1524–1527)
* Sebastián de Belalcázar (Ecuador and Colombia, 1533–1536)
* Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera (Peru, Argentina, 16th century)
* Domingo Martínez de Irala (Argentina and Paraguay, 1535–1556)
* Gonzalo Pizarro (Peru, 1532–1542)
* Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar (Cuba, 1511–1519)
* Juan de Garay (Peru, Paraguay, Argentina, 16th century)
* Diego de Ordaz (Venezuela, 1532)
* Aleixo Garcia (Peru, 1524-1525)
* Juan Pizarro (Peru, 1532–1536)
* Juan García Pizarro (Peru, 1529-1537)
* Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (Yucatán, 1517)
* Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (Nicaragua, 1524)
* Hernando Pizarro (Peru, 1532–1560)
* Sebastián Caboto (Uruguay 16th century)
* Jerónimo de Alderete (Peru, 1535–1540; Chile, 1550–1552)
* Diego Hernández de Serpa (Venezuela, 1510–1570)
* Juan de Grijalva (Yucatán, 1518)
* Francisco de Montejo (Yucatán, 1527–1546)
* Juan de la Cámara (Yucatán, 1539–1546)
* Nicolás Federmann (Venezuela and Colombia, 1537–1539).
* Pánfilo de Narváez (Spanish Florida, 1527–1528)
* Diego de Nicuesa (Panama, 1506–1511)
* Hernán Venegas Carrillo (Colombia, 1536–1544)
* Cristóbal de Olid (Honduras, 1523–1524)
* Francisco de Orellana (Amazon River, 1541–1543)
* Hernando de Soto (United States, 1539–1542)
* Gonzalo García Zorro (Colombia, 1536–1544)
* Inés Suárez, (Chile, 1541)
* Francisco de Aguirre, Peru,(1536–40), Bolivia,(1538–39) Chile, (1540–1553) and Argentina (1562–64)
* Martín de Urzúa y Arizmendi, count of Lizárraga, (Petén, Guatemala, 1696–1697)
* Juan de Céspedes Ruiz (Colombia, 1521–1543)
* Pedro de Valdivia (Chile, 1540–1552)
* Jorge Robledo (Peru and Colombia, 1521–1543)
* Pedro Menéndez de Avilés (Florida, 1565–1567)
* Juan de Sanct Martín (Colombia, 1536–1550)
* Pedro de Mendoza (Argentina, 1534–1537)
* Antonio de Lebrija (Colombia, 1529–1539)
* Alonso de Ribera (Chile 1599–1617)
* Alonso de Sotomayor (Chile 1583–1592, Panama 1592–1604)
* Martín Ruiz de Gamboa (Chile 1552–1590)
* Juan Garrido (Multiple campaigns 1502–1530, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, Cuba, Florida, Mexico)
* Miguel López de Legazpi (Philippines, 1565–1572)
* Juan de Salcedo (Philippines, 1565–1576)
* Diego Romo de Vivar y Pérez (Mexico, 17th century)
* Gonzalo Suárez Rendón (Colombia, 1536–1539)
===People in the service of Portugal===

* Afonso de Albuquerque
* Jerónimo de Azevedo
* Phillippe de Oliveira
* Constantino of Braganza
* André Furtado de Mendonça
* João de Castro
* Duarte Pacheco Pereira
* António Raposo Tavares
* Domingos Jorge Velho
* Francisco Barreto
* Fernão Mendes Pinto
* Álvaro Martins
* António de Abreu
* Jorge de Menezes
* Pedro Mascarenhas
* Duarte Fernandes
* Diogo Lopes de Sequeira
* António de Noli
* Antão Gonçalves
* Bartolomeu Dias
* Cadamosto
* Cristóvão de Mendonça
* Lourenço de Almeida
* Diogo Cão
* Diogo de Azambuja
* Diogo Gomes
* Francisco Serrão
* Dinis Dias
* Fernão do Pó
* Fernão Magalhães also known as Ferdinand Magellan and Magallanes, served Spain too.
* Fernão Pires de Andrade
* Francisco de Almeida
* Francisco Álvares
* Henry the Navigator
* Gaspar Corte-Real
* Gil Eanes
* Gonçalo Velho
* João Afonso de Aveiro
* João da Nova
* João Grego
* João Álvares Fagundes
* João Fernandes Lavrador
* João Gonçalves Zarco
* João Infante
* João Vaz Corte-Real
* Jorge Álvares
* Tomé de Sousa
* Lopo Soares de Albergaria
* Luís Pires
* Luís Vaz de Torres
* Martim Afonso de Sousa
* Miguel Corte-Real
* Nicolau Coelho
* Nuno Álvares Pereira
* Nuno da Cunha
* Paulo da Gama
* Nuno Tristão
* Paulo Dias de Novais
* Pedro Álvares Cabral
* Pedro Teixeira
* Pero de Alenquer
* Pero de Barcelos
* Pero da Covilhã
* Pero Dias
* Pero Vaz de Caminha
* Tristão da Cunha
* Tristão Vaz Teixeira
* Vasco da Gama
==See also==

* European colonization of the Americas
* Libertadores, leaders of the Hispanic American wars of independence from Spain and Portugal (contrast to the Conquistadors)
* List of conquistadors
* Price revolution
* &quot;Tercio&quot;, a Renaissance-era military formation sometimes referred to as the Spanish Square

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* de Vitoria, Francisco (2006). &quot;De Indis et de Iure Belli Relectiones&quot;. Reprint edition, Lawbook Exchange Ltd.
* Gibson, Charles. &quot;The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule: A History of the Indians of the Valley of Mexico&quot;. Stanford University Press, 1964.
* Hinz, Felix (2014): &quot;Spanish-Indian encounters: the conquest and creation of new empires&quot;. In: Robert Aldrich, Kirsten McKenzie (eds.): &quot;The Routledge History of Western Empires&quot;, Routledge, London/ New York, , pp. 17–32.
* Johnson, Lyman, and Sonya Lipsett-Rivera. &quot;The Faces of Honor: Sex, Shame, and Violence in Colonial Latin America&quot;. University of New Mexico Press, 2003.
* Lockhart, James and Stuart Schwartz (1983). &quot;Early Latin America: A History of Colonial Spanish America and Brazil&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Mignolo, Walter D. (1996). &quot;The Darker Side of the Renaissance: Literacy, Territoriality, and Colonization&quot;. University of Michigan Press.
* Restall, Matthew (2003). &quot;Seven Myths of the Spanish Conquest&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Seed, Patricia (1998). &quot;Colonial Spanish America: A Documentary History&quot;. Rowman &amp; Littlefield.
* Varon Gabai, Rafael (2013). &quot;Other Council Fires Were Here Before Ours: A Classic Native American Creation Story as Retold by a Contemporary Seneca/Oneida Writer&quot;. Syracuse University Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="0" end="13" title="Conquistador" label="Conquistadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="22" end="36" title="Conquistador" label="conquistadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="71" end="78" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="83" end="93" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="158" end="166" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="168" end="174" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="176" end="183" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="188" end="192" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="204" end="220" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="241" end="258" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="286" end="294" title="Colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="299" end="310" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="343" end="352" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="408" end="428" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="450" end="461" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q379053" start="499" end="507" title="Hidalgo (nobility)" label="hidalgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790360" start="559" end="574" title="colonial empire" label="colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="582" end="591" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919465" start="615" end="628" title="Captaincy General of Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="630" end="634" title="Captaincy General of Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q541745" start="640" end="651" title="Captaincy General of Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="692" end="705" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="714" end="750" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q141791" start="761" end="773" title="Moctezuma II" label="Moctezuma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="803" end="815" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="865" end="880" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="931" end="944" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="955" end="961" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="974" end="987" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="995" end="1014" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="1050" end="1061" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="1081" end="1098" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="1135" end="1139" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q44741" start="1160" end="1177" title="Francisco Pizarro" label="Francisco Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="1191" end="1211" title="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire" label="subduing this empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="1321" end="1328" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1333" end="1338" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="1348" end="1356" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="1370" end="1376" title="Muisca" label="Muisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q347688" start="1405" end="1431" title="Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada" label="Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q453058" start="1475" end="1494" title="Rodrigo de Bastidas" label="Rodrigo de Bastidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q313369" start="1496" end="1511" title="Alonso de Ojeda" label="Alonso de Ojeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q345620" start="1513" end="1528" title="Juan de la Cosa" label="Juan de la Cosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q645620" start="1530" end="1546" title="Pedro de Heredia" label="Pedro de Heredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="1586" end="1593" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1599" end="1608" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q35827" start="1722" end="1737" title="Río de la Plata" label="Río de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="1738" end="1746" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="1806" end="1822" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="1831" end="1844" title="Hispanosphere" label="Hispanosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1847" end="1854" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="1913" end="1926" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="1928" end="1937" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1955" end="1968" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582862" start="2130" end="2135" title="Cusco" label="Cusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="2140" end="2151" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="2189" end="2205" title="List of Portuguese monarchs" label="Portuguese Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2284" end="2297" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="2302" end="2308" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="2391" end="2398" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="2471" end="2496" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Portuguese-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="2539" end="2560" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2586" end="2591" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="2597" end="2609" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="2615" end="2626" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="2632" end="2643" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q152765" start="2649" end="2673" title="Filipe de Brito e Nicote" label="Filipe de Brito e Nicote"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="2697" end="2702" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="2972" end="2992" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135885" start="3032" end="3048" title="circumnavigation" label="circumnavigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="3065" end="3083" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979955" start="3953" end="3981" title="Native American disease and epidemics" label="spread of Old World diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="3993" end="4001" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="4003" end="4012" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="4018" end="4024" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="4082" end="4091" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="4568" end="4576" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500812" start="5020" end="5035" title="Holy orders in the Catholic Church" label="Catholic clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032043" start="5359" end="5373" title="India Catalina" label="India Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q230314" start="5378" end="5387" title="La Malinche" label="Malintzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620690" start="5615" end="5627" title="Hispanicization" label="Hispanicised"/>
<link wikidata="Q504735" start="5715" end="5728" title="Juan de Fuca" label="Ioánnis Fokás"/>
<link wikidata="Q867627" start="5804" end="5830" title="Strait of Juan de Fuca" label="strait that bears his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="5839" end="5855" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="5860" end="5876" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington state"/>
<link wikidata="Q61482" start="5898" end="5916" title="Nikolaus Federmann" label="Nikolaus Federmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="5989" end="5998" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q348340" start="6026" end="6043" title="Sebastian Cabot (explorer)" label="Sebastiano Caboto"/>
<link wikidata="Q65952" start="6066" end="6082" title="Georg von Speyer" label="Georg von Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45185" start="6159" end="6171" title="Eusebio Kino" label="Eusebio Kino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982317" start="6173" end="6189" title="Wenceslaus Linck" label="Wenceslaus Linck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443980" start="6211" end="6228" title="Ferdinand Konščak" label="Ferdinand Konščak"/>
<link wikidata="Q47674" start="6251" end="6267" title="Amerigo Vespucci" label="Amerigo Vespucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q578479" start="6309" end="6322" title="Aleixo Garcia" label="Aleixo Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="6644" end="6653" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="6726" end="6735" title="Occitan language" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q440345" start="6947" end="6960" title="María Estrada" label="María Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q379053" start="7570" end="7577" title="Hidalgo (nobility)" label="hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="7633" end="7641" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="7848" end="7861" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="7880" end="7892" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44741" start="7897" end="7914" title="Francisco Pizarro" label="Francisco Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="7943" end="7954" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="7989" end="8000" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="8166" end="8176" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="8178" end="8188" title="Carmelites" label="Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="8190" end="8201" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="8207" end="8214" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="8228" end="8242" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="8244" end="8266" title="Bartolomé de Las Casas" label="Bartolomé de Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45185" start="8268" end="8280" title="Eusebio Kino" label="Eusebio Kino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448974" start="8282" end="8307" title="Juan de Palafox y Mendoza" label="Juan de Palafox y Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098834" start="8312" end="8326" title="Gaspar da Cruz" label="Gaspar da Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="8384" end="8390" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q532539" start="8748" end="8768" title="Toribio de Benavente" label="Toribio de Benavente"/>
<link wikidata="Q165853" start="8843" end="8848" title="harem" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="8887" end="8902" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566879" start="8918" end="8926" title="Caramuru" label="Caramuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q120684" start="8965" end="8974" title="Tupi people" label="Tupinambá"/>
<link wikidata="Q650828" start="8984" end="9000" title="Gonzalo Guerrero" label="Gonzalo Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q459553" start="9047" end="9056" title="Chactemal" label="Chactemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q551554" start="9058" end="9077" title="Gerónimo de Aguilar" label="Gerónimo de Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025457" start="9276" end="9281" title="ñusta" label="ñusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="9287" end="9297" title="chronicler" label="chronicler"/>
<link wikidata="Q729597" start="9299" end="9318" title="Pedro Cieza de León" label="Pedro Cieza de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q919967" start="9320" end="9356" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés" label="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220424" start="9358" end="9369" title="Diego Durán" label="Diego Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042774" start="9371" end="9390" title="Juan de Castellanos" label="Juan de Castellanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066791" start="9402" end="9413" title="Pedro Simón" label="Pedro Simón"/>
<link wikidata="Q590682" start="9489" end="9503" title="Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca" label="Bishop Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q310566" start="9505" end="9531" title="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar" label="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="9533" end="9547" title="Diego Columbus" label="Diego Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q925893" start="9553" end="9568" title="Francisco Garay" label="Francisco Garay"/>
<link wikidata="Q213594" start="9730" end="9737" title="Infante" label="Infante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138610" start="9738" end="9741" title="Dom (title)" label="Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="9742" end="9761" title="Henry the Navigator" label="Henry the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="9782" end="9793" title="João I of Portugal" label="King João I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="9871" end="9876" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9935" end="9955" title="European exploration of Africa#Portuguese explorers" label="Portuguese explorers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10015" end="10035" title="Economic history of Portugal#15th century" label="tradable commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="10080" end="10086" title="Slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="10147" end="10153" title="slaves" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="10169" end="10175" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="10926" end="10948" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="10957" end="10978" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="11020" end="11036" title="Kingdom of Spain" label="Kingdom of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="12228" end="12237" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305439" start="12268" end="12280" title="boundary delimitation" label="delimitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="12431" end="12452" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="12513" end="12530" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="12538" end="12543" title="papal bull" label="bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="12640" end="12648" title="meridian (geography)" label="meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="12664" end="12670" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="12683" end="12692" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="12719" end="12729" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="12805" end="12814" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147471" start="13314" end="13332" title="Treaty of Zaragoza" label="Treaty of Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q48784815" start="13434" end="13450" title="Sevilla la Nueva (settlement)" label="Sevilla la Nueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="13529" end="13536" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q846939" start="13750" end="13762" title="Spanish Town" label="Spanish Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473663" start="13779" end="13801" title="Saint Catherine Parish" label="Saint Catherine Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144797" start="13832" end="13841" title="Guanahani" label="Guanahani"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="13851" end="13862" title="the Bahamas" label="the Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q354097" start="13973" end="13983" title="Adelantado" label="Adelantado"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="13993" end="13997" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q310566" start="13999" end="14025" title="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar" label="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="14126" end="14132" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="14180" end="14190" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q720589" start="14269" end="14286" title="Nicolás de Ovando" label="Nicolás de Ovando"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="14374" end="14388" title="Diego Colón" label="Diego Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122879296" start="14519" end="14560" title="Hernández de Córdoba expedition" label="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="14564" end="14571" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q310566" start="14573" end="14588" title="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar" label="Diego Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q26722" start="14634" end="14650" title="Juan de Grijalva" label="Juan de Grijalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q40524" start="14821" end="14839" title="Pánfilo de Narváez" label="Pánfilo de Narváez"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="15477" end="15513" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q312741" start="15581" end="15599" title="Juan Díaz de Solís" label="Juan Díaz de Solís"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="15616" end="15623" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="15638" end="15648" title="confluence (geography)" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18278" start="15656" end="15669" title="Uruguay River" label="Uruguay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q127892" start="15678" end="15690" title="Paraná River" label="Paraná River"/>
<link wikidata="Q356785" start="15702" end="15732" title="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (discoverer of Yucatán)" label="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="15745" end="15749" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="15789" end="15796" title="Yucatán (state)" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q26722" start="15903" end="15919" title="Juan de Grijalva" label="Juan de Grijalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q80914" start="15955" end="15962" title="Tabasco" label="Tabasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q390720" start="15968" end="15984" title="governor of Cuba" label="governor of Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q310566" start="15986" end="16004" title="Diego de Velasquez" label="Diego de Velasquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q378235" start="16335" end="16353" title="Pedro Arias Dávila" label="Pedro Arias Dávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="16378" end="16389" title="La Española" label="La Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="16411" end="16419" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573380" start="16458" end="16464" title="Darién, Panama" label="Darién"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="16621" end="16637" title="Spanish conquest of Peru" label="conquest of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="16685" end="16692" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q728342" start="16730" end="16743" title="Pedro Navarro" label="Pedro Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="16775" end="16779" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q928747" start="16906" end="16925" title="Gil González Dávila" label="Gil González Dávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q210900" start="16952" end="16969" title="Pedro de Alvarado" label="Pedro de Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993582" start="16973" end="16990" title="Spanish conquest of Guatemala" label="explore Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q373751" start="17032" end="17062" title="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (founder of Nicaragua)" label="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q390720" start="17222" end="17238" title="Governor of Cuba" label="Governor of Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="17239" end="17255" title="Hernando de Soto (explorer)" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q207668" start="17309" end="17325" title="Diego de Almagro" label="Diego de Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898731" start="17511" end="17528" title="Pedro de los Ríos y Gutiérrez de Aguayo" label="Pedro de los Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208151" start="17561" end="17565" title="León, Nicaragua" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="18011" end="18030" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Viceroyalty of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="18141" end="18155" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898655" start="18157" end="18180" title="Pedro Fernández de Lugo" label="Pedro Fernández de Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="18193" end="18204" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q453058" start="18232" end="18251" title="Rodrigo de Bastidas" label="Rodrigo de Bastidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728" start="18319" end="18347" title="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta" label="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="18476" end="18491" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q347688" start="18537" end="18563" title="Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada" label="Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="18620" end="18626" title="Muisca" label="Muisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077264" start="18649" end="18671" title="New Kingdom of Granada" label="New Kingdom of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="18781" end="18798" title="Santafé de Bogotá" label="Santafé de Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q312741" start="18800" end="18818" title="Juan Díaz de Solís" label="Juan Díaz de Solís"/>
<link wikidata="Q35827" start="18848" end="18863" title="Río de la Plata" label="Río de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q35045" start="19034" end="19040" title="Potosí" label="Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q238079" start="19121" end="19141" title="Potosí Department" label="department of Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q823273" start="19255" end="19269" title="Sancti Spiritu (Argentina)" label="Sancti Spiritu"/>
<link wikidata="Q127892" start="19303" end="19315" title="Paraná River" label="Paraná River"/>
<link wikidata="Q521271" start="19372" end="19406" title="Governorate of the Río de la Plata" label="Governorate of the Río de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810844" start="20003" end="20015" title="Juan Garrido" label="Juan Garrido"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810928" start="21478" end="21491" title="Juan Valiente" label="Juan Valiente"/>
<link wikidata="Q130252784" start="22326" end="22345" title="Juan García Pizarro" label="Juan García Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="22451" end="22458" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164323" start="23041" end="23059" title="Discovery doctrine" label="undiscovered lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="23080" end="23090" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q185974" start="23092" end="23110" title="Juan Ponce de León" label="Juan Ponce de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567934" start="23303" end="23323" title="Seven Cities of Gold" label="Seven Cities of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q715754" start="23439" end="23457" title="Francisco de Ulloa" label="Francisco de Ulloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="23606" end="23613" title="Basque people" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="23670" end="23678" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="23683" end="23695" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q284046" start="23816" end="23823" title="Red Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Red Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q174652" start="23903" end="23910" title="bowhead" label="bowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527843" start="23916" end="23927" title="right whale" label="right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320176" start="24160" end="24173" title="Estêvão Gomes" label="Estêvão Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="24193" end="24211" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="24294" end="24309" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="24318" end="24330" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q116680865" start="24418" end="24431" title="Diogo Ribeiro (cartographer)" label="Diego Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q250763" start="24514" end="24528" title="Cabeza de Vaca" label="Cabeza de Vaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277677" start="24551" end="24569" title="Narváez expedition" label="Narváez expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059534" start="24653" end="24671" title="Tampa Bay, Florida" label="Tampa Bay, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="24813" end="24823" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="24825" end="24835" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="24840" end="24848" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="24925" end="24930" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215321" start="24950" end="24963" title="Apalachee Bay" label="Apalachee Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="25160" end="25177" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315101" start="25186" end="25202" title="Galveston Island" label="Galveston Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="25292" end="25302" title="Gulf Coast" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q13866" start="25340" end="25353" title="Nueva Vizcaya" label="Nueva Vizcaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q80252" start="25409" end="25416" title="Sinaloa" label="Sinaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q633848" start="25524" end="25536" title="Gulf Islands" label="Gulf Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="25691" end="25706" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q354615" start="25760" end="25787" title="Andrés Dorantes de Carranza" label="Andrés Dorantes de Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839280" start="25789" end="25818" title="Alonso del Castillo Maldonado" label="Alonso del Castillo Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="25827" end="25835" title="slavery" label="enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="25845" end="25851" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370004" start="25858" end="25868" title="Estevanico" label="Estevanico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="25900" end="25911" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q690830" start="25969" end="25983" title="Marcos de Niza" label="Marcos de Niza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567934" start="26019" end="26041" title="Seven Cities of Cibola" label="Seven Cities of Cibola"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="26053" end="26061" title="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado" label="Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q231317" start="26192" end="26196" title="Zuni people" label="Zuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392902" start="26208" end="26215" title="Hawikuh" label="Hawikuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="26258" end="26267" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q441300" start="26268" end="26286" title="Antonio de Mendoza" label="Antonio de Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106099" start="26310" end="26323" title="Codex Mendoza" label="Codex Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="26444" end="26473" title="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065451" start="26482" end="26489" title="Quivira" label="Quivira"/>
<link wikidata="Q182491" start="26509" end="26532" title="Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo" label="Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="26567" end="26582" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q961953" start="26778" end="26802" title="García López de Cárdenas" label="García López de Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q685297" start="27273" end="27292" title="Hernando de Alarcón" label="Hernando de Alarcón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="27332" end="27346" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376778" start="27616" end="27629" title="Melchior Díaz" label="Melchior Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79820" start="28033" end="28037" title="Yuma, Arizona" label="Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061033" start="28313" end="28326" title="Yuma Crossing National Heritage Area" label="Yuma Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q727612" start="28335" end="28356" title="Juan Bautista de Anza" label="Juan Bautista de Anza"/>
<link wikidata="Q25533" start="28649" end="28684" title="Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition" label="Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="28776" end="28786" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735153" start="28890" end="28912" title="García Sarmiento de Sotomayor, 2nd Count of Salvatierra" label="Diego García Sarmiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="29071" end="29089" title="Charles I of Spain" label="Charles I of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751621" start="29125" end="29147" title="García Jofre de Loaísa" label="García Jofre de Loaísa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="29210" end="29230" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="29248" end="29266" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="29340" end="29354" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="29420" end="29429" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q449551" start="29512" end="29535" title="Ruy López de Villalobos" label="Ruy López de Villalobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="29697" end="29711" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q219608" start="29750" end="29762" title="Ambon Island" label="Ambon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q19151" start="29764" end="29771" title="Ternate" label="Ternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053892" start="29777" end="29784" title="Morotai" label="Morotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q318500" start="29869" end="29892" title="Miguel López de Legazpi" label="Miguel López de Legazpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q722310" start="29939" end="29954" title="Luís de Velasco" label="Luís de Velasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="30094" end="30112" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="30129" end="30140" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="30381" end="30396" title="Pacific Islands" label="Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="30453" end="30472" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506955" start="30515" end="30521" title="Tidore" label="Tidore"/>
<link wikidata="Q63124" start="30826" end="30849" title="Ternate, Cavite" label="municipality of Ternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="30880" end="30895" title="Manila Galleons" label="Manila Galleons"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="30940" end="30946" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q181469" start="30956" end="30963" title="galleon" label="galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="31007" end="31015" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q182491" start="31075" end="31098" title="Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo" label="Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q141710" start="31174" end="31192" title="Sebastián Vizcaíno" label="Sebastián Vizcaíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776964" start="31261" end="31278" title="Martín de Aguilar" label="Martín de Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168063" start="31375" end="31383" title="Coos Bay" label="Coos Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="31399" end="31405" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="32393" end="32400" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="32489" end="32497" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="32514" end="32530" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="32646" end="32655" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="32711" end="32717" title="republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="32722" end="32727" title="republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="32782" end="32796" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="33169" end="33175" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="33514" end="33527" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="33713" end="33721" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="33761" end="33775" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q472658" start="33912" end="33919" title="History of Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q730328" start="33937" end="33942" title="Asilah" label="Asila"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="34097" end="34104" title="John II of Portugal" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q968662" start="34133" end="34150" title="Elmina" label="São Jorge da Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q313060" start="34223" end="34232" title="Diogo Cão" label="Diogo Cão"/>
<link wikidata="Q932289" start="34257" end="34262" title="Congo Basin" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858128" start="34283" end="34293" title="Cape Cross" label="Cape Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="34347" end="34358" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="34432" end="34445" title="Kongo Kingdom" label="Kongo Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q360804" start="34486" end="34501" title="Pero da Covilhã" label="Pero da Covilhã"/>
<link wikidata="Q980581" start="34506" end="34521" title="Afonso de Paiva" label="Afonso de Paiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377" start="34744" end="34759" title="Bartolomeu Dias" label="Bartolomeu Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="34772" end="34789" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="34866" end="34879" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="34904" end="34924" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="34979" end="35000" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="35011" end="35014" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478280" start="35025" end="35030" title="Ormuz" label="Ormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79883" start="35038" end="35052" title="Persian Strait" label="Persian Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="35058" end="35065" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q83067" start="35157" end="35162" title="Timor" label="Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024123" start="35280" end="35294" title="Álvaro Caminha" label="Álvaro Caminha"/>
<link wikidata="Q233124" start="35417" end="35432" title="São Tomé Island" label="São Tomé Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q210636" start="35434" end="35442" title="Príncipe" label="Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="36433" end="36446" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="36463" end="36476" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="36512" end="36519" title="Kozhikode" label="Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="36617" end="36625" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="36645" end="36662" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208664" start="37640" end="37645" title="Pemba Island" label="Pemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q500189" start="37843" end="37874" title="M&amp;#x27;banza-Kongo" label="Cidade de Congo de São Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="37928" end="37938" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q383455" start="38142" end="38159" title="Afonso I of Kongo" label="Afonso I of Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361666" start="38180" end="38218" title="Roman Catholic Church in Kongo" label="Roman Catholic Church in Kongo kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="38450" end="38458" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="38463" end="38483" title="João III of Portugal" label="João III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="38577" end="38588" title="History of slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="38877" end="38893" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="38929" end="38935" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="38986" end="38995" title="Exploration" label="explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657862" start="39017" end="39036" title="Lourenço de Almeida" label="Lourenço de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q337066" start="39049" end="39069" title="Francisco de Almeida" label="Francisco de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="39130" end="39137" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524320" start="39336" end="39354" title="Sinhala Kingdom" label="Sinhalese kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311219" start="39366" end="39372" title="Jaffna Kingdom" label="Jaffna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412581" start="39381" end="39388" title="Kingdom of Raigama" label="Raigama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136850" start="39397" end="39405" title="Kingdom of Sitawaka" label="Sitawaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589163" start="39418" end="39423" title="Kingdom of Kotte" label="Kotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159717" start="39530" end="39550" title="Pedro Lopes de Sousa" label="Pedro Lopes de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530762" start="39599" end="39615" title="Kingdom of Kandy" label="Kingdom of Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027837" start="39623" end="39639" title="Campaign of Danture" label="Danture campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="39741" end="39758" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q82859" start="39810" end="39817" title="Socotra" label="Socotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905074" start="39918" end="39935" title="Eleni of Ethiopia" label="Eleni of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786668" start="39952" end="39958" title="Mateus (Ethiopia)" label="Mateus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="39967" end="39987" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344575" start="40125" end="40142" title="Francisco Álvares" label="Francisco Álvares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378950" start="40515" end="40540" title="Giovanni Battista Ramusio" label="Giovanni Battista Ramusio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628477" start="40624" end="40637" title="Battle of Diu" label="Battle of Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q249934" start="40654" end="40660" title="Burji dynasty" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="40717" end="40728" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="40851" end="40872" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110453" start="40989" end="40996" title="Capture of Malacca (1511)" label="capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955098" start="41174" end="41182" title="A Famosa" label="A Famosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981637" start="41287" end="41303" title="Duarte Fernandes" label="Duarte Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="41312" end="41332" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Kingdom of Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q561304" start="41369" end="41383" title="Ramathibodi II" label="Ramathibodi II"/>
<link wikidata="Q527755" start="41449" end="41466" title="Pedro Mascarenhas" label="Pedro Mascarenhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10097" start="41487" end="41493" title="Bintan" label="Bintan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244637" start="41508" end="41514" title="Mahmud Shah of Malacca" label="Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q453238" start="41549" end="41559" title="Diogo Dias" label="Diogo Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="41564" end="41585" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="41777" end="41784" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346089" start="41895" end="41912" title="Francisco Barreto" label="Francisco Barreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826" start="42003" end="42009" title="Muscat, Oman" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q695265" start="42015" end="42021" title="Hormuz Island" label="Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="42029" end="42041" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="42058" end="42079" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="42146" end="42166" title="Diplomacy" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="42172" end="42178" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="42212" end="42216" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="42263" end="42270" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83318" start="42282" end="42295" title="Bab al-Mandab" label="Bab al-Mandab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320260" start="42314" end="42321" title="Kamaran" label="Kamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777544" start="42353" end="42368" title="António Correia (admiral)" label="António Correia"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="42379" end="42386" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q275635" start="42488" end="42495" title="Massawa" label="Massawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370833" start="42585" end="42600" title="Estêvão da Gama (16th century)" label="Estevão da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q134514" start="42622" end="42626" title="Suez" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="42745" end="42754" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="42933" end="42938" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="43317" end="43331" title="Jesuit China missions" label="Jesuit mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q420427" start="43366" end="43376" title="Xu Guangqi" label="Xu Guangqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10945451" start="43381" end="43392" title="Sun Yuanhua" label="Sun Yuanhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="43396" end="43404" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10066" start="43410" end="43424" title="Tianqi Emperor" label="Tianqi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11064574" start="43606" end="43614" title="Battle of Guangning" label="the fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q814966" start="43618" end="43627" title="Guangning, Liaoning" label="Guangning"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="43644" end="43652" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q10945451" start="43655" end="43667" title="Ignatius Sun" label="Ignatius Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797" start="43745" end="43758" title="Star fort" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10066" start="43826" end="43840" title="Tianqi Emperor" label="Tianqi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10945451" start="44075" end="44078" title="Ignatius Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429287" start="44117" end="44130" title="Sun Chengzong" label="Sun Chengzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q715553" start="44135" end="44149" title="Yuan Chonghuan" label="Yuan Chonghuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311189" start="44175" end="44182" title="Nurhaci" label="Nurhaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047602" start="44190" end="44208" title="Battle of Ningyuan" label="Battle of Ningyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226859" start="44234" end="44249" title="Diogo Rodrigues" label="Diogo Rodrigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="44312" end="44319" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208668" start="44336" end="44345" title="Rodrigues (island)" label="Rodrigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="44361" end="44370" title="Mascarene" label="Mascarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="44374" end="44393" title="Mascarene Islands" label="Mascarenhas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="44604" end="44614" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="44623" end="44630" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="44717" end="44722" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q739411" start="44887" end="44900" title="Banda Islands" label="Banda Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q611584" start="45011" end="45027" title="António de Abreu" label="António de Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q554452" start="45055" end="45071" title="Francisco Serrão" label="Francisco Serrão"/>
<link wikidata="Q554452" start="45093" end="45109" title="Francisco Serrão" label="Francisco Serrão"/>
<link wikidata="Q219608" start="45151" end="45156" title="Ambon Island" label="Ambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19151" start="45302" end="45309" title="Ternate" label="Ternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506955" start="45314" end="45320" title="Tidore" label="Tidore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49209" start="45503" end="45511" title="Javanese people" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="45516" end="45521" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="45815" end="45824" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="45936" end="45941" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="46164" end="46182" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219608" start="46706" end="46711" title="Ambon Island" label="Ambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q219608" start="46937" end="46942" title="Ambon Island" label="Ambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="48020" end="48029" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="48160" end="48177" title="Mascarene islands" label="Mascarene islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="48210" end="48220" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="48283" end="48301" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="48322" end="48329" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="48422" end="48443" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85642" start="48504" end="48514" title="John Cabot" label="John Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052766" start="48587" end="48610" title="João Fernandes Lavrador" label="João Fernandes Lavrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="48652" end="48661" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="48694" end="48700" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135525" start="48832" end="48842" title="Corte-Real (disambiguation)" label="Corte-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="48913" end="48938" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="48976" end="48993" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q362292" start="49111" end="49130" title="João Vaz Corte-Real" label="João Vaz Corte-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115062" start="49354" end="49375" title="João Álvares Fagundes" label="João Álvares Fagundes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036201" start="49388" end="49396" title="Donatário" label="donatary"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="49432" end="49452" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="Gulf of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="49547" end="49558" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181857" start="49582" end="49594" title="Bay of Fundy" label="Bay of Fundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887535" start="49602" end="49613" title="Minas Basin" label="Minas Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="49652" end="49670" title="Cape Breton Island" label="Cape Breton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="49875" end="49895" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675898" start="50097" end="50107" title="brazilwood" label="brazilwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q704141" start="50317" end="50339" title="Martim Afonso de Sousa" label="Martim Afonso de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138610" start="50582" end="50585" title="Don (honorific)" label="Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="50586" end="50594" title="John III of Portugal" label="João III"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188" start="50731" end="50745" title="Madeira Island" label="Madeira Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="50819" end="50835" title="Governor-General" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554759" start="50869" end="50882" title="Tomé de Sousa" label="Tomé de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="50933" end="50940" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889012" start="51051" end="51063" title="João Ramalho" label="João Ramalho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566879" start="51133" end="51154" title="Diogo Álvares Correia" label="Diogo Álvares Correia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734857" start="51532" end="51541" title="Mem de Sá" label="Mem de Sá"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="51556" end="51572" title="Governor-General" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="51623" end="51631" title="Salvador, Brazil" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="51635" end="51640" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="51707" end="51713" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q734274" start="51731" end="51748" title="Manuel da Nóbrega" label="Manuel da Nóbrega"/>
<link wikidata="Q317126" start="51753" end="51769" title="José de Anchieta" label="José de Anchieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q272254" start="51783" end="51794" title="São Vicente, Brazil" label="São Vicente"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="51808" end="51817" title="São Paulo (city)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990219" start="51828" end="51844" title="French colonization of the Americas" label="French colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="51876" end="51890" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353951" start="51925" end="51943" title="France Antarctique" label="France Antarctique"/>
<link wikidata="Q28441" start="51972" end="51980" title="São Luís, Maranhão" label="São Luís"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440788" start="52014" end="52032" title="France Équinoxiale" label="France Équinoxiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="52138" end="52152" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28441" start="52191" end="52199" title="São Luís, Maranhão" label="São Luís"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="52227" end="52232" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="52279" end="52287" title="Salvador, Brazil" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="52318" end="52342" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q560774" start="52479" end="52488" title="Piet Hein (Netherlands)" label="Piet Heyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="52506" end="52514" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="52519" end="52525" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q221357" start="52619" end="52630" title="Dutch Brazil" label="New Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="52665" end="52671" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q321492" start="52687" end="52709" title="John Maurice of Nassau" label="John Maurice of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q736029" start="52720" end="52733" title="Nassau-Siegen" label="Nassau-Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="52815" end="52839" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="52891" end="52897" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="52911" end="52921" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43783" start="53066" end="53073" title="Sergipe" label="Sergipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28441" start="53090" end="53110" title="São Luís de Maranhão" label="São Luís de Maranhão"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="53171" end="53181" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="53183" end="53189" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="53234" end="53248" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="53276" end="53298" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q935621" start="53554" end="53576" title="Isaac Aboab da Fonseca" label="Isaac Aboab da Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q94166707" start="53581" end="53605" title="Moses Raphael de Aguilar" label="Moses Raphael de Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="53940" end="53964" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q321492" start="54048" end="54070" title="John Maurice of Nassau" label="John Maurice of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="54203" end="54220" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064" start="54346" end="54356" title="Colonia del Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q35827" start="54376" end="54391" title="Río de la Plata" label="Rio de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="54434" end="54441" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q806283" start="54482" end="54491" title="Bandeirantes" label="explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="54533" end="54545" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q42824" start="54573" end="54584" title="Mato Grosso" label="Mato Grosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q41587" start="54589" end="54594" title="Goiás" label="Goiás"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="54707" end="54733" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="1494 Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q617103" start="54771" end="54784" title="Banda Oriental" label="Eastern Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="54947" end="54953" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q400911" start="54954" end="54969" title="Ahmad al-Mansur" label="Ahmad al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="54993" end="55004" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121532" start="55031" end="55054" title="Battle of Ksar El Kebir" label="Battle of Ksar El Kebir"/>
<link wikidata="Q272899" start="55079" end="55090" title="Sebastian of Portugal" label="Sebastian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q334768" start="55198" end="55210" title="Abu Abdallah Mohammed II Saadi" label="Abu Abdallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q747516" start="55456" end="55468" title="House of Aviz" label="Aviz dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="55532" end="55545" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185044" start="55588" end="55606" title="Philippine Dynasty" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="55643" end="55649" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I"/>
<link wikidata="Q82850" start="55696" end="55711" title="List of English monarchs" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736547" start="55716" end="55723" title="List of Irish monarchs" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102202" start="55729" end="55743" title="dynastic union" label="dynastic union"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="55873" end="55893" title="Dutch–Portuguese War" label="Dutch–Portuguese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q430726" start="55918" end="55951" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)" label="English-Spanish wars of 1585–1604"/>
<link wikidata="Q944191" start="56274" end="56278" title="History of Gabon" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q806283" start="56481" end="56493" title="Bandeirantes" label="Bandeirantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="56619" end="56639" title="Dutch–Portuguese War" label="Dutch–Portuguese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="56641" end="56656" title="Colonial Brazil" label="Colonial Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="56695" end="56711" title="Tordesilhas Line" label="Tordesilhas Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q321492" start="56894" end="56931" title="John Maurice, Prince of Nassau-Siegen" label="John Maurice, Prince of Nassau-Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="57012" end="57036" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264655" start="57266" end="57279" title="Elmina Castle" label="Elmina Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="57299" end="57305" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q330533" start="57400" end="57419" title="Seventeen Provinces" label="Seventeen Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="57495" end="57500" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38088" start="57514" end="57521" title="Paraíba" label="Paraíba"/>
<link wikidata="Q40123" start="57544" end="57549" title="Ceará" label="Ceará"/>
<link wikidata="Q43783" start="57555" end="57562" title="Sergipe" label="Sergipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q74049" start="58116" end="58131" title="Spanish Formosa" label="Spanish Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="58232" end="58239" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="58516" end="58522" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="58787" end="58795" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="58797" end="58808" title="chicken pox" label="chicken pox"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="58810" end="58820" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="58822" end="58828" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="58830" end="58839" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="58841" end="58848" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="58850" end="58857" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="58863" end="58875" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254860" start="59066" end="59082" title="List of epidemics" label="Epidemic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="59180" end="59188" title="Immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="59216" end="59234" title="Francisco Coronado" label="Francisco Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="59272" end="59282" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q250763" start="59399" end="59413" title="Cabeza de Vaca" label="Cabeza de Vaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="59665" end="59673" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q311433" start="59747" end="59759" title="Huayna Capac" label="Huayna Capac"/>
<link wikidata="Q179577" start="59775" end="59784" title="Atahualpa" label="Atahualpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="59961" end="59970" title="Growth rings" label="tree-ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q63472138" start="60234" end="60254" title="cocoliztli epidemics" label="cocoliztli epidemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="60256" end="60263" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q162272" start="60273" end="60297" title="viral hemorrhagic fever" label="viral haemorrhagic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q63472138" start="60380" end="60417" title="Cocoliztli Epidemic of 1545-1548" label="cocoliztli epidemic from 1545 to 1548"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004884" start="60656" end="60668" title="Henry F. Dobyns" label="Henry Dobyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="60843" end="60879" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California at Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="60922" end="60928" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567934" start="61361" end="61381" title="Seven Cities of Gold" label="Seven Cities of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q654562" start="61710" end="61735" title="The Travels of Marco Polo" label="The Travels of Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q118192" start="61833" end="61845" title="Prester John" label="Prester John"/>
<link wikidata="Q905162" start="61872" end="61883" title="Dido (Queen of Carthage)" label="White Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569" start="61917" end="61930" title="Sénégal River" label="Sénégal River"/>
<link wikidata="Q775332" start="61937" end="61954" title="Fountain of Youth" label="Fountain of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065451" start="62006" end="62013" title="Quivira" label="Quivira"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075289" start="62015" end="62034" title="Zuni-Cibola Complex" label="Zuni-Cibola Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="62040" end="62049" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125226" start="62081" end="62096" title="Ten Lost Tribes" label="Ten Lost Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="62114" end="62121" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q207901" start="62132" end="62153" title="Francisco de Orellana" label="Francisco de Orellana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="62166" end="62178" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q606025" start="62464" end="62485" title="Antonio de Montezinos" label="Antonio de Montezinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="62546" end="62592" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans of the Andes in South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q919967" start="62594" end="62630" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés" label="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q863476" start="62686" end="62692" title="Bimini" label="Bimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q721423" start="62741" end="62766" title="Francisco López de Gómara" label="Francisco López de Gómara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196510" start="62840" end="62871" title="Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda" label="Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q775332" start="63154" end="63160" title="Fountain of Youth" label="Boinca"/>
<link wikidata="Q312741" start="63184" end="63197" title="Juan de Solis" label="Juan de Solis"/>
<link wikidata="Q795608" start="63256" end="63272" title="Gulf of Honduras" label="Gulf of Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="63279" end="63293" title="Walter Raleigh" label="Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q650667" start="63458" end="63469" title="the Guianas" label="the Guianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="63619" end="63634" title="precious metals" label="precious metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q35045" start="63686" end="63692" title="Potosí" label="Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="63745" end="63758" title="ocean current" label="ocean current"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="63761" end="63772" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q398548" start="63888" end="63903" title="Agulhas current" label="Agulhas current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191273" start="64110" end="64131" title="Santa Catarina (island)" label="Santa Catarina island"/>
<link wikidata="Q578479" start="64155" end="64168" title="Aleixo Garcia" label="Aleixo Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208347" start="64488" end="64499" title="Gran Chaco" label="Chaco Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="64551" end="64562" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="64583" end="64588" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="64605" end="64612" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311433" start="64731" end="64743" title="Huayna Cápac" label="Huayna Cápac"/>
<link wikidata="Q135993" start="64859" end="64868" title="San Pedro, Paraguay" label="San Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q179396" start="64876" end="64890" title="Paraguay River" label="Paraguay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q844977" start="65275" end="65295" title="Island of California" label="Island of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="65315" end="65327" title="cartography" label="cartographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="65557" end="65564" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q112754" start="65662" end="65677" title="primary sources" label="primary sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="65862" end="65883" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191055" start="66062" end="66084" title="1755 Lisbon earthquake" label="1755 Lisbon earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="66426" end="66432" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="66440" end="66468" title="Memory of the World Register" label="Memory of the World Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="66984" end="67005" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="67054" end="67068" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="67212" end="67223" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q976128" start="67304" end="67318" title="Laws of Burgos" label="Laws of Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="67471" end="67487" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="67715" end="67734" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="los Reyes Católicos"/>
<link wikidata="Q590682" start="67752" end="67777" title="Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca" label="Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993747" start="68118" end="68136" title="Council of Castile" label="Council of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="68249" end="68258" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="68292" end="68313" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="69595" end="69619" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish Colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558023" start="70027" end="70040" title="Welser family" label="Welser family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388890" start="70526" end="70541" title="Pinzón brothers" label="Pinzón brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17744" start="70557" end="70562" title="Río Tinto (river)" label="Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17747" start="70563" end="70568" title="Odiel" label="Odiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44741" start="71447" end="71464" title="Francisco Pizarro" label="Francisco Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q207668" start="71503" end="71519" title="Diego de Almagro" label="Diego de Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900" start="71591" end="71596" title="Quito" label="Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q332070" start="71636" end="71659" title="Sebastián de Belalcázar" label="Sebastián de Belalcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210900" start="71755" end="71772" title="Pedro de Alvarado" label="Pedro de Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="71803" end="71809" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q719855" start="72017" end="72033" title="Hernando Pizarro" label="Hernando Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q919763" start="72072" end="72088" title="Diego Almagro II" label="Diego Almagro II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183880" start="72177" end="72190" title="Jorge Robledo (conquistador)" label="Jorge Robledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381257" start="72446" end="72460" title="Pedro de Ursúa" label="Pedro de Ursúa"/>
<link wikidata="Q529197" start="72491" end="72506" title="Lope de Aguirre" label="Lope de Aguirre"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="72558" end="72567" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="72629" end="72637" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121487" start="72770" end="72778" title="New Laws" label="New Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="72796" end="72806" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q435292" start="72809" end="72824" title="Gonzalo Pizarro" label="Gonzalo Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956446" start="72826" end="72841" title="Pizarro brothers" label="another brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q881775" start="72895" end="72912" title="Blasco Núñez Vela" label="Blasco Núñez Vela"/>
<link wikidata="Q929681" start="73050" end="73067" title="Pedro de la Gasca" label="Pedro de la Gasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="73124" end="73133" title="Audiencia Real" label="Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121487" start="73235" end="73243" title="New Laws" label="New Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q203534" start="73318" end="73335" title="Pedro de Valdivia" label="Pedro de Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372895" start="73356" end="73374" title="Alonso de Alvarado" label="Alonso de Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="73528" end="73535" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="73804" end="73815" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="74001" end="74005" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="74086" end="74091" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552718" start="74268" end="74279" title="Granada War" label="Granada War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891025" start="74285" end="74315" title="conquest of the Canary Islands" label="conquest of the Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312328" start="74320" end="74339" title="Spanish conquest of Iberian Navarre" label="conquest of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="74515" end="74528" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q593267" start="74538" end="74550" title="Fall of Tenochtitlan" label="Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="74948" end="74958" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q225641" start="75075" end="75082" title="Mombasa" label="Mombasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="75084" end="75097" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="75313" end="75318" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q220016" start="75321" end="75326" title="pike (weapon)" label="pikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="75332" end="75340" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="75348" end="75356" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="75514" end="75521" title="dragoon" label="dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736128" start="75536" end="75557" title="Francisco de Carvajal" label="Francisco de Carvajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="75588" end="75613" title="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire" label="Spanish civil war in Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940364" start="75629" end="75640" title="volley fire" label="volley fire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76123" end="76132" title="History of Argentina#Spanish colonial era" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="76134" end="76144" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76149" end="76159" title="History of California to 1899#Spanish colonization and governance (1697–1821)" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907935" start="76472" end="76479" title="mastiff" label="mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q37690" start="76482" end="76498" title="Alano Español" label="Spanish war dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q38920" start="76504" end="76514" title="Livestock guardian dog" label="sheep dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37939" start="76771" end="76786" title="Spanish Mastiff" label="Spanish Mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217219" start="76798" end="76807" title="Molossers" label="Molossers"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="76830" end="76835" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="76837" end="76843" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="76849" end="76853" title="Maya peoples" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q38953" start="76988" end="77008" title="Attack dog" label="specifically trained"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722177" start="77027" end="77035" title="Dogs in warfare" label="war dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185974" start="77187" end="77200" title="Juan Ponce de León" label="Ponce de Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724426" start="77214" end="77224" title="Becerrillo" label="Becerrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19080" start="77442" end="77463" title="Vasco Núñez de Balboa" label="Vasco Núñez de Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="77750" end="77770" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="77825" end="77834" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q841280" start="77839" end="77847" title="Quadrant (instrument)" label="quadrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q843239" start="77907" end="77918" title="cross-staff" label="cross-staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q10542" start="78014" end="78028" title="Southern Cross" label="Southern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q72300" start="78068" end="78084" title="João de Santarém" label="João de Santarém"/>
<link wikidata="Q71938" start="78089" end="78102" title="Pedro Escobar" label="Pedro Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q120200" start="78310" end="78319" title="Ephemeris" label="Ephemeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="78457" end="78465" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q330740" start="78532" end="78546" title="Abraham Zacuto" label="Abraham Zacuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="78625" end="78638" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="78643" end="78663" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q169560" start="78792" end="78799" title="caravel" label="caravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164174" start="79009" end="79015" title="lateen" label="lateen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741347" start="79042" end="79049" title="luffing" label="luffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15608352" start="79113" end="79117" title="tack (sailing)" label="tack"/>
<link wikidata="Q848944" start="79698" end="79711" title="merchant ship" label="merchant ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q220635" start="79927" end="79934" title="carrack" label="carrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="79963" end="79969" title="Mast (sailing)" label="masted"/>
<link wikidata="Q273062" start="79998" end="80003" title="stern" label="stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q912957" start="80015" end="80024" title="aftcastle" label="aftcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="80026" end="80036" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q523831" start="80041" end="80049" title="bowsprit" label="bowsprit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="80285" end="80290" title="deck (ship)" label="decks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="80627" end="80641" title="meteorological" label="meteorological"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="80646" end="80659" title="oceanographic" label="oceanographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q664687" start="80716" end="80732" title="Bissagos Islands" label="Bissagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q241478" start="80837" end="80860" title="Trindade and Martim Vaz" label="Trindade and Martim Vaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q241357" start="80862" end="80900" title="Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago" label="Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q175057" start="80902" end="80921" title="Fernando de Noronha" label="Fernando de Noronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q749561" start="80923" end="80930" title="Corisco" label="Corisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333186" start="80932" end="80945" title="Elobey Grande" label="Elobey Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333176" start="80947" end="80959" title="Elobey Chico" label="Elobey Chico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736616" start="80960" end="80974" title="Annobón" label="Annobón Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q46197" start="80976" end="80992" title="Ascension Island" label="Ascension Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q205022" start="80994" end="81006" title="Bioko Island" label="Bioko Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="81008" end="81024" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q210636" start="81026" end="81041" title="Príncipe" label="Príncipe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34497" start="81043" end="81062" title="Saint Helena" label="Saint Helena Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q220982" start="81064" end="81080" title="Tristan da Cunha" label="Tristan da Cunha"/>
<link wikidata="Q169274" start="81092" end="81104" title="Sargasso Sea" label="Sargasso Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="81142" end="81150" title="ocean current" label="currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="81156" end="81167" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250263" start="81176" end="81188" title="oceanic gyre" label="oceanic gyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615451" start="81436" end="81459" title="atmospheric circulation" label="atmospheric circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169973" start="81478" end="81486" title="Coriolis effect" label="Coriolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="81774" end="81788" title="Manila galleon" label="Manila galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q477855" start="81831" end="81847" title="Angelino Dulcert" label="Angelino Dulcert"/>
<link wikidata="Q266680" start="81872" end="81886" title="portolan chart" label="portolan chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q537601" start="81951" end="81970" title="Lanceloto Malocello" label="Lanceloto Malocello"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="81989" end="82006" title="Dinis of Portugal" label="Dinis of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182432" start="82018" end="82027" title="Lanzarote" label="Lanzarote"/>
<link wikidata="Q192534" start="82168" end="82181" title="Fuerteventura" label="Fuerteventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051489" start="82210" end="82215" title="Lobos Island" label="Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q929938" start="82289" end="82316" title="Saint Brendan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Saint Brendan&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="82486" end="82505" title="Henry the Navigator" label="Henry the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q926672" start="82725" end="82731" title="Sagres (Vila do Bispo)" label="Sagres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686582" start="82753" end="82768" title="Jehuda Cresques" label="Jehuda Cresques"/>
<link wikidata="Q8826" start="82817" end="82822" title="Palma, Majorca" label="Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q477855" start="82856" end="82872" title="Angelino Dulcert" label="Angelino Dulcert"/>
<link wikidata="Q282356" start="83041" end="83053" title="Pedro Reinel" label="Pedro Reinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313060" start="83151" end="83160" title="Diogo Cão" label="Diogo Cão"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336098" start="83293" end="83302" title="wind rose" label="wind rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385583" start="83332" end="83344" title="Jorge Reinel" label="Jorge Reinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049421" start="83349" end="83359" title="Lopo Homem" label="Lopo Homem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869450" start="83460" end="83472" title="Miller Atlas" label="Miller Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="83608" end="83628" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="83707" end="83714" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="83816" end="83823" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349261" start="83923" end="83941" title="Fernão Vaz Dourado" label="Fernão Vaz Dourado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="84174" end="84193" title="Cristopher Columbus" label="Cristopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="84195" end="84206" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368256" start="84221" end="84245" title="Alonso Fernández de Lugo" label="Alonso Fernández de Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="84247" end="84261" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q313369" start="84276" end="84291" title="Alonso de Ojeda" label="Alonso de Ojeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="84293" end="84302" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="84317" end="84330" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="84332" end="84338" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="84351" end="84366" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q210900" start="84381" end="84398" title="Pedro de Alvarado" label="Pedro de Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993582" start="84419" end="84428" title="Spanish conquest of Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="84453" end="84457" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="84470" end="84476" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q127456040" start="84491" end="84509" title="Miguel Díez de Aux" label="Miguel Díez de Aux"/>
<link wikidata="Q44741" start="84532" end="84549" title="Francisco Pizarro" label="Francisco Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q347688" start="84570" end="84596" title="Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada" label="Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898655" start="84643" end="84666" title="Pedro Fernández de Lugo" label="Pedro Fernández de Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261557" start="84705" end="84720" title="Pedro de Candia" label="Pedro de Candia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="84722" end="84728" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="84736" end="84744" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="84749" end="84756" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="84778" end="84807" title="Francisco Vásquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vásquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040026" start="84837" end="84850" title="Juan de Oñate" label="Juan de Oñate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="84852" end="84877" title="New Mexico, United States" label="New Mexico, United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6300937" start="84892" end="84923" title="Juan Roque (Zape Confraternity)" label="Juan Roque (Zape Confraternity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612198" start="84926" end="84958" title="Juan Vásquez de Coronado y Anaya" label="Juan Vásquez de Coronado y Anaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="84960" end="84970" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q207668" start="84974" end="84990" title="Diego de Almagro" label="Diego de Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="85009" end="85014" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q453058" start="85029" end="85048" title="Rodrigo de Bastidas" label="Rodrigo de Bastidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="85050" end="85058" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="85063" end="85069" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q19080" start="85084" end="85105" title="Vasco Núñez de Balboa" label="Vasco Núñez de Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185974" start="85128" end="85146" title="Juan Ponce de León" label="Juan Ponce de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="85148" end="85159" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q250763" start="85189" end="85215" title="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca" label="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028779" start="85256" end="85279" title="Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón" label="Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón"/>
<link wikidata="Q332070" start="85309" end="85332" title="Sebastián de Belalcázar" label="Sebastián de Belalcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616487" start="85369" end="85393" title="Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera" label="Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q423811" start="85428" end="85453" title="Domingo Martínez de Irala" label="Domingo Martínez de Irala"/>
<link wikidata="Q435292" start="85492" end="85507" title="Gonzalo Pizarro" label="Gonzalo Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q310566" start="85528" end="85554" title="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar" label="Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="85556" end="85560" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q441411" start="85575" end="85588" title="Juan de Garay" label="Juan de Garay"/>
<link wikidata="Q911242" start="85633" end="85647" title="Diego de Ordaz" label="Diego de Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="85649" end="85658" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q578479" start="85668" end="85681" title="Aleixo Garcia" label="Aleixo Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q593704" start="85702" end="85714" title="Juan Pizarro (conquistador)" label="Juan Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q130252784" start="85735" end="85754" title="Juan García Pizarro" label="Juan García Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q356785" start="85775" end="85805" title="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (Yucatán conquistador)" label="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="85807" end="85814" title="Yucatán (state)" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q373751" start="85824" end="85854" title="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (founder of Nicaragua)" label="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="85856" end="85865" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q719855" start="85875" end="85891" title="Hernando Pizarro" label="Hernando Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q348340" start="85912" end="85928" title="Sebastian Cabot (explorer)" label="Sebastián Caboto"/>
<link wikidata="Q369522" start="85954" end="85974" title="Jerónimo de Alderete" label="Jerónimo de Alderete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274696" start="86013" end="86037" title="Diego Hernández de Serpa" label="Diego Hernández de Serpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26722" start="86063" end="86079" title="Juan de Grijalva" label="Juan de Grijalva"/>
<link wikidata="Q387619" start="86098" end="86118" title="Francisco de Montejo" label="Francisco de Montejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211777" start="86142" end="86159" title="Juan de la Cámara" label="Juan de la Cámara"/>
<link wikidata="Q61482" start="86183" end="86200" title="Nikolaus Federmann" label="Nicolás Federmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q40524" start="86240" end="86258" title="Pánfilo de Narváez" label="Pánfilo de Narváez"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="86260" end="86275" title="Spanish Florida" label="Spanish Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q922802" start="86290" end="86306" title="Diego de Nicuesa" label="Diego de Nicuesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729568" start="86329" end="86352" title="Hernán Venegas Carrillo" label="Hernán Venegas Carrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q550491" start="86377" end="86394" title="Cristóbal de Olid" label="Cristóbal de Olid"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="86396" end="86404" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q207901" start="86419" end="86440" title="Francisco de Orellana" label="Francisco de Orellana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="86442" end="86454" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="86469" end="86485" title="Hernando de Soto" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924156" start="86515" end="86535" title="Gonzalo García Zorro" label="Gonzalo García Zorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q262936" start="86560" end="86571" title="Inés Suárez" label="Inés Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442259" start="86589" end="86609" title="Francisco de Aguirre (conquistador)" label="Francisco de Aguirre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362335" start="86690" end="86717" title="Martín de Ursúa" label="Martín de Urzúa y Arizmendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573336" start="86740" end="86745" title="Spanish conquest of Petén" label="Petén"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958693" start="86771" end="86792" title="Juan de Céspedes Ruiz" label="Juan de Céspedes Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203534" start="86817" end="86834" title="Pedro de Valdivia" label="Pedro de Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183880" start="86856" end="86869" title="Jorge Robledo (conquistador)" label="Jorge Robledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q553152" start="86903" end="86927" title="Pedro Menéndez de Avilés" label="Pedro Menéndez de Avilés"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953455" start="86951" end="86971" title="Juan de Sanct Martín" label="Juan de Sanct Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q434564" start="86996" end="87012" title="Pedro de Mendoza" label="Pedro de Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700226" start="87038" end="87056" title="Antonio de Lebrija (conquistador)" label="Antonio de Lebrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q545679" start="87081" end="87097" title="Alonso de Ribera" label="Alonso de Ribera"/>
<link wikidata="Q434264" start="87118" end="87137" title="Alonso de Sotomayor" label="Alonso de Sotomayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353329" start="87176" end="87197" title="Martín Ruiz de Gamboa" label="Martín Ruiz de Gamboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810844" start="87218" end="87230" title="Juan Garrido" label="Juan Garrido"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="87262" end="87272" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q318500" start="87312" end="87335" title="Miguel López de Legazpi" label="Miguel López de Legazpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="87337" end="87348" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q722160" start="87363" end="87378" title="Juan de Salcedo" label="Juan de Salcedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q53337489" start="87406" end="87433" title="Diego Romo de Vivar" label="Diego Romo de Vivar y Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440163" start="87459" end="87480" title="Gonzalo Suárez Rendón" label="Gonzalo Suárez Rendón"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="87546" end="87567" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306761" start="87570" end="87589" title="Jerónimo de Azevedo" label="Jerónimo de Azevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537305" start="87592" end="87613" title="Phillippe de Oliveira" label="Phillippe de Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427482" start="87616" end="87639" title="Constantino of Braganza" label="Constantino of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16321577" start="87642" end="87667" title="André Furtado de Mendonça" label="André Furtado de Mendonça"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352529" start="87670" end="87684" title="João de Castro" label="João de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q686754" start="87687" end="87709" title="Duarte Pacheco Pereira" label="Duarte Pacheco Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q611334" start="87712" end="87734" title="António Raposo Tavares" label="António Raposo Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791609" start="87737" end="87757" title="Domingos Jorge Velho" label="Domingos Jorge Velho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346089" start="87760" end="87777" title="Francisco Barreto" label="Francisco Barreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q363923" start="87780" end="87799" title="Fernão Mendes Pinto" label="Fernão Mendes Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840589" start="87802" end="87816" title="Álvaro Martins" label="Álvaro Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q611584" start="87819" end="87835" title="António de Abreu" label="António de Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029176" start="87838" end="87854" title="Jorge de Menezes" label="Jorge de Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q527755" start="87857" end="87874" title="Pedro Mascarenhas" label="Pedro Mascarenhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981637" start="87877" end="87893" title="Duarte Fernandes" label="Duarte Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226851" start="87896" end="87919" title="Diogo Lopes de Sequeira" label="Diogo Lopes de Sequeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q496061" start="87922" end="87937" title="António de Noli" label="António de Noli"/>
<link wikidata="Q610486" start="87940" end="87955" title="Antão Gonçalves" label="Antão Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377" start="87958" end="87973" title="Bartolomeu Dias" label="Bartolomeu Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q360073" start="87976" end="87985" title="Cadamosto" label="Cadamosto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574612" start="87988" end="88009" title="Cristóvão de Mendonça" label="Cristóvão de Mendonça"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657862" start="88012" end="88031" title="Lourenço de Almeida" label="Lourenço de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q313060" start="88034" end="88043" title="Diogo Cão" label="Diogo Cão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226869" start="88046" end="88063" title="Diogo de Azambuja" label="Diogo de Azambuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226846" start="88066" end="88077" title="Diogo Gomes" label="Diogo Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q554452" start="88080" end="88096" title="Francisco Serrão" label="Francisco Serrão"/>
<link wikidata="Q128780" start="88099" end="88109" title="Dinis Dias" label="Dinis Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q649556" start="88112" end="88124" title="Fernão do Pó" label="Fernão do Pó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="88127" end="88143" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Fernão Magalhães"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312125" start="88213" end="88236" title="Fernão Pires de Andrade" label="Fernão Pires de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q337066" start="88239" end="88259" title="Francisco de Almeida" label="Francisco de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344575" start="88262" end="88279" title="Francisco Álvares" label="Francisco Álvares"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="88282" end="88301" title="Henry the Navigator" label="Henry the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q374424" start="88304" end="88321" title="Gaspar Corte-Real" label="Gaspar Corte-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q360391" start="88324" end="88333" title="Gil Eanes" label="Gil Eanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q681823" start="88336" end="88349" title="Gonçalo Velho" label="Gonçalo Velho"/>
<link wikidata="Q980581" start="88352" end="88373" title="João Afonso de Aveiro" label="João Afonso de Aveiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q435882" start="88376" end="88388" title="João da Nova" label="João da Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6298181" start="88391" end="88401" title="João Grego" label="João Grego"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115062" start="88404" end="88425" title="João Álvares Fagundes" label="João Álvares Fagundes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052766" start="88428" end="88451" title="João Fernandes Lavrador" label="João Fernandes Lavrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q360742" start="88454" end="88474" title="João Gonçalves Zarco" label="João Gonçalves Zarco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9291431" start="88477" end="88489" title="João Infante" label="João Infante"/>
<link wikidata="Q362292" start="88492" end="88511" title="João Vaz Corte-Real" label="João Vaz Corte-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q425897" start="88514" end="88527" title="Jorge Álvares" label="Jorge Álvares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554759" start="88530" end="88543" title="Tomé de Sousa" label="Tomé de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587384" start="88546" end="88571" title="Lopo Soares de Albergaria" label="Lopo Soares de Albergaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706848" start="88574" end="88584" title="Luís Pires" label="Luís Pires"/>
<link wikidata="Q356808" start="88587" end="88605" title="Luís Vaz de Torres" label="Luís Vaz de Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q704141" start="88608" end="88630" title="Martim Afonso de Sousa" label="Martim Afonso de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q748766" start="88633" end="88650" title="Miguel Corte-Real" label="Miguel Corte-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702303" start="88653" end="88667" title="Nicolau Coelho" label="Nicolau Coelho"/>
<link wikidata="Q374056" start="88670" end="88690" title="Nuno Álvares Pereira" label="Nuno Álvares Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419029" start="88693" end="88706" title="Nuno da Cunha" label="Nuno da Cunha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83400" start="88709" end="88722" title="Paulo da Gama" label="Paulo da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q550611" start="88725" end="88737" title="Nuno Tristão" label="Nuno Tristão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243549" start="88740" end="88760" title="Paulo Dias de Novais" label="Paulo Dias de Novais"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="88763" end="88783" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q940706" start="88786" end="88800" title="Pedro Teixeira" label="Pedro Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668016" start="88803" end="88819" title="Pero de Alenquer" label="Pero de Alenquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052766" start="88822" end="88838" title="Pero de Barcelos" label="Pero de Barcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q360804" start="88841" end="88856" title="Pero da Covilhã" label="Pero da Covilhã"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087685" start="88859" end="88868" title="Pero Dias" label="Pero Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361936" start="88871" end="88890" title="Pero Vaz de Caminha" label="Pero Vaz de Caminha"/>
<link wikidata="Q81116" start="88893" end="88909" title="Tristão da Cunha" label="Tristão da Cunha"/>
<link wikidata="Q463058" start="88912" end="88932" title="Tristão Vaz Teixeira" label="Tristão Vaz Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="88935" end="88948" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="88965" end="89002" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377288" start="89005" end="89017" title="Libertadores" label="Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613266" start="89131" end="89152" title="List of conquistadors" label="List of conquistadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066998" start="89155" end="89171" title="Price revolution" label="Price revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q749150" start="89180" end="89186" title="Tercio" label="Tercio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303160" wikidata="Q295632" url="?curid=303160" title="Hell (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Hell]], in many religions, is a place of suffering during the afterlife, where wicked or unrighteous souls are punished.

Hell may also refer to:
==Religion and mythology==
* Hell in Christianity
* Christian views on Hades
* Hel (location), Germanic underworld from which the word &quot;hell&quot; derives
* Gehenna or &quot;Gehinnom&quot;
* Jahannam, Gehenna in Islam 
* Tartarus
* Underworld, the world of the dead in various religious traditions, located below the world of the living
* Any place or situation of great suffering

==Arts and entertainment==
=== Film and television ===
* &quot;Jigoku&quot; (1960 film) (地獄, &quot;Hell&quot;), also titled &quot;The Sinners of Hell&quot; a Japanese horror film directed by Nobuo Nakagawa
* &quot;Hell&quot; (1964 film) or &quot;Henri-Georges Clouzot&#x27;s Inferno&quot; (&quot;L&#x27;enfer&quot;), an unfinished French film by Henri-Georges Clouzot
* &quot;Hell&quot; (1994 film) (&quot;L&#x27;enfer&quot;), a French film directed by Claude Chabrol, adapted from Clouzot&#x27;s 1964 film
* &quot;Hell&quot; (2005 film) (&quot;L&#x27;enfer&quot;), a French film directed by Danis Tanović
* &quot;Hell&quot; (2010 film) (&quot;El Infierno&quot;), a Mexican crime comedy
* &quot;Hell&quot; (2011 film), a German science fiction film directed by Tim Fehlbaum
* &quot;Hell&quot;, the directly translated title of &quot;Hellbound&quot; (TV Series), a South Korean dark fantasy show from 2021
* &quot;Hell&quot; (&quot;Father Ted&quot;), a 1996 TV episode
* &quot;Hell&quot; (&quot;Squid Game&quot;), a 2021 TV episode
* Dr. Hell, a character in the anime series &quot;Mazinger Z&quot;

=== Literature ===
* Hell (DC Comics), a fictional location in the DC Comics universe
* &quot;Hell&quot; (Barbusse novel) (&quot;L&#x27;Enfer&quot;), a 1908 novel by Henri Barbusse
* &quot;Hell&quot; (Davis novel), 1998 novel by Kathryn Davis
* &quot;Hell&quot; or &quot;Hell: A Verse Drama and Photoplay&quot;, a 1924 play by Upton Sinclair
* &quot;Hell&quot;, also known as &quot;Inferno&quot;, the first volume of the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;
* Hell, a locale in the Tomorrow series novels by John Marsden

=== Music ===
====Artists====
* Hell (British band), an English heavy metal band
* Hell (American band), a doom metal band from Salem, Oregon
** &quot;Hell I&quot;, 2009
** &quot;Hell II&quot;, 2010
** &quot;Hell III&quot;, 2012
** &quot;Hell&quot;, 2015 EP
** &quot;Hell&quot; (Hell album), 2017
* DJ Hell, a German house/techno DJ

====Albums====
* &quot;Hell&quot; (James Brown album), 1974
* &quot;Hell&quot; (Venom album), 2008
* &quot;Hell&quot; (Die Ärzte album), 2020
* &quot;&quot;, an EP by Bad Meets Evil

====Songs====
* &quot;Hell&quot;, a song by Blind Melon from &quot;Nico&quot;
* &quot;Hell&quot; (Disturbed song), a song by Disturbed, a B-side from the single &quot;Stricken&quot;
* &quot;Hell&quot;, a song by Foo Fighters from &quot;In Your Honor&quot;
* &quot;Hell&quot;, a song by King Gizzard &amp; the Lizard Wizard from &quot;Infest the Rats&#x27; Nest&quot;
* &quot;Hell&quot;, a song by Pet Shop Boys.
* &quot;Hell&quot;, a song by Squirrel Nut Zippers from &quot;Hot&quot;
* &quot;Hell&quot;, a song by Tegan and Sara from &quot;Sainthood&quot;
* &quot;The Hell Song&quot;, a song by Sum 41

===Other uses in arts and entertainment===
* &quot;Hell&quot; (Bosch), a painting by Hieronymous Bosch
* &quot;&quot;, a 1990s video game
* &quot;Hell&quot; and &quot;Fucking Hell&quot; (Chapman), art installations by Jake and Dinos Chapman

== Places ==
* Hell, California, a demolished ghost town in the U.S.
* Hell, Michigan, a community in the U.S.
* Hell, Grand Cayman, the Cayman Islands
* Hell, Norway, a village in Stjørdal
* Hell Cave, a cave in Slovenia
* Hell Creek, near Jordan, Montana, U.S.

== Other uses ==
* Hell (crater), a lunar crater named after Maximilian Hell
* Hell (surname)
* Hell.com, a website for web designers and artists
* Hell Pizza, a New Zealand-based pizza chain
* Helles, sometimes called Hell, a light style of beer
* The transmission mode of the Hellschreiber teleprinter
* Hell Energy Drink, a Hungarian energy drink
* Helvetinjärvi (&quot;Hell&#x27;s Lake&quot;), a national park in Ruovesi, Pirkanmaa, Finland

== See also ==
* 
* Halle (disambiguation)
* Heaven and Hell (disambiguation)
* Hel (disambiguation)
* Hell on Earth (disambiguation)
* Hellas (disambiguation)
* Helle (disambiguation)
* Jigoku (disambiguation) ( in Japanese)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295632" start="0" end="8" title="Hell (disambiguation)" label="[[Hell]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q295632" start="124" end="128" title="Hell (disambiguation)" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276239" start="177" end="197" title="Hell in Christianity" label="Hell in Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452850" start="200" end="224" title="Christian views on Hades" label="Christian views on Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q644341" start="227" end="241" title="Hel (location)" label="Hel (location)"/>
<link wikidata="Q558093" start="310" end="317" title="Gehenna" label="Gehenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q58418" start="344" end="352" title="Jahannam" label="Jahannam"/>
<link wikidata="Q101322" start="374" end="382" title="Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="385" end="395" title="Underworld" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="524" end="533" title="suffering" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808273" start="592" end="622" title="Jigoku (film)" label="&amp;quot;Jigoku&amp;quot; (1960 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864704" start="743" end="771" title="Hell (1964 film)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (1964 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213581" start="905" end="933" title="Hell (1994 film)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (1994 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756026" start="1044" end="1072" title="Hell (2005 film)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (2005 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q624974" start="1143" end="1171" title="Hell (2010 film)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (2010 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q481410" start="1224" end="1252" title="Hell (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (2011 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q100934044" start="1362" end="1395" title="Hellbound (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Hellbound&amp;quot; (TV Series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5706488" start="1442" end="1483" title="Hell (Father Ted)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Father Ted&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108806773" start="1505" end="1546" title="Hell (Squid Game)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Squid Game&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10760639" start="1568" end="1576" title="Dr. Hell" label="Dr. Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798506" start="1655" end="1671" title="Hell (DC Comics)" label="Hell (DC Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5706510" start="1722" end="1755" title="Hell (Barbusse novel)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (Barbusse novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766141" start="1817" end="1847" title="Hell (Davis novel)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (Davis novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216134" start="1961" end="1975" title="Upton Sinclair" label="Upton Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509219" start="2016" end="2023" title="Inferno (Dante)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373801" start="2105" end="2120" title="Tomorrow series" label="Tomorrow series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602602" start="2177" end="2196" title="Hell (British band)" label="Hell (British band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700642" start="2228" end="2248" title="Hell (American band)" label="Hell (American band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613590" start="2353" end="2361" title="Hell III" label="Hell III"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809490" start="2406" end="2435" title="Hell (Hell album)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (Hell album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62061" start="2444" end="2451" title="DJ Hell" label="DJ Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635765" start="2496" end="2532" title="Hell (James Brown album)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (James Brown album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525785" start="2541" end="2571" title="Hell (Venom album)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (Venom album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q100326681" start="2580" end="2614" title="Hell (Die Ärzte album)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (Die Ärzte album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339859" start="2729" end="2733" title="Nico (album)" label="Nico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040528" start="2742" end="2775" title="Hell (Disturbed song)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (Disturbed song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q907592" start="2898" end="2911" title="In Your Honor" label="In Your Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049724" start="2996" end="3022" title="Infest the Rats&amp;#x27; Nest" label="Infest the Rats&amp;#x27; Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="3059" end="3072" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909687" start="3136" end="3139" title="Hot (Squirrel Nut Zippers album)" label="Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q540444" start="3202" end="3211" title="Sainthood (album)" label="Sainthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q734177" start="3226" end="3239" title="The Hell Song" label="The Hell Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944498" start="3310" end="3334" title="Hell (Bosch)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;quot; (Bosch)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090515" start="3426" end="3460" title="Fucking Hell (Chapman)" label="&amp;quot;Fucking Hell&amp;quot; (Chapman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5706453" start="3522" end="3538" title="Hell, California" label="Hell, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602605" start="3578" end="3592" title="Hell, Michigan" label="Hell, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223523" start="3620" end="3638" title="Hell, Grand Cayman" label="Hell, Grand Cayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602619" start="3661" end="3673" title="Hell, Norway" label="Hell, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809419" start="3699" end="3708" title="Hell Cave" label="Hell Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q917642" start="3731" end="3741" title="Hell Creek" label="Hell Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516314" start="3790" end="3803" title="Hell (crater)" label="Hell (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870676" start="3850" end="3864" title="Hell (surname)" label="Hell (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129800" start="3867" end="3875" title="Hell.com" label="Hell.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602607" start="3919" end="3929" title="Hell Pizza" label="Hell Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q261105" start="3965" end="3971" title="Helles" label="Helles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349535" start="4049" end="4062" title="Hellschreiber" label="Hellschreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12814582" start="4077" end="4094" title="Hell Energy Drink" label="Hell Energy Drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q937131" start="4123" end="4136" title="Helvetinjärvi" label="Helvetinjärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108656" start="4237" end="4259" title="Halle (disambiguation)" label="Halle (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226596" start="4262" end="4294" title="Heaven and Hell (disambiguation)" label="Heaven and Hell (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223931" start="4297" end="4317" title="Hel (disambiguation)" label="Hel (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q824026" start="4320" end="4350" title="Hell on Earth (disambiguation)" label="Hell on Earth (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456299" start="4353" end="4376" title="Hellas (disambiguation)" label="Hellas (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q779047" start="4379" end="4401" title="Helle (disambiguation)" label="Helle (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192358" start="4404" end="4427" title="Jigoku (disambiguation)" label="Jigoku (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303161" wikidata="Q30066986" url="?curid=303161" title="Transatlantic cable">
<text>Transatlantic cable may refer to:

* Transatlantic telegraph cable
* Transatlantic communications cable
* Other transatlantic submarine communications cable</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2395922" start="37" end="66" title="Transatlantic telegraph cable" label="Transatlantic telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q361047" start="69" end="103" title="Transatlantic communications cable" label="Transatlantic communications cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="126" end="156" title="submarine communications cable" label="submarine communications cable"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303164" wikidata="Q242876" url="?curid=303164" title="Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig-Holstein">
<text>Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig-Holstein (Franziska Josepha Louise Augusta Marie Christina Helena; 12 August 1872 – 8 December 1956) was a granddaughter of Queen Victoria.

==Early life==
Princess Marie Louise was born at Cumberland Lodge in Windsor Great Park. By birth, she was member of the House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg. Her father was Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg, the third son of Duke Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg and Countess Louise of Danneskjold-Samsøe. Her mother was Princess Helena of the United Kingdom, the fifth child and third daughter of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. She was baptized on 18 September 1872. Her godparents were Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria and Queen Marie of Hanover.

Her parents resided in the United Kingdom, and the Princess was considered a member of the British royal family. Under Royal Warrant of 15 May 1867, the children of Prince and Princess Christian were to be styled &quot;Highness&quot;. From her birth in 1872 therefore Princess Marie Louise was styled &quot;Her Highness Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig-Holstein&quot;, albeit only in the United Kingdom. She was known to her family as &quot;Louie&quot;.

She was a bridesmaid at the 1885 wedding of her maternal aunt Princess Beatrice, to Prince Henry of Battenberg.

==Marriage==
On 6 July 1891, Princess Marie Louise married Prince Aribert of Anhalt (18 June 1866 – 24 December 1933) at St. George&#x27;s Chapel in Windsor Castle. Prince Aribert was the third son of Frederick I, Duke of Anhalt, and his wife, Princess Antoinette of Saxe-Altenburg. The bride&#x27;s first cousin, the German Emperor Wilhelm II, had been instrumental in arranging the match.

Though contemporary sources did not directly suggest it was a cause of his marriage dissolution, a number of contemporaries and subsequent historical accounts suggest Aribert was bisexual or homosexual, and some have suggested an indiscretion with a male attendant was the catalyst for the dissolution and that the marriage had never been consummated. The marriage was annulled on 13 December 1900 by his father. Princess Marie Louise, on an official visit to Canada at the time, immediately returned to Britain. According to her memoirs, she regarded her marriage vows as binding, so she never remarried.

==Activities, charity and patronages==

After the annulment, Princess Marie Louise devoted herself to charitable organisations and patronage of the arts. She inspired the creation of Queen Mary&#x27;s Dolls&#x27; House to showcase the work of British craftsmen. She established the Girl&#x27;s Club in Bermondsey that served as a hospital during World War I. She was also active in the work of the Princess Christian Nursing Home at Windsor. She took part in all official occasions of the royal family, including coronations and funerals and processed as a Princess of the Blood Royal at events such as the coronation of George VI and the carriage procession for Princesses of the Blood Royal at the coronation of Elizabeth II.

==World War I==
In July 1917, when George V changed the name of the British Royal House from the House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha to House of Windsor, he also ordered his numerous cousins and in-laws, who were British subjects, to discontinue the use of their German titles, styles, and surnames. Never taking other titles or surnames, Princess Marie Louise and her unmarried sister, Princess Helena Victoria, became known simply as &quot;Her Highness Princess Marie Louise&quot; and &quot;Her Highness Princess Helena Victoria&quot;, giving them the odd distinction of being princesses but not, apparently, members of any particular royal family. This approach differed from the one accepted by George V&#x27;s other relatives, who relinquished all princely titles, not just their German designations, and in turn received British titles of nobility from the King. Their titles of Princess were derived from their father, and they were not officially princesses of the United Kingdom. However, their unmarried status and their right to be styled &quot;Highness&quot; dating from Queen Victoria&#x27;s concession of 1867 rendered their situations awkward, so that it was easier to allow them to retain their status as princesses while avoiding the question of immediate family membership altogether.

==Later life==
Princess Marie Louise became a godmother of Prince Richard of Gloucester in 1944. She was called &quot;Cousin Louie&quot; by a young Princess Elizabeth, and attended her wedding alongside her sister, Princess Helena Victoria. She attended four coronations in Westminster Abbey, those of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra in 1902; King George V and Queen Mary in 1911; King George VI and Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother in 1937; and Queen Elizabeth II in 1953. In 1956, she published her memoirs, &quot;My Memories of Six Reigns&quot;. She died at her London home, 10 Fitzmaurice Place, Berkeley Square, a few months later on 8 December 1956 and is buried at the Royal Burial Ground, Frogmore at Windsor Great Park. At the time of her death, she was one of six surviving grandchildren of Queen Victoria. Probate of the Princess&#x27;s estate was granted on 12 March 1957 and was valued at £107,644 (£1.8 million at 2022 conversion rates).

==Titles, styles and honours==
===Titles and styles===
*1872–1891: &quot;Her Highness&quot; Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig-Holstein
*1891–1900: &quot;Her Highness&quot; Princess Aribert of Anhalt
*1900–1917: &quot;Her Highness&quot; Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig-Holstein
*1917–1956: &quot;Her Highness&quot; Princess Marie Louise

===Honours===
*VA: Lady of the Royal Order of Victoria and Albert, Second Class
*CI: Companion of the Order of the Crown of India (11 December 1893)
*GCVO: Dame Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (1953)
*GBE: Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (1919)
*RRC: Member of the Royal Red Cross
* Recipient of the Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Medal (2 June 1953)

==Ancestry==
==Notes==
==Sources==
*Ronald Allison and Sarah Riddell, eds., &quot;The Royal Encyclopedia&quot; (London: Macmillan, 1992).
*Marlene A. Eilers, &quot;Queen Victoria&#x27;s Descendants&quot; (New York: Atlantic International Publishing, 1987).
*Princess Marie Louise (née Princess of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenberg), &quot;My Memories of Six Reigns&quot; (London: Evans Brothers, 1956).
*&quot;Obituary: Princess Marie Louise, Patron of Social Services,&quot; &quot;The Times&quot; 10 December 1956, p. 14.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q242876" start="0" end="43" title="Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="159" end="173" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143701" start="225" end="241" title="Cumberland Lodge" label="Cumberland Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569306" start="245" end="263" title="Windsor Great Park" label="Windsor Great Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q690037" start="297" end="348" title="House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg" label="House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q677589" start="365" end="427" title="Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61097" start="446" end="506" title="Duke Christian of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Duke Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993461" start="530" end="548" title="Danneskjold-Samsøe" label="Danneskjold-Samsøe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160539" start="565" end="602" title="Princess Helena of the United Kingdom" label="Princess Helena of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="661" end="695" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha" label="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="756" end="787" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q61452" start="792" end="814" title="Marie of Saxe-Altenburg" label="Queen Marie of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="844" end="858" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="908" end="928" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q158140" start="1336" end="1353" title="Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom" label="Princess Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q444347" start="1358" end="1384" title="Prince Henry of Battenberg" label="Prince Henry of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q572145" start="1446" end="1470" title="Prince Aribert of Anhalt" label="Prince Aribert of Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="1508" end="1532" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel at Windsor Castle" label="St. George&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="1536" end="1550" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q704332" start="1588" end="1615" title="Frederick I, Duke of Anhalt" label="Frederick I, Duke of Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q65293" start="1631" end="1668" title="Princess Antoinette of Saxe-Altenburg" label="Princess Antoinette of Saxe-Altenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="1720" end="1730" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="1958" end="1966" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="1970" end="1980" title="homosexual" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q381344" start="2118" end="2128" title="consummate" label="consummate"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="2148" end="2156" title="annulment" label="annulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2239" end="2245" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q766492" start="2569" end="2604" title="Queen Mary&amp;#x27;s Dolls&amp;#x27; House" label="Queen Mary&amp;#x27;s Dolls&amp;#x27; House"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2732" end="2743" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753066" start="2943" end="2970" title="Prince du sang" label="Princess of the Blood Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172236" start="2993" end="3016" title="coronation of George VI" label="coronation of George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797766" start="3086" end="3112" title="coronation of Elizabeth II" label="coronation of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="3150" end="3158" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="3191" end="3202" title="Royal House" label="Royal House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753846" start="3212" end="3238" title="House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha" label="House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q81589" start="3242" end="3258" title="House of Windsor" label="House of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204864" start="3493" end="3517" title="Princess Helena Victoria" label="Princess Helena Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q579431" start="4061" end="4093" title="British princess" label="princesses of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q170294" start="4469" end="4497" title="Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester" label="Prince Richard of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="4558" end="4576" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979114" start="4591" end="4602" title="Wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Philip Mountbatten, Duke of Edinburgh" label="her wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="4684" end="4701" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="4712" end="4727" title="King Edward VII" label="King Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="4732" end="4747" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Queen Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="4757" end="4770" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="4775" end="4785" title="Mary of Teck" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="4795" end="4809" title="King George VI" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="4814" end="4846" title="Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="4860" end="4878" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677705" start="5090" end="5119" title="Royal Burial Ground, Frogmore" label="Royal Burial Ground, Frogmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q94158" start="5739" end="5773" title="Royal Order of Victoria and Albert" label="Royal Order of Victoria and Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635491" start="5810" end="5837" title="Order of the Crown of India" label="Order of the Crown of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q94050" start="5888" end="5909" title="Royal Victorian Order" label="Royal Victorian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="5947" end="5974" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q94340" start="6002" end="6017" title="Royal Red Cross" label="Royal Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q94793" start="6037" end="6072" title="Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Medal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303166" wikidata="Q3976" url="?curid=303166" title="Reeperbahn">
<text>The Reeperbahn () is a street and entertainment district in Hamburg&#x27;s St. Pauli district, one of the two centres of Hamburg&#x27;s nightlife (the other being Sternschanze) and also the city&#x27;s major red-light district. In German, it is also nicknamed &quot;die sündige Meile&quot; (the sinful mile) and &quot;Kiez&quot;. The Reeperbahn Festival is among the largest club festivals.

==Name and history==
The name &quot;Reeperbahn&quot; means ropewalk, which is a place where ropes are made ( = rope, the standard German word is ; = track). Until the 1620s Hamburg&#x27;s ropewalks had been located in the Neustadt (New Town) quarter of the inner city close to the Elbe, which then became a densely built up area. Therefore, the ropewalks &quot;had to be relocated outside the city walls on the country road leading toward Altona – which later took on the street name &#x27;Reperbahn&#x27;.&quot; The street was a ropewalk in the 17th and 18th centuries.

==The street and its side streets==
The street is lined with restaurants, night clubs, discotheques and bars. There are also strip clubs, sex shops, brothels and similar businesses. Between 1997 and 2007 the Erotic Art Museum was open on Nobistor, a street running between the Reeperbahn and &quot;Louise-Schroeder-Straße&quot;.

The &quot;&quot;, a musical theatre, is also located at the Reeperbahn. It played Andrew Lloyd Webber&#x27;s &quot;Cats&quot; for many years, after that &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot;, an ABBA-musical, followed by &quot;&quot;, (&quot;I have never been to New York&quot;), a jukebox musical featuring hit songs by Austrian singer/songwriter Udo Jürgens, then &quot;Sister Act&quot; and finally &quot;Rocky&quot;, based on the Stallone film. There are other theatres at the Reeperbahn (St. Pauli Theater, Imperial Theater, Schmidt&#x27;s Tivoli) and also several Cabarets/Varietés.

A famous landmark is the Davidwache, a police station located on the South side of the Reeperbahn at the cross street &#x27;. Street prostitution is legal during certain times of the day on &#x27;. The &quot;Herbertstraße&quot;, a short side street off the &quot;Davidstraße&quot;, has sex workers displaying themselves behind windows, waiting for customers. Since 1933, large screens block the view into Herbertstraße from the adjacent streets. Since the 1970s, there have been signs saying that entrance to the street is prohibited for women and juveniles; however, it is a public road which anyone may enter. Many pubs, and street-based sex workers, can be found on the square of Hans-Albers-Platz south of the Reeperbahn.

The &quot;&quot; (&quot;Great Freedom&quot;) is a street starting on the North Side with several bars, clubs and a Catholic church. In former years, several sex theatres here (&quot;Salambo&quot;, &quot;Regina&quot;, &quot;Colibri&quot;, &quot;Safari&quot;) would show live sex acts on stage. , until its closure in 2013, the &quot;Safari&quot; was the only live sex theatre left in Germany. The popular table dance club &quot;Dollhouse&quot; now takes the place of the &quot;Salambo&quot;. &quot;Hotel Luxor&quot;, Hamburg&#x27;s oldest brothel that had operated on this street for 60 years, was closed in 2008. The street&#x27;s name comes from the fact that Catholics were allowed to practise their religion here at a time when this district did not yet belong to Hamburg; they were forbidden from doing so in Protestant Hamburg proper.

In 1967, Europe&#x27;s largest brothel at the time, the six-floor &quot;Eros Center&quot;, was opened on the Reeperbahn. It was closed in the late 1980s amidst the AIDS scare.

At a major trial during 2006 and 2007 ten members of the &quot;Marek Gang&quot;, which controls brothels on and near the Reeperbahn, were charged with pimping. The judge rejected the charge of forming a criminal gang and handed out suspended sentences: the men had started relationships with young women in local discotheques in order to recruit them to work in their brothels, an illegal practice if the women are under 21 years of age; some men had also abused some of the women who worked for them.

Because of the problems with the high crime rate, in 2007 the Senate of Hamburg enacted a ban on weapons in the Reeperbahn area. The only other such area with a weapons ban in Hamburg is the &quot;&quot;, St. Georg.

The &quot;St Pauli Preservation Society&quot; decries the ongoing gentrification of the area. Several older residents blamed the decline of the Reeperbahn&#x27;s sex industry on the rise of discotheques and cheap bars that attract teenage customers. In 2013, the Dancing Towers were built at the eastern end of Reeperbahn, symbolizing a couple dancing tango. The increasing number of these and other modern buildings erected at the Reeperbahn attracted criticism by some St. Pauli inhabitants.

The Reeperbahn was hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic. Almost every establishment was forced to close.

==The Beatles==

In the early 1960s, The Beatles (who had not yet become world-famous) played in several clubs around the Reeperbahn, including the &quot;Star-Club&quot;, &quot;Kaiserkeller&quot;, &quot;Top Ten&quot; (Reeperbahn 136) and &quot;Indra&quot;. Stories about the band&#x27;s residencies, onstage and offstage antics are legendary; some stories are true (John Lennon played a song set with a toilet seat around his neck), others inflated (the band urinating in an alley as nuns walked past was told rather differently later). A fellow musician, Ted &quot;Kingsize&quot; Taylor, made a crude tape recording of their last New Year&#x27;s Eve show, at the Star-Club in December 1962; a cleaned-up version of the tape was later released as an album, later characterized by Harrison as &quot;awful&quot;.

Famously John Lennon is quoted: &quot;I might have been born in Liverpool – but I grew up in Hamburg&quot;.

To mark the historical importance of their time in Hamburg, a &quot;Beatles-Platz&quot; was built at the cross of Reeperbahn and Große Freiheit.

==In popular culture==

The popular 1944 movie &quot;Große Freiheit Nr. 7&quot; tells the story of a singer (played by Hans Albers) who works in a Reeperbahn club and falls in love with a girl played by Ilse Werner. Hans Albers and Heinz Rühmann played in the 1954 movie &quot;Auf der Reeperbahn nachts um halb eins&quot; (&quot;On the Reeperbahn at Half Past Midnight&quot;, after a song of the same name sung by Albers in the 1944 film).

&quot;Reeperbahn&quot; is a 1978 song by Udo Lindenberg, to the tune of Penny Lane, lamenting the decay of the entertainment there.

In the 1965 film &quot;Ship of Fools&quot;, Jose Ferrer and Christiane Schmidtmer sang &quot;Heute Abend Geh&#x27;n Wir Bummeln Auf Der Reeperbahn&quot; (&quot;Tonight We Will Go Strolling on The Reeperbahn&quot;).

The Police song &quot;Low Life&quot; is about the Reeperbahn.

Randy Pie&#x27;s 1975 song &quot;Kitsch&quot; is about a curiosity shop on the Reeperbahn – the group hailed from Hamburg.

Reeperbahn is the name of a 1980s Swedish band. Finnish artist Irwin Goodman has a song and an album called &quot;St.Pauli ja Reeperbahn&quot;. The street is also mentioned in the Elvis Costello song &quot;Human Hands&quot;, in Van Morrison&#x27;s song &quot;Heavy Connection&quot;, in Paul Kelly&#x27;s song &quot;Every Fucking City&quot;, in the Midnight Oil song &quot;Mountains of Burma&quot;, the Sloppy Seconds song &quot;Germany&quot; from their album &quot;Destroyed&quot; and in the Runrig song &quot;Song of the Earth&quot;. The heavy metal band Blue Cheer have a song called &quot;Sweet Child of the Reeperbahn&quot; on their 1991 album &quot;Dining with the Sharks&quot;. The punk band The Toy Dolls have a song titled &quot;Caught up the Reeperbahn&quot;, first released on their 1993 album &quot;Absurd-Ditties&quot;.

&quot;Reeperbahn&quot; is the name of a track from the Christian rock group Model Engine&#x27;s CD &quot;The Lean Years Tradition&quot;.

The Reeperbahn is often mentioned in Karen Duve&#x27;s 1999 novel, &quot;Regenroman&quot;. (The English translation is entitled &quot;Rain&quot;).

Tom Waits&#x27; 2002 release &quot;Alice&quot; contains a track called &quot;Reeperbahn&quot;.

Zodiac Mindwarp &amp; The Love Reaction released the track &#x27;Christmas eve on the Reeperbahn&#x27; on their 2002 album I Am Rock. 

Dutch DJ and producer Nicky Romero had the music video for his song &quot;Toulouse&quot; shot in Hamburg, Germany. Near the end, the actors enter the Reeperbahn&#x27;s subway system.

Australian pop-punk band the Hard-Ons have a song called &quot;Don&#x27;t Fear The Reeperbahn&quot; on their 2007 album &quot;Most People Are Nicer Than Us&quot;. Its title is a play on the Blue Öyster Cult song &quot;(Don&#x27;t Fear) The Reaper&quot;.

German electro house duo Digitalism recorded the song &quot;Reeperbahn&quot; on their 2011 release &quot;I Love You Dude&quot;.

Udo Lindenberg recorded 2011 a song titled &quot;Reeperbahn&quot; live together with Jan Delay.

The commercial house music producer Eric Prydz has a track titled &quot;Reeperbahn&quot; under his moniker Pryda.

London based indie band Spector have a bonus track titled &quot;Reeperbahn&quot; on the deluxe version of their 2015 album &quot;Moth Boys&quot;.

UK based folk rock band Skinny Lister wrote a song titled &quot;Hamburg Drunk&quot;, which depicts a rough night &quot;falling and sprawlling down the old Reeperbahn&quot; on their 2016 album &quot;The Devil, The Heart and the Fight&quot;.

==See also==

* Prostitution in Germany

==References==
==External links==
* Information about Reeperbahn and the St. Pauli district 
* - links and information about the reeperbahn 
* - the night life in Hamburg on the Reeperbahn 
* Picture from the Reeperbahn 
* St. Pauli and the Reeperbahn </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3976" start="4" end="14" title="Reeperbahn" label="Reeperbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="60" end="67" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556" start="75" end="84" title="St. Pauli" label="St. Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594437" start="136" end="145" title="nightlife" label="nightlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592" start="163" end="175" title="Sternschanze" label="Sternschanze"/>
<link wikidata="Q272888" start="208" end="226" title="red-light district" label="red-light district"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="231" end="237" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q584571" start="318" end="322" title="Kiez" label="Kiez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640962" start="417" end="421" title="street name" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249556" start="451" end="459" title="ropewalk" label="ropewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554" start="614" end="622" title="Neustadt, Hamburg" label="Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="673" end="677" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630" start="831" end="837" title="Altona, Hamburg" label="Altona"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="1025" end="1035" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="1038" end="1048" title="night club" label="night club"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="1051" end="1062" title="discotheque" label="discotheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="1068" end="1072" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586445" start="1089" end="1099" title="strip club" label="strip club"/>
<link wikidata="Q221618" start="1102" end="1110" title="sex shop" label="sex shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="1113" end="1120" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q475236" start="1172" end="1189" title="Erotic Art Museum (Hamburg)" label="Erotic Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="1314" end="1329" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="1376" end="1395" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q337097" start="1409" end="1413" title="Cats (musical)" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="1453" end="1463" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="1474" end="1478" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q643684" start="1561" end="1576" title="jukebox musical" label="jukebox musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q155236" start="1627" end="1638" title="Udo Jürgens" label="Udo Jürgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q656057" start="1651" end="1661" title="Sister Act (musical)" label="Sister Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505318" start="1686" end="1691" title="Rocky the Musical" label="Rocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="1712" end="1720" title="Stallone" label="Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q317892" start="1771" end="1788" title="St. Pauli Theater" label="St. Pauli Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246310" start="1808" end="1829" title="Schmidt Theater" label="Schmidt&amp;#x27;s Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="1848" end="1856" title="Cabarets" label="Cabarets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177761" start="1893" end="1903" title="Davidwache" label="Davidwache"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="1994" end="2013" title="prostitution" label="Street prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q315857" start="2076" end="2089" title="Herbertstraße" label="Herbertstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693775" start="2166" end="2202" title="Window prostitution" label="displaying themselves behind windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886347" start="2551" end="2568" title="Hans-Albers-Platz" label="Hans-Albers-Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480893" start="2869" end="2886" title="sex show" label="sex acts on stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085410" start="2999" end="3010" title="table dance" label="table dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11879920" start="3092" end="3103" title="Hotel Luxor" label="Hotel Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="3600" end="3604" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="3764" end="3768" title="pimp" label="pimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q330344" start="4154" end="4164" title="crime rate" label="crime rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q316437" start="4178" end="4195" title="Senate of Hamburg" label="Senate of Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560" start="4321" end="4330" title="St. Georg, Hamburg" label="St. Georg"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="4399" end="4413" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q837322" start="4495" end="4507" title="sex industry" label="sex industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285521" start="4596" end="4610" title="Dancing Towers" label="Dancing Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q338450" start="4685" end="4690" title="tango" label="tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="4863" end="4880" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="4968" end="4979" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q456140" start="5085" end="5094" title="Star-Club" label="Star-Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q834519" start="5108" end="5120" title="Kaiserkeller" label="Kaiserkeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769600" start="5134" end="5141" title="Top Ten Club" label="Top Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="5297" end="5308" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191" start="5334" end="5345" title="toilet seat" label="toilet seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="5415" end="5418" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18178797" start="5487" end="5518" title="Kingsize Taylor" label="Ted &amp;quot;Kingsize&amp;quot; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193663" start="5533" end="5547" title="magnetic tape" label="tape recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="5562" end="5581" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="5807" end="5816" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q813228" start="5920" end="5933" title="Beatles-Platz" label="Beatles-Platz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548193" start="6051" end="6071" title="Große Freiheit Nr. 7" label="Große Freiheit Nr. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q561231" start="6117" end="6128" title="Hans Albers" label="Hans Albers"/>
<link wikidata="Q68582" start="6201" end="6212" title="Ilse Werner" label="Ilse Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q60876" start="6230" end="6243" title="Heinz Rühmann" label="Heinz Rühmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q759433" start="6327" end="6366" title="On the Reeperbahn at Half Past Midnight (1954 film)" label="On the Reeperbahn at Half Past Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494407" start="6382" end="6403" title="On the Reeperbahn at Half Past Midnight (song)" label="song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q312572" start="6480" end="6494" title="Udo Lindenberg" label="Udo Lindenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q842168" start="6511" end="6521" title="Penny Lane" label="Penny Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169951" start="6595" end="6608" title="Ship of Fools (film)" label="Ship of Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q312098" start="6616" end="6627" title="Jose Ferrer" label="Jose Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107630" start="6632" end="6653" title="Christiane Schmidtmer" label="Christiane Schmidtmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="6788" end="6798" title="The Police" label="The Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288976" start="6851" end="6860" title="Randy Pie" label="Randy Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673308" start="7038" end="7051" title="Irwin Goodman" label="Irwin Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="7155" end="7169" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="7203" end="7215" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q952656" start="7261" end="7271" title="Paul Kelly (Australian musician)" label="Paul Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48284" start="7323" end="7335" title="Midnight Oil" label="Midnight Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541379" start="7377" end="7391" title="Sloppy Seconds (band)" label="Sloppy Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265356" start="7440" end="7449" title="Destroyed (Sloppy Seconds album)" label="Destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q839817" start="7467" end="7473" title="Runrig" label="Runrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q804567" start="7531" end="7541" title="Blue Cheer" label="Blue Cheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278336" start="7629" end="7651" title="Dining with the Sharks" label="Dining with the Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q728289" start="7673" end="7686" title="The Toy Dolls" label="The Toy Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669985" start="7785" end="7799" title="Absurd-Ditties" label="Absurd-Ditties"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952953" start="7884" end="7896" title="Model Engine" label="Model Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q95207" start="7983" end="7993" title="Karen Duve" label="Karen Duve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8019" end="8029" title="Regenroman" label="Regenroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="8094" end="8103" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754772" start="8129" end="8134" title="Alice (Tom Waits album)" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q260214" start="8348" end="8360" title="Nicky Romero" label="Nicky Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074284" start="8400" end="8408" title="Toulouse (song)" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246721" start="8539" end="8547" title="Hard-Ons" label="Hard-Ons"/>
<link wikidata="Q331016" start="8700" end="8716" title="Blue Öyster Cult" label="Blue Öyster Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667755" start="8728" end="8756" title="(Don&amp;#x27;t Fear) The Reaper" label="(Don&amp;#x27;t Fear) The Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q702332" start="8790" end="8800" title="Digitalism (band)" label="Digitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945042" start="8870" end="8885" title="I Love You Dude" label="I Love You Dude"/>
<link wikidata="Q19018" start="8979" end="8988" title="Jan Delay" label="Jan Delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="9006" end="9017" title="house music" label="house music"/>
<link wikidata="Q155141" start="9027" end="9037" title="Eric Prydz" label="Eric Prydz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155141" start="9098" end="9103" title="Pryda" label="Pryda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575150" start="9130" end="9137" title="Spector (band)" label="Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q20967663" start="9235" end="9244" title="Moth Boys" label="Moth Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535582" start="9277" end="9290" title="Skinny Lister" label="Skinny Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q12605" start="9510" end="9533" title="Prostitution in Germany" label="Prostitution in Germany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303171" wikidata="Q537604" url="?curid=303171" title="Falset, Spain">
<text>Falset () is the principal village of the comarca of the Priorat, in Catalonia, very famous for its wine. It has a castle and two palaces (Medinacelli and Azahara). It is located about 30km inland from Salou on the N420 road. 

The old winery of Falset, also known in Catalonia as one of the Wine Cathedrals, is from Modernisme and Noucentisme style and was designed by the architect Cèsar Martinell.

==References==
== External links ==
* Ajuntament de Falset
* Government data pages </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q537604" start="0" end="6" title="Falset, Spain" label="Falset"/>
<link wikidata="Q937876" start="42" end="49" title="Comarques of Catalonia" label="comarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15377" start="57" end="64" title="Priorat" label="Priorat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="69" end="78" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156362" start="236" end="242" title="winery" label="winery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122677" start="317" end="327" title="Modernisme" label="Modernisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580216" start="332" end="343" title="Noucentisme" label="Noucentisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150065" start="384" end="399" title="Cèsar Martinell" label="Cèsar Martinell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303186" wikidata="Q6160094" url="?curid=303186" title="Jared Sandberg">
<text>Jared Lawrence Sandberg (born March 2, 1978) is an American professional baseball coach and a former Major League Baseball (MLB) third baseman and minor league manager. Sandberg served as the manager for Triple-A El Paso Chihuahuas in the PCL for the 2022 season.

He became the major league field coordinator for the Seattle Mariners of the American League prior to the 2019 season.

Born in Olympia, Washington, where he graduated from Capital High School, Sandberg had a 12-year pro playing career (1996–2007), and prior to joining the Mariners, he had spent 20 years in the Tampa Bay Rays&#x27; organization. His entire MLB career — 196 games played — was spent with the team (then called the &quot;Devil Rays&quot;) from through . He spent ten years as a manager in the Rays&#x27; farm system, including 2015 through 2018 as the pilot of the Triple-A Durham Bulls, their top affiliate, where he won consecutive International League Governors&#x27; Cup championships in 2017–18.

==Career==
Sandberg threw and batted right-handed, and was listed as tall and . During his MLB career, he collected 139 hits, with 38 doubles and 25 home runs. In , Sandberg showed potential to hit for power, hitting 18 home runs in 102 games with the Devil Rays. On June 11, Sandberg hit two home runs in the fifth inning against the Los Angeles Dodgers, becoming the first player in Devil Rays history to hit two home runs in an inning and the first player to do so in an interleague game. However, he struck out 139 times that season, and his difficulties hitting for average prevented him from spending a full season in the major leagues. His career batting average was only .221.

In , Sandberg played with the Portland Sea Dogs, a Double-A affiliate of the Boston Red Sox. Sandberg started the season with the Houston Astros Double-A affiliate Corpus Christi Hooks. He played mainly third base, but struggled to hit for average. In his final game for the Hooks, he broke out of an 0-for-26 slump with a home run. The following day, he was released to make room for a player to come off the disabled list. Sandberg signed with the Cleveland Indians and was assigned to the Double-A Akron Aeros. In , Sandberg signed with the Kansas City Royals, and was assigned to play for the Double-A Wichita Wranglers.

He retired after the 2007 season and took a job as the hitting coach for the Single-A Hudson Valley Renegades in the Tampa Bay Rays organization. After the season, he became the manager of the Rookie level Princeton Rays. In the 2013 season, he became the manager of the Single-A Bowling Green Hot Rods in the Tampa Rays organization. He was named the manager of the High-A Charlotte Stone Crabs for the 2014 season. Following the departure of Charlie Montoyo, Sandberg was named manager of the Triple-A Durham Bulls in January . On July 29, 2016, Sandberg was named the manager of the Arizona Fall League&#x27;s Peoria Javelinas for the 2016 season.

His career minor-league managerial record (2009 through 2018) was 612–522 (.540).

On Wednesday November 21, 2018, the Seattle Mariners announced Sandberg had been hired to serve as their Major League field coordinator for the 2019 season.

==Personal life==
Sandberg is the nephew of the Baseball Hall of Fame former Chicago Cubs second baseman Ryne Sandberg.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6160094" start="0" end="23" title="Jared Sandberg" label="Jared Lawrence Sandberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="73" end="81" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="82" end="87" title="coach (baseball)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="101" end="122" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368170" start="129" end="142" title="third baseman" label="third baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="147" end="159" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186921" start="160" end="167" title="manager (baseball)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q15279091" start="213" end="231" title="El Paso Chihuahuas" label="El Paso Chihuahuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="318" end="334" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="342" end="357" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="393" end="412" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035585" start="438" end="457" title="Capital High School (Olympia, Washington)" label="Capital High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="578" end="592" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520121" start="641" end="653" title="games played" label="games played"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="786" end="797" title="farm system" label="farm system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="847" end="855" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581129" start="856" end="868" title="Durham Bulls" label="Durham Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967325" start="937" end="956" title="Governors&amp;#x27; Cup" label="Governors&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="1104" end="1108" title="hit (baseball)" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194630" start="1118" end="1125" title="double (baseball)" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="1133" end="1142" title="home runs" label="home runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="1204" end="1212" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="1319" end="1338" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q85778021" start="1391" end="1421" title="List of Major League Baseball single-inning home run leaders" label="hit two home runs in an inning"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="1555" end="1562" title="Batting average (baseball)" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054218" start="1700" end="1717" title="Portland Sea Dogs" label="Portland Sea Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="1747" end="1761" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="1800" end="1814" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172650" start="1834" end="1854" title="Corpus Christi Hooks" label="Corpus Christi Hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="2080" end="2093" title="disabled list" label="disabled list"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="2120" end="2137" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825666" start="2171" end="2182" title="Akron Aeros" label="Akron Aeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="2214" end="2232" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998179" start="2276" end="2293" title="Wichita Wranglers" label="Wichita Wranglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929018" start="2382" end="2405" title="Hudson Valley Renegades" label="Hudson Valley Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244999" start="2502" end="2516" title="Princeton Rays" label="Princeton Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951161" start="2576" end="2598" title="Bowling Green Hot Rods" label="Bowling Green Hot Rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961124" start="2670" end="2691" title="Charlotte Stone Crabs" label="Charlotte Stone Crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085259" start="2740" end="2755" title="Charlie Montoyo" label="Charlie Montoyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240330" start="2882" end="2901" title="Arizona Fall League" label="Arizona Fall League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166143" start="2909" end="2925" title="Peoria Javelinas" label="Peoria Javelinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="3067" end="3083" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="3266" end="3278" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453949" start="3294" end="3307" title="Ryne Sandberg" label="Ryne Sandberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303187" wikidata="Q1144839" url="?curid=303187" title="R4M">
<text>R4M, abbreviation for &quot;Rakete, 4 kilogramm, Minenkopf&quot; (), also known by the nickname &quot;Orkan&quot; () due to its distinctive smoke trail when fired, was a folding-fin air-to-air rocket used by the Luftwaffe at the end of World War II.

The R4M was used on several late war German combat aircraft, most notably the Messerschmitt Me 262, and could be fired from open ramps under aircraft wings or from tubes inside under-wing rocket pods. It featured a high capacity &quot;mine shell&quot; equivalent warhead filled with of the explosive-mixture &quot;HTA 41&quot; (also known as &quot;HTA 15&quot;), which consists of 40% Hexogen (RDX), 45% TNT and 15% aluminium. The shell-walls of the warhead were only thick.

Besides the air-to-air warhead the rocket could also be outfitted with shaped charge warheads for air-to-ground use, then called R4HL for &quot;hohlladung&quot; (). These warheads were called &quot;Panzerblitz&quot; () and existed in two primary versions: &quot;Panzerblitz 2&quot; (&quot;PB 2&quot;), consisting of an 88 mm Panzerschreck warhead fitted with a ballistic cap, and &quot;Panzerblitz 3&quot; (&quot;PB 3&quot;), consisting of the original 55 mm mine-warhead modified to be a shaped-charge.

== Development ==

The R4M was developed in order to deal with the increasing weight of anti-bomber weapons being deployed by Luftwaffe fighters. The primary anti-bomber weapon of the Luftwaffe for much of the war was the 20 mm MG 151/20 autocannon, which was compact enough to be mounted in an internal wing bay mounting in the Focke-Wulf Fw 190 (up to 4 cannon, or 6 with optional twin-gun underwing pods) and also fitted on the centerline of Bf 109G fighters, firing through the propeller spinner as a &quot;Motorkanone&quot;. This could be supplemented by an additional pair of cannon in drag-inducing underwing gun pods, but it was found that it took an average of twenty 20 mm hits to shoot down a typical four-engined Allied bomber. The MG 151/20 was subsequently supplemented with or replaced by the 30 mm MK 108 cannon, which replaced the centerline &quot;Motorkanone&quot;-mount MG 151/20 on many Bf 109&#x27;s, and could be fitted into slightly larger underwing pods, which could be used on either the Bf 109 or Fw 190. This heavier-caliber cannon could bring down a bomber with an average of one to three hits. However, the MK 108 was much heavier and the larger calibre ammunition made it difficult to carry more than one or two &quot;passes&quot; worth. Worse, the low muzzle velocity of this gun meant it had a very short range and suffered a ballistic drop of over 41 metres at 1,000 metres range after firing. In approaching close enough to get hits, the fighters placed themselves within the range of the dozens of AN/M2 &quot;light barrel&quot; Browning defensive machine guns that a combat box formation of a typical USAAF heavy bomber raid possessed, from nearly any approach direction. The more powerful MK 103 cannon had higher muzzle velocity and increased range, at the cost of greatly increased weight, size (barrel length of 1.34 meters, or 52-3/4 inches) and much lower rate of fire: 380-420 RPM vs. 600-650 RPM for the MK 108.

Also, the Nebelwerfer 42-derived &quot;Werfer-Granate 21&quot; (Wfr. Gr. 21, or &quot;Bordrakete&quot; BR 21) rockets fitted to Messerschmitt Bf 109 and Bf 110, and Focke-Wulf Fw 190 fighters, used to break up the USAAF combat box bomber formations, had launch tubes that were not only drag-producing, due to their exposed five-strut under-wing mounting, but also from the fact that the launch tubes needed to be aimed upwards at some 15° from level flight, to counter the BR 21 rocket projectile&#x27;s considerable ballistic drop after firing. This added to the already considerable drag the launch tube mountings created, and contributed to the Wfr. Gr 21&#x27;s relatively slow projectile velocity of , approximately 60% of the velocity of the MK 108 cannon&#x27;s shells.

The solution was to replace the underwing gun pods, and the excessively drag-producing large-calibre underwing rocket launch tubes, with a small-diameter solid-fuel rocket-engine-propelled projectile, mounting a warhead similar to that of the cannon shell. Although each &quot;round&quot; was heavier than the corresponding gun-fired shell, the absence of a gun reduced the overall weight considerably. The weight difference was so great that even a much larger and longer-ranged rocket was still lighter than the guns it could replace, although the total number of rounds carried was also reduced from 65 rounds of 30 mm ammunition to only 24 rockets.
The anti-aircraft version of the R4M used a large warhead of 55 mm with of the strongly brisant Hexogen explosive charge, nearly guaranteeing a fighter kill with one hit, from the &quot;shattering&quot; force of its explosive warhead — this was the same explosive used in the shells fired by both the MK 103 (30 x 184 mm cartridge) and MK 108 (30 x 90 mm cartridge) autocannons. Each R4M weighed 3.2 kg and was provided with enough fuel to be fired from 1000 m, just outside the range of the bomber&#x27;s defensive guns. The main body of the rocket consisted of a simple steel tube with eight base-hinged flip-out fins on the tail for stabilisation (patented by Edgar Brandt in 1930 and also used on the contemporary M8 rocket), deployed immediately after launch. A battery typically consisted of two groups of 12 rockets and when all 24 were salvoed in an attack, they would fill an area about 15 by 30 m at 1000 m, a density that made it almost certain that the target would be hit. The R4Ms were usually fired in four salvos of six missiles at intervals of 70 milliseconds from a range of 600 m, and would supersonically streak towards their target at a sixty percent higher velocity than the Wfr. Gr. 21&#x27;s rockets would (the BR 21&#x27;s projectile travelled at some 1150 km/h post-launch), as the R4M typically had a flight speed of roughly . Two warheads were available for the R4M, the common PB-3 with a 0.4 kg charge for anti-aircraft use and the larger shaped charge, similar in construction to the Panzerschreck, the Panzerblitz (PB-2/3), for anti-tank use. The &quot;Panzerblitz III&quot;, mounting a gigantic 210 mm hollow charge warhead (the same calibre as the BR 21), can be seen as the ultimate development of the basic &quot;Orkan&quot; rocket. It was intended to be carried (six or eight rockets per plane) by the tank-busting B model of the Henschel Hs 132 jet dive-bomber - however, neither the missile nor the warplane it was exclusively intended for got beyond the prototype stage before the end of the war.

== Operations ==
Only a small number of aircraft were fitted with the R4M, mostly Messerschmitt Me 262s and the ground attack version of the Fw 190s, which mounted them on small wooden racks under the wings. On one occasion, a Me 163A was fitted with several R4M rockets, and this setup was tested for several weeks in 1944, without incident. This was the first time a rocket propelled aircraft has had rocket propelled armament.

The Luftwaffe found the R4M missiles to have a similar trajectory to the 30 mm MK 108 cannon&#x27;s rounds in flight, so the standard Revi 16&quot;B&quot; gunsight could be utilized.

== Technical specifications (R4M) ==

;General
*Name − Rakete, 4 kilogramm, Minenkopf (R4M)
*Type − Folding-fin, Air-to-air rocket
*Total length − 
*Total weight − 

;Warhead
*Type − High-Explosive, High-Capacity
*Caliber − 
*Length − 
*Wall thickness − 
*Explosive Charge − &quot;HTA 41&quot; (torpex)
*Fuze model − &quot;AzR2&quot; nose fuze
*Fuze length − (total), (internal)

;Rocket engine
*Diameter − (engine)
*Length − (engine), (tail section)
*Fin-span − 
*Fin-swivel − 100°
*Propellant type − Solid fuel diethylene glycol tube
*Propellant dimensions − (length), (internal diameter), (external diameter)
*Propellant weight − 
*Combustion chamber − thick venturi-pipe ending with a nozzle
*Nozzle dimensions − (length), ( (internal top diameter), (internal base diameter)

;Performance
*Max thrust − 
*Burn time − 0.75 s
*Velocity − (initial), (at )
*Range − (max), (effective)

== Notes ==
== See also ==
* 3.5-inch FFAR rocket (US forces)
* 5-inch FFAR rocket (US forces)
* RP-3 (United Kingdom)
* RS-82 (rocket family) (Soviet Union)

== References ==
== External links ==

* German language page on details of the R4M unguided rocket, and its &quot;Panzerblitz&quot; ground attack version</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1144839" start="0" end="3" title="R4M" label="R4M"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697636" start="182" end="199" title="air-to-air rocket" label="air-to-air rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="212" end="221" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="236" end="248" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="329" end="349" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216918" start="439" end="449" title="rocket pod" label="rocket pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361632" start="486" end="496" title="mine shell" label="mine shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q827512" start="514" end="521" title="warhead" label="warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="636" end="643" title="Hexogen" label="Hexogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="645" end="648" title="RDX" label="RDX"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="655" end="658" title="TNT" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="667" end="676" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q284813" start="798" end="811" title="shaped charge" label="shaped charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513967" start="925" end="936" title="Panzerblitz (missile)" label="Panzerblitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q159503" start="1052" end="1065" title="Panzerschreck" label="Panzerschreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q698638" start="1460" end="1469" title="MG 151/20 cannon" label="MG 151/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="1470" end="1480" title="autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="1561" end="1578" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="1677" end="1684" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Bf 109G"/>
<link wikidata="Q820248" start="1848" end="1855" title="gun pod" label="gun pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q689213" start="2046" end="2059" title="MK 108 cannon" label="MK 108 cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019825" start="2276" end="2283" title="Caliber (artillery)" label="caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q689213" start="2368" end="2374" title="MK 108 cannon" label="MK 108"/>
<link wikidata="Q920165" start="2515" end="2530" title="muzzle velocity" label="muzzle velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q789762" start="2590" end="2604" title="bullet drop" label="ballistic drop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2765" end="2804" title="M2 Browning#Aircraft guns" label="AN/M2 &amp;quot;light barrel&amp;quot; Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q552029" start="2958" end="2971" title="MK 103 cannon" label="MK 103 cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q689213" start="3180" end="3186" title="MK 108 cannon" label="MK 108"/>
<link wikidata="Q288357" start="3199" end="3210" title="21 cm Nebelwerfer 42" label="Nebelwerfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019014" start="3228" end="3245" title="Werfer-Granate 21" label="Werfer-Granate 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="3342" end="3348" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Bf 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="3403" end="3408" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150698" start="3409" end="3419" title="combat box" label="combat box"/>
<link wikidata="Q689213" start="3937" end="3950" title="MK 108 cannon" label="MK 108 cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q899092" start="4708" end="4715" title="Brisance" label="brisant"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="4716" end="4723" title="Hexogen" label="Hexogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q552029" start="4921" end="4927" title="MK 103 cannon" label="MK 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q689213" start="4956" end="4962" title="MK 108 cannon" label="MK 108"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047441" start="5283" end="5295" title="Edgar Brandt" label="Edgar Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713957" start="5338" end="5347" title="M8 rocket" label="M8 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019014" start="5817" end="5828" title="Werfer-Granate 21" label="Wfr. Gr. 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="6056" end="6069" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q159503" start="6135" end="6148" title="Panzerschreck" label="Panzerschreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513967" start="6154" end="6165" title="Panzerblitz (missile)" label="Panzerblitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="6180" end="6189" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q284813" start="6255" end="6268" title="hollow charge" label="hollow charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="6459" end="6471" title="Anti-tank rocket" label="tank-busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q703104" start="6487" end="6502" title="Henschel Hs 132" label="Henschel Hs 132"/>
<link wikidata="Q678321" start="6507" end="6518" title="dive-bomber" label="dive-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="6740" end="6760" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="6799" end="6805" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q155360" start="6885" end="6891" title="Me 163" label="Me 163"/>
<link wikidata="Q689213" start="7168" end="7181" title="MK 108 cannon" label="MK 108 cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697636" start="7386" end="7403" title="Air-to-air rocket" label="Air-to-air rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361632" start="7456" end="7485" title="High-Explosive, High-Capacity" label="High-Explosive, High-Capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041604" start="7568" end="7574" title="torpex" label="torpex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="7577" end="7581" title="Fuze" label="Fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q421902" start="7786" end="7803" title="diethylene glycol" label="diethylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q250840" start="7962" end="7968" title="nozzle" label="nozzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304742" start="8188" end="8208" title="3.5-Inch Forward Firing Aircraft Rocket" label="3.5-inch FFAR rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639620" start="8223" end="8241" title="5-Inch Forward Firing Aircraft Rocket" label="5-inch FFAR rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031336" start="8256" end="8260" title="RP-3" label="RP-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q949963" start="8280" end="8301" title="RS-82 (rocket family)" label="RS-82 (rocket family)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303197" wikidata="Q51805" url="?curid=303197" title="List of Star Wars characters">
<text>This incomplete list of characters from the &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise contains only those which are considered part of the official &quot;Star Wars&quot; canon, as of the changes made by Lucasfilm in April 2014. Following its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the novels, comics, video games and other works produced since the originating 1977 film &quot;Star Wars&quot; as &quot;Star Wars Legends&quot; and declared them non-canon to the rest of the franchise. As such, the list contains only information from the Skywalker Saga films, the 2008 animated TV series &quot;Star Wars: The Clone Wars&quot;, and other films, shows, or video games published or produced after April 2014.

The list includes humans and various alien species. No droid characters are included; for those, see the list of &quot;Star Wars&quot; droid characters. Some of the characters featured in this list have additional or alternate plotlines in the non-canonical &quot;Legends&quot; continuity. To see those or characters who do not exist at all in the current &quot;Star Wars&quot; canon, see the list of &quot;Star Wars Legends&quot; characters and list of &quot;Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic&quot; characters.

== A ==

=== Gial Ackbar ===
=== Bode Akuna ===
Bode Akuna is a mercenary who befriends Cal and works with him to help find a path to the hidden planet Tanalorr.

The character has been voiced by Noshir Dalal in &quot;Jedi Survivor&quot;.

===Stass Allie===
Stass Allie is a Tholothian Jedi Master and the cousin of Adi Gallia. Allie is one of the many victims of Order 66. She was initially planned to die with Kit Fisto.

The character has been portrayed by Lily Nyamwasa in &quot;Episode III&quot;.

=== Almec ===
Almec is a Mandalorian politician who serves as Prime Minister of Mandalore during the Clone Wars. A prominent supporter of Satine Kryze and her New Mandalorian government, he is imprisoned for his involvement in an illegal smuggling ring but is later freed and reinstated as a puppet leader after Darth Maul takes over the New Mandalorian capital city of Sundari. When Maul is later captured by Darth Sidious, Almec sends Mandalorian super commandos Gar Saxon and Rook Kast to rescue him. During the Siege of Mandalore, he is captured by Bo-Katan Kryze&#x27;s force and is killed by Saxon when he attempts to relay information to Ahsoka, Rex, and Bo-Katan.

The character has been voiced by Julian Holloway in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Mas Amedda ===
Mas Amedda is the Chagrian Vice Chair of the Galactic Senate. He is Grand Vizier and head of the Imperial Ruling Council, installed by Gallius Rax as the puppet leader of the Empire following Palpatine&#x27;s death. Amedda is also one of the few people to know about Palpatine&#x27;s secret persona as Darth Sidious. Amedda formally surrenders the Empire to the New Republic.

The character has been portrayed by Jerome Blake and David Bowers in &quot;Episodes I-III&quot;, and voiced by Stephen Stanton in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;. His story has also been expanded in &quot;Aftermath: Life Debt&quot; and &quot;Aftermath: Empire&#x27;s End&quot;.

=== Padmé Amidala ===
=== Cassian Andor ===
=== Maarva Andor ===
Maarva Andor is a human female who lived during the final decades of the Galactic Republic and into the era of the Galactic Empire. Alongside her husband, Clem, Maarva became the adoptive mother of Cassian Andor, whom they rescued while smuggling on the planet Kenari.

The character has been portrayed by Fiona Shaw in &quot;Andor&quot;.

=== Mother Aniseya ===
The mother of Osha and Mae Aniseya, alongside Mother Koril, and the leader of a coven of Force witches on Brendok, who was killed in a fire sixteen years before the events of &quot;The Acolyte.&quot;

The character has been played by Jodie Turner-Smith in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Verosha &quot;Osha&quot; and Mae-ho &quot;Mae&quot; Aniseya ===
Twin sisters who were separated by a tragedy when they were young. Osha is the former Padawan learner of Sol who left the Jedi Order due to &quot;internal turmoil&quot; she has regarding her connection to the Force. Mae is presumed dead until she re-emerges as a dangerous warrior using the dark side of the Force.

The characters have been played by Amandla Stenberg in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Raymus Antilles ===
Raymus Antilles is captain of the CR90 corvette &quot;Tantive IV&quot;, where he is strangled to death by Darth Vader. Antilles was also the last master of C-3PO and R2-D2 before they fall under the ownership of Luke Skywalker. In the final days of the Republic, Antilles served as captain of the CR70 corvette &quot;Tantive III&quot;.

The character has been portrayed by Peter Geddis in &quot;Episode IV&quot;, by Rohan Nichol in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and by Tim Beckmann in &quot;Rogue One&quot;.

=== Wedge Antilles ===
=== Chelli Lona Aphra ===
=== The Armorer ===
=== Ryder Azadi ===
Ryder Azadi is the former Governor of Lothal and a family friend to Ephraim and Mira Bridger. He secretly assisted them in their campaign against the Galactic Empire which led to their arrest. Ryder escaped prison, but his friends did not. He later met Ezra and Kanan on Lothal. After helping in a mission that also involved Princess Leia, Ryder decided to form a new Rebel cell on Lothal. He later pretends to betray the Rebels in order to lure Governor Pryce into a trap. During the final part of the battle, Ryder tries to get Pryce to come along quietly when the Imperial base begins to take off and explode to no avail, but Pryce chooses to die, staying loyal to the Empire until the end. After the liberation of Lothal, Ryder assisted in its reconstruction and assumed the governorship.

The character has been voiced by Clancy Brown in &quot;Rebels&quot;, and Brown reprised his role in &quot;Ahsoka&quot;.

=== Azmorigan ===
Azmorigan is a Jablogian crime lord and business partner of Vizago&#x27;s. He was first tricked by Lando Calrissian into giving the entrepreneur a mining-purposed puffer pig and trading it for Hera, who then outsmarted Azmorigan and escaped from his ship, the &quot;Merchant One&quot;, to Calrissian and the &quot;Ghost&quot; crew. Azmorigan cornered them at Vizago&#x27;s mining estate, intending to reclaim the puffer pig and Hera along the &quot;Ghost&quot; and its crew but was defeated there and is forced to flee. In &quot;The Wynkahthu Job&quot;, having formed an alliance with Hondo, with the two of them attacking an Imperial cargo ship only to have it become caught in the storms of a nearby planet, forcing them to call upon the &quot;Ghost&quot; crew for help. The salvage operation gets the rebels several proton bombs and an encounter with Imperial Sentry Droids, while Hondo only succeeds in unintentionally recovering one of his Ugnaughts.

The character has been voiced by James Hong in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

== B ==

=== Ponda Baba ===
Ponda Baba is an Aqualish mercenary who attacks Luke Skywalker in the Mos Eisley cantina, and then gets his arm cut off by Obi-Wan Kenobi&#x27;s lightsaber. He is an associate of Dr. Cornelius Evazan, who also antagonizes Luke Skywalker in the cantina. When the original Kenner action figure for Baba was released, the then-unnamed alien was called simply &quot;Walrus Man&quot;.

In &quot;Episode IV&quot; the character was portrayed by Tommy Ilsley. In &quot;Rogue One&quot;, he is seen with Dr. Evazan on the streets of Jedha.

=== Cad Bane ===
=== Darth Bane ===
=== Tobias Beckett ===
=== Val Beckett ===
Val Beckett is the wife and partner-in-crime of Tobias Beckett. She is killed during a failed Coaxium heist for the Crimson Dawn.

The character has been portrayed by Thandiwe Newton in &quot;Solo&quot;.

=== The Bendu ===
The Bendu is an ancient Force-wielder whose philosophy predates the Jedi Order; encountered by the rebels on the planet Atollon, where he describes himself as being &quot;the middle&quot; between the &quot;ashla&quot;, light side of the Force, and the &quot;bogan&quot;, dark side of the Force.

The character has been voiced by Tom Baker in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Kelleran Beq ===
Kelleran Beq is a Jedi Master who rescued Grogu from Order 66 with the help of the Royal Naboo Security Forces.

The character has been portrayed by Ahmed Best in &quot;The Mandalorian&quot;, reprising his role from the 2020 web-based children&#x27;s game show &quot;Star Wars: Jedi Temple Challenge&quot;.

=== Sio Bibble ===
Sio Bibble is the Governor of Naboo.

The character has been portrayed by Oliver Ford Davies in &quot;Episodes I-III&quot;.

=== Depa Billaba ===
Depa Billaba is a Jedi Master on the Jedi High Council who falls into a six-month coma after an encounter with General Grievous on Haruun Kal. While recovering, she forms a bond with Padawan Caleb Dume (who will later become known as Kanan Jarrus), whom she takes on as her apprentice. She sacrifices herself during Order 66 to save her Padawan.

The character has been portrayed by Dipika O&#x27;Neill Joti in &quot;Episodes I-II&quot;, and voiced by Archie Panjabi in &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Jar Jar Binks ===
=== Zorii Bliss ===
Zorri Bliss is a leader of a group of spice-smugglers from the planet Kijimi and a past love interest of Resistance pilot Poe Dameron. She later was among the many who assisted the Resistance in the air battle against the Sith Eternal forces over Exegol.

The character has been portrayed by Keri Russell in &quot;Episode IX&quot;.

=== Lux Bonteri ===
Lux Bonteri is the son of Separatist Senator Mina Bonteri, a freedom fighter during the Clone Wars and a love interest of Ahsoka Tano. After his mother&#x27;s assassination, he first seeks revenge against Dooku with Death Watch. Later he becomes a rebel and frees his homeworld from Separatist occupation. He later becomes the representative of his homeworld Onderon in the Galactic Senate, once they rejoin the Republic. 

The character has been voiced by Jason Spisak in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Bossk ===
Bossk is a notorious Trandoshan bounty hunter who is one of the six summoned by Darth Vader to track down the &quot;Millennium Falcon&quot;. He is also seen in Jabba&#x27;s Palace. Bossk is the son of bounty hunter Cradossk and is known for his hatred and hunting of Wookiees, with a particular vendetta against the Wookiee Chewbacca. During the Clone Wars, he mentors and serves as a bodyguard to a young Boba Fett, eventually joining his syndicate of bounty hunters.

The character has been portrayed by Alan Harris in &quot;Episodes V-VI&quot;, and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

In the fourth draft of &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot;, Bossk was written as a slimy, tentacled monster with two huge bloodshot eyes in a soft baggy face. Concept art of Bossk was drawn by artist Ralph McQuarrie in either late 1978 or early 1979.

The head, feet, and arms of the character were recycled from the Mos Eisley cantina scene in &quot;A New Hope&quot; and sculpted by make-up artist Stuart Freeborn. The outfit used for the character was a High-Altitude Windak Pressure Suit used by the Royal Air Force in the 1960s and was recycled from the 1966 &quot;Doctor Who&quot; serial &quot;The Tenth Planet&quot;. An insignia was applied to the shoulder of the costume to give the appearance that Bossk was a part of an &quot;organized unit.&quot; His weapon was made from a Webley-Schermuly Riot gun with various add-ons.

Bossk is mentioned in &quot;&quot;, when Val complains to her husband Tobias Beckett about hiring Han Solo and Chewbacca instead of experienced mercenaries such as Bossk. In earlier drafts, Bossk was written in as a member of the Enfys Nest&#x27;s Cloud Riders who abandons her at the end of movie. Screenwriter Jonathan Kasdan &quot;fought long and hard&quot; to include this in &quot;Solo&quot; but was overruled.

=== Ezra Bridger ===
== C ==

=== Bix Caleen ===
Bix Caleen is a mechanic and black market dealer who is Andor&#x27;s ally.

The character has been portrayed by Adria Arjona in &quot;Andor&quot;.

=== Lando Calrissian ===
===Tycho Celchu===
An Imperial officer who defects to the rebellion during the Alliance&#x27;s mission to Dantooine.

=== Chewbacca ===
=== Cid Scaleback ===
Cid Scaleback (full first name Ciddarin) is a former Jedi informant who provides the Bad Batch with mercenary missions in the aftermath of the Clone Wars. She later betrays the Bad Batch after they return from Eriadu, handing Omega over to Royce Hemlock.

The character has been voiced by Rhea Perlman in &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== The Client ===
=== Rush Clovis ===
Rush Clovis is a Separatist Senator who represents the planet Scipio in the Galactic Senate, as well as a former suitor of Padmé Amidala though it is made clear he never really knew her. When the Clone Wars broke out, he became a delegate of the InterGalactic Banking Clan. During the Battle of Scipio, he sacrifices himself to save Padmé.

The character has been voiced by Robin Atkin Downes in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Commander CC-2224 &quot;Cody&quot; ===
CC-2224, or &quot;Cody&quot;, is a clone Commander of the 212th Attack Battalion, serving under Obi-Wan Kenobi during the Clone Wars. Following the Battle of Utapau, he unwillingly betrays and attempts to kill Kenobi when Order 66 is issued.

The character has been portrayed by Temuera Morrison in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Kaydel Ko Connix ===
Kaydel Ko Connix is a junior controller in the Resistance at the beginning of the sequel trilogy. After the Battle of Starkiller base she is promoted to Lieutenant. She joins Poe&#x27;s failed mutiny against Admiral Holdo in Episode VIII. Despite this she stays with the Resistance and is one of few survivors of the Battle of Crait. During Episode IX she helps set up a Resistance base, then participates in and survives the Battle of Exegol. 

The character has been portrayed by Billie Lourd, daughter of Carrie Fisher, in &quot;Episodes VII-IX&quot;.

=== Eno Cordova ===
Eno Cordova is a Jedi Master, presumed survivor of Order 66, and former mentor of Cere Junda and owner of BD-1. He discovered an ancient vault built by the Force-sensitive Zeffo on the planet Bogano, where he hid a Jedi holocron containing a list of Force-sensitive children, in the hopes that it could someday help rebuild the Jedi Order.

The character has been voiced by Tony Amendola in &quot;Jedi: Fallen Order&quot; and &quot;Jedi: Survivor&quot;.

=== CT-9904 &quot;Crosshair&quot; ===
CT-9904, or &quot;Crosshair&quot;, is a defective clone trooper and member of Clone Force 99. He is the team&#x27;s sniper, possessing genetic mutations that give him exceptional eyesight. He is the only member of Clone Force 99 whose biochip is activated when Order 66 is issued, causing him to turn on his squadmates after they rebel against the newly formed Galactic Empire. Crosshair is later put in charge of a unit of conscripted Imperial soldiers, and tasked with hunting down the Bad Batch. Though he eventually learns about his biochip and removes it, he continues to willingly serve the Empire, believing that attempting to fight it is useless and holding a grudge against the Bad Batch for abandoning him. After being forced to work with the Bad Batch to survive Tipoca City&#x27;s destruction, Crosshair partially makes amends with his former squadmates, but still refuses to join them. He is later captured by Royce Hemlock and imprisoned at Dr Hemlock&#x27;s base on Mount Tantiss, escaping with Omega and a lurca hound named Batcher. He joins the group on Pabu and at Hunter&#x27;s request, gets his hand checked out by AZI-3. He is losing his accuracy and has a tremor in his hand from his months on Mount Tantiss.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Salacious Crumb ===
Salacious Crumb is a Kowakian monkey-lizard in Jabba the Hutt&#x27;s court. The character&#x27;s name (and aspects of its appearance) is derived from creature designer Phil Tippett&#x27;s drunken mispronunciation of the word &quot;shoelaces&quot; and an homage to underground comix cartoonist Robert Crumb.

The character has been performed by Tim Rose in &quot;Episode VI&quot;, with his voice provided by Mark Dodson. Rose&#x27;s antics controlling the Crumb puppet led to an increase in the character&#x27;s prominence.

== D ==

=== Figrin D&#x27;an ===
Figrin D&#x27;an is the leader of the Bith band &quot;Figrin D&#x27;an and the Modal Nodes&quot;, playing in the Mos Eisley cantina.

The character has been portrayed by Rick Baker in &quot;Episode IV&quot;.

=== Poe Dameron ===
=== Biggs Darklighter ===
Biggs Darklighter is a pilot for the Rebel Alliance and a childhood friend of Luke Skywalker. In the Battle of Yavin, Darklighter was shot down and killed by Darth Vader.

The character has been portrayed by Garrick Hagon in &quot;Episode IV&quot;.

=== The Daughter ===
One of the Mortis gods, the Daughter is the embodiment of the light side of the Force, child of the Father, and sister to the Son. She is obedient of her father and helps him test Anakin Skywalker to see whether he is the Chosen One and can replace the Father. She ultimately sacrifices herself to save her father from her brother and manages to also save Ahsoka Tano, who had been corrupted by the latter, before dying. She is believed to have been reincarnated as Morai, an owl who is seen accompanying Ahsoka several times and to whom she claims she owes her life.

The character has been voiced by Adrienne Wilkinson in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Dengar ===
Dengar is a Corellian bounty hunter summoned by Darth Vader to hunt for the &quot;Millennium Falcon&quot;, and he is also briefly visible later in Jabba&#x27;s Palace. During the Clone Wars, Dengar is part of a syndicate of bounty hunters betrayed by Asajj Ventress on the planet Quarzite.

The character has been portrayed by Morris Bush in &quot;Episodes V-VI&quot;, and voiced by Simon Pegg in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

Dengar attempts to capture Han Solo and Chewbacca in the 2015 &quot;Star Wars&quot; Marvel comics series story-line &quot;Showdown on the Smuggler&#x27;s Moon&quot; and makes appearances in the &quot;Star Wars: Darth Vader&quot; comic series as well. In the &quot;Aftermath&quot; novels, Dengar both battles and befriends fellow bounty hunter Mercurial Swift, before joining Jas Emari to rescue Norra Wexley during the Battle of Jakku, and receives a pardon from the New Republic.

=== DJ ===
DJ, an acronym for &quot;Don&#x27;t Join&quot;, is a slicer who assists and then betrays Finn and Rose Tico on their mission aboard the First Order flagship, the &quot;Mega&quot;-class Star Dreadnought &quot;Supremacy&quot;.

The character has been portrayed by Benicio del Toro in &quot;Episode VIII&quot;.

=== Din Djarin / The Mandalorian ===
=== Tan Divo ===
Tan Divo is a Coruscant police inspector during the Clone Wars, often displaying a pompous attitude. After the end of the Clone Wars, Divo lived on Alderaan and died when the first Death Star blew up the planet in an event known as &quot;The Disaster&quot;.

The character has been voiced by Tom Kenny in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Lott Dod ===
Lott Dod is a Neimoidian senator of the Trade Federation, representing the trade conglomerate&#x27;s interests in the Galactic Senate.

The character has been portrayed by Silas Carson in &quot;Episode I&quot; (voiced by Toby Longworth), and voiced by Gideon Emery in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Jan Dodonna ===
Jan Dodonna is a general and leader of the Rebel base on Yavin 4 who plans the attack on the first Death Star.

The character has been portrayed by Alex McCrindle in &quot;Episode IV&quot;, voiced by Michael Bell in &quot;Rebels&quot;, and portrayed by Ian McElhinney in &quot;Rogue One&quot;. In &quot;Episode IV&quot;, he is also the first character to utter the phrase, &quot;May the Force be with you&quot;.

=== Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus ===
=== Cin Drallig ===
Cin Drallig is a Jedi Master who serves as the battlemaster and head of security for the Jedi Temple in the final days of the Clone Wars. He is killed by Darth Vader during the siege of the Jedi Temple.

The character has been portrayed by Nick Gillard in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and voiced by Robin Atkin Downes in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Caleb Dume / Kanan Jarrus ===
=== Cara Dune ===
=== Rio Durant ===
Rio Durant is an Ardennian pilot and long-time associate of criminals Tobias and Val Beckett. He is killed during a failed Coaxium heist for the Crimson Dawn.

The character has been voiced by Jon Favreau in &quot;Solo&quot;.

=== Tala Durith ===
Tala Durith is an Imperial officer on Mapuzo. She becomes disillusioned by the Empire&#x27;s cruelty and joins an underground network known as the Hidden Path. She aids Ben Kenobi and Princess Leia several times, ultimately sacrificing herself so they can avoid capture.

The character has been portrayed by Indira Varma in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;.

== E ==

=== CT-1409 &quot;Echo&quot; ===
CT-1409, or &quot;Echo&quot;, is an ARC Trooper and member of Domino Squad and the 501st Legion, who is seemingly killed in the Battle of Lola Sayu. In reality, however, he was captured and used against his will as a pawn by the Separatists for their campaign on Anaxes. After being rescued by Captain Rex and the Bad Batch, he plays a key role in leading the Republic to victory in the battle of Anaxes, before joining Clone Force 99 as its latest member. Following Order 66, Echo along with most of the team rebel against the Empire and become mercenaries. He later leaves the squad to join Rex to &quot;do more&quot; against the Empire.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== The Eighth Brother ===
The Eighth Brother is a masked Terellian Jango Jumper who trailed the former Sith Lord Darth Maul to the planet Malachor, before falling to his death attempting to flee from the combined might of Maul, Kanan Jarrus, and Ahsoka Tano.

The character has been voiced by Robbie Daymond in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Morgan Elsbeth ===
=== Embo ===
Embo is a Kyuzo bounty hunter that works for the highest bidder, but has a sense of honor. His weapons include a bowcaster and his hat, which he uses as both a boomerang and board.

The character has been voiced by Dave Filoni in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.&#x27;

=== Galen Erso ===
Galen Erso is an Imperial research scientist and the father of Jyn Erso. As prime designer of the Death Star, Erso supplies information on a critical weakness which he had deliberately included in the weapon&#x27;s design to the Rebellion, allowing an attack on the seemingly invulnerable battle station. Despite this, he is later mortally wounded by the Rebels in an attack on an Imperial base on Eadu, and gets to briefly reunite with his daughter before dying.

The character has been portrayed by Mads Mikkelsen in &quot;Rogue One&quot;.

=== Jyn Erso ===
=== Haja Estree ===
Haja Estree is a human male con artist who worked on the planet Daiyu during the reign of the Galactic Empire.

The character has been portrayed by Kumail Nanjiani in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;.

=== Cornelius Evazan ===
Dr. Cornelius Evazan is a character who antagonizes Luke Skywalker and is subsequently attacked with a lightsaber by Obi-Wan Kenobi in the Mos Eisley cantina. He is a human male with a heavily scarred face, accompanied by his Aqualish associate Ponda Baba. He claims to be a wanted man who has the death sentence in 12 systems. Evazan also bumps into Jyn Erso and threatens her on the streets of Jedha in &quot;Rogue One&quot;.

The character has been portrayed by Alfie Curtis in &quot;Episode IV,&quot; and by Michael Smiley in &quot;Rogue One&quot;.

== F ==
=== Yord Fandar ===
Yord Fandar is a human male Knight of the Jedi Order who lived during the High Republic Era. As a Jedi Padawan, he befriended Verosha &quot;Osha&quot; Aniseya. Eventually being promoted to a Jedi Knight, he took on Tasi Lowa as a Padawan.

The character has been played by Charlie Barnett in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Onaconda Farr ===
Onaconda Farr is a senator from Rodia initially aligned with the CIS, before eventually returning to the Republic thanks to his old friend and fellow Senator Padmé Amidala. He is later killed with a poisoned drink by his personal aide, Lolo Purs, who held him responsible for bringing the war to Rodia.

The character has been portrayed by Zuraya Hamilton in &quot;Episode II&quot;, and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== The Father ===
One of the three Mortis gods, the Father represents the balance of the Force, between his Daughter, who embodies the light side of the Force, and his Son, who embodies the dark side. After growing old, he lures Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Ahsoka Tano to Mortis in order to test the former and see if he is indeed the &quot;Chosen One&quot; and will bring balance to the Force. He eventually becomes convinced of this, but Anakin refuses his offer to stay on Mortis and become his successor. The Father later commits suicide, which renders the Son mortal and allows Anakin to kill him for all the harm he had done.

The character has been voiced by Lloyd Sherr in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Feral ===
Feral is a Dathomirian Zabrak who lived on the planet Dathomir. Feral was a Nightbrother of the Viscus Clan and the brother of Savage Opress and Maul. Feral, and his brother Savage, caught the interest of the Sith Assassin Asajj Ventress in a trial of combat. Savage protected Feral throughout the trials, however he was eventually bewitched by the Nightsisters causing him to turn on Feral, breaking his neck. Feral&#x27;s first and only appearance is in Star Wars: The Clone Wars season 3, episode 13 &quot;&quot;Monster&quot;&quot;.

=== Fern ===
Fern is a human female youngling who lived in the galaxy in the early New Republic Era. Fern lived together with her mother Fara on At Attin, where Fara was a teacher and part of the government, and was best friends with another child called KB. In 9 ABY, Fern met the boy Wim who found an old starship buried in the woods outside their city. After the two, KB and Wim&#x27;s best friend Neel investigated the ship they accidentally activated it and became lost in space. The group of kids then forged an alliance with the ship&#x27;s droid SM-33 and a Force-sensitive man called Jod Na Nawood to find their way back home and avoid a crew of pirates.

The character has been played by Ryan Kiera Armstrong in &quot;Star Wars: Skeleton Crew&quot;.

=== Boba Fett ===
=== Jango Fett ===
=== The Fifth Brother ===
The Fifth Brother is the second Inquisitor introduced in &quot;Rebels&quot;. A gray-skinned humanoid, he and the Seventh Sister are dispatched to hunt down the crew of the &quot;Ghost&quot; after the death of the Grand Inquisitor. They are both ultimately killed by Maul on Malachor.

The character has been voiced by Philip Anthony-Rodriguez in &quot;Rebels&quot;, and portrayed by Sung Kang in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;.

=== Finn / FN-2187 ===
=== Kit Fisto ===
Kit Fisto is a Nautolan Jedi Master and member of the Jedi Council. He dies when attempting to arrest Darth Sidious.

The character has been portrayed by Zachariah Jensen and Daniel Zizmor in &quot;Episode II&quot;, by Ben Cooke in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and voiced by Phil LaMarr in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;. Fisto was first developed as a male Sith concept by concept artist Dermot Power. When the alien Sith apprentice idea was abandoned, Power revisited the tentacle-headed alien as a Jedi, with a less malevolent face, yet still with an imposing presence.

He was initially planned to die at the hands of treacherous clone troopers in Order 66.

=== CT-27-5555 &quot;Fives&quot; ===
CT-27-5555, or &quot;Fives&quot;, is an ARC Trooper and member of the Domino Squad and the 501st Legion, who participates in numerous battles of the Clone Wars. After witnessing his close friend Clone Trooper Tup unwittingly executing Jedi General Tiplar during the Battle of Ringo Vinda, Fives goes to great lengths to find answers for Tup&#x27;s actions, ultimately leading to his discovery of Order 66. However, because of this, Palpatine frames him for an assassination attempt. Before he could reveal what he learned to Captain Rex and Anakin Skywalker, Fives is killed by Commander Fox under Palpatine&#x27;s orders.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Bib Fortuna ===
=== Babu Frik ===
Babu Frik is an Anzellan droidsmith on Kijimi who helps Rey, Finn and Poe Dameron decrypt a message inside C-3PO&#x27;s memory. He later survives the Sith Eternal&#x27;s destruction of Kijimi and is present at the Battle of Exegol.

The character has been voiced by Shirley Henderson in &quot;Episode IX&quot;. Henderson later voiced other Anzellan droidsmiths in season 3 of &quot;The Mandalorian&quot;.

=== Garsa Fwip ===
== G ==

=== Adi Gallia ===
Adi Gallia is a Tholothian Jedi Master and member of the Jedi Council. Gallia is killed by Savage Oppress during the Clone Wars. She also appears as a disembodied voice empowering Rey to face the rejuvenated Darth Sidious.

The character has been portrayed by Gin Clarke in &quot;Episode I&quot;, and voiced by Angelique Perrin in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Episode IX&quot;.

=== Yarna d&#x27;al&#x27; Gargan ===
Yarna d&#x27;al&#x27; Gargan is an Askajian dancer who is enslaved to Jabba the Hutt.

The character has been portrayed by Claire Davenport in &quot;Episode VI&quot;.

=== Garindan ===
Garindan is a Kubaz spy who leads Imperial stormtroopers to the &quot;Millennium Falcon&quot;.

The character has appeared in &quot;Episode IV&quot;.

=== Phee Genoa ===
Phee Genoa is a pirate who often searches for ancient wonders and artifacts. She becomes close with Clone Force 99 and introduces them to the calm, tropical planet of Pabu.

She is voiced by Wanda Sykes in &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Saw Gerrera ===
=== Steela Gerrera ===
Steela Gerrera is the sister of Saw Gerrera, who was part of his rebellion against the Separatists on Onderon during the Clone Wars, and was killed by a droid gunship during the final battle while risking her life to save King Dendup. Her death deeply affected her brother.

The character has been voiced by Dawn-Lyen Gardner in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Moff Gideon ===
=== The Grand Inquisitor ===
The Grand Inquisitor is an unnamed Jedi of the Pau&#x27;an species who becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Order due to the actions of the Jedi Council during the Clone Wars, and ultimately defects from it during Order 66, joining the Galactic Empire. Trained by Darth Vader alongside the other Inquisitors, he is tasked with hunting down all remaining Jedi throughout the galaxy, a mission which eventually brings him into conflict with Jedi Padawan Kanan Jarrus, the leader of a Rebel cell on the planet Lothal. Following his defeat by Jarrus, the Grand Inquisitor opts to commit suicide to avoid Vader&#x27;s punishment for his failure. Later, his redemeed spirit, known as the Sentinel, helps Jarrus complete his Jedi training in order to become a Jedi Knight, before being enslaved by the Sith as a Temple Guard once more.

The character has been voiced by Jason Isaacs in &quot;Rebels&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Empire&quot;. The Grand Inquisitor received positive critical reception, leading to interest in him reprising his role in live-action media on Disney+. Ultimately, Rupert Friend was cast as the Grand Inquisitor, portraying the character in his first live-action appearance in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;.

=== Commander CC-1004 &quot;Gree&quot; ===
CC-1004, or &quot;Gree&quot;, is a clone Commander of the 41st Elite Corps, serving under Jedi Luminara Unduli during the Clone Wars. He takes part in the Battle of Kashyyyk and attempts to carry out Order 66 by executing Yoda, but the Jedi Master senses his intentions and swiftly decapitates him and another trooper.

The character has been voiced by Temuera Morrison in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Greedo ===

Greedo is a Rodian bounty hunter from the Tetsu Clan and worked for crime boss Jabba the Hutt. Greedo&#x27;s Huttese language is based on Quechua, the Inca language. He appears in the first &quot;Star Wars&quot; film during a scene where he confronts and threatens Han Solo, only to be killed by Solo. The scene was later altered so that Greedo also shoots at Han, leading to the infamous fan controversy known as &quot;Han shot first&quot;, which the character has since come to be most associated with.

Greedo was portrayed in 1977 by Paul Blake, as well as Maria De Aragon for some close-in pickup shots in 1977. Linguist Larry Ward performed the voice, speaking in a simplified form of Quechua, a South American language. A younger version of him was played by Simon Rose and Oliver Walpole in a deleted scene from the 1999 prequel film &quot;Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace&quot;. The character has made appearances in a few other pieces of &quot;Star Wars&quot; media, including the 2008 animated series &quot;Star Wars: The Clone Wars&quot; (voiced by Tom Kenny) and the 2015 video game &quot;Star Wars Battlefront&quot;.

=== Captain CC-5576-39 &quot;Gregor&quot; ===
CC-5576-39, or &quot;Gregor&quot;, is a clone Commando thought to have died in the Battle of Sarrish. Stricken with amnesia and living on Abafar, he is later told by Colonel Meebur Gascon that he is a clone trooper, and seemingly sacrifices himself to help the Colonel and his droids to get off Abafar to save many Republic lives. However, he survives this ordeal and eventually returns to the Republic, after which he removes his biochip, so that he would not be forced to carry out Order 66. When the Republic is reorganized into the Empire after the end of the Clone Wars, Gregor is forced to train conscripted Imperial soldiers, until the Bad Batch rescue him. Years later, Gregor ends up in the Seelos system with fellow retired clones Rex and Wolffe, and is shown to have developed some eccentric tendencies. He aids a group of rebels against Imperial forces in a skirmish on the planet, and later takes part in a battle to free the planet Lothal from Imperial occupation, though he is fatally wounded by an Imperial technician during the battle.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, &quot;Rebels&quot;, and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Grievous ===
=== Din Grogu / The Child ===
=== Nute Gunray ===
Nute Gunray is the Neimoidian Viceroy of the Trade Federation whose invasion of Naboo is supported by Darth Sidious. His animosity towards Padmé Amidala leads him to join the Separatist Alliance as one of its high-ranking members. Following Count Dooku&#x27;s death, Gunray was sent with the other Separatist Council leaders to Mustafar by General Grievous where they are eventually executed by Darth Vader.

The character has been portrayed by Silas Carson in &quot;Episodes I–III&quot; and voiced by Tom Kenny in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

George Lucas, a longtime Democrat, is believed to have created the name based on two famous Republican Party figures he did not care for: Newt Gingrich and Ronald Reagan.

== H ==

=== Rune Haako ===
Rune Haako is Nute Gunray&#x27;s right-hand man. He is a high-ranking member of the Trade Federation the Separatist Council. He is killed along with the other Separatist leaders on Mustafar by Darth Vader.

The character has been portrayed by Jerome Blake and James Taylor (voice) in &quot;Episode I&quot;, by Alan Ruscoe and Chris Truswell (voice) in &quot;Episode II&quot;, and by Sandy Thompson in &quot;Episode III&quot;.

=== Shin Hati ===
Shin Hati is the apprentice of former Jedi Baylan Skoll, who found Hati after himself surviving Order 66 and fleeing into the Unknown Regions. During the era of the New Republic, both operate as Dark Jedi mercenaries in search of power, working with Morgan Elsbeth. After the battle on Peridea, Hati stays to lead the Peridea bandits.

Her name is an allusion to the celestial wolf Hati in Norse mythology, the companion of the celestial wolf Sköll.

The character has been portrayed by Ivanna Sakhno in &quot;Ahsoka&quot;.

=== Dr. Royce Hemlock ===
Doctor Royce Hemlock served for the Galactic Republic and then became head of the Advanced Science Division based at Mount Tantiss. He reports directly to the Emperor as he works on a secret, highly classified experiment regarding cloning technology. Dr. Hemlock uses child test subjects in order to yield results.

Dr. Hemlock is voiced by Jimmi Simpson in &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Valin Hess ===
Valin Hess is an Imperial officer who used to have Migs Mayfeld as a soldier. He encounters Mayfield again when he and Din Djarin infiltrate an Imperial rhydonium refinery on Morak to discover Moff Gideon&#x27;s whereabouts and is killed by his former soldier just as he recognizes him because he insulted the soldiers killed during Operation: Cinder.

The character has been portrayed by Richard Brake in &quot;The Mandalorian&quot;.

=== Amilyn Holdo ===
=== Ri-Lee Howell ===
Ri-Lee Howell is a Jedi Master revealed in &quot;Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker - The Visual Dictionary&quot;. In this novel, which expands more of the universe in &quot;The Rise of Skywalker&quot; film, Howell is cited as a Jedi Master who assembled the sacred texts that were passed from Luke Skywalker to Rey. These texts were featured in &quot;The Last Jedi&quot;. While many of the sacred Jedi texts were stored and lost in subsequently holocrons, Howell&#x27;s dedication to writing physical passages is what kept them alive.

Ri-Lee Howell is named after real-life Riley Howell, a 21-year-old who was killed as he tackled a gunman that opened fire at the University of North Carolina. Because of his actions, he saved his classmates&#x27; lives. A profile written by the New York Times following his death read, &quot;He was also a deep scholar of Star Wars, amassing a legion of Jedi action figures with his brother Ted, 14.” Lucasfilm reached out to his family and promised that he would be honored in the Star Wars universe. “Riley’s courage and selflessness brings out the Jedi in all of us,” the letter read.

=== &quot;Hunter&quot; ===
Sergeant &quot;Hunter&quot; is a defective clone trooper and commander of Clone Force 99. He has genetic mutations that give him enhanced senses, such as tracking and feeling electromagnetic signals. During Order 66, after witnessing Jedi Master Depa Billaba&#x27;s death, he lets her Padawan, Caleb Dume, escape. After the formation of the Empire, Hunter, along with most of Clone Force 99, rebels and escapes Kamino with a young unaltered clone named Omega. They become mercenaries, and Hunter forms a strong father-daughter relationship with Omega, leading him to want to quit being a soldier to give her a normal life.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Armitage Hux ===
== I ==
=== IG-88B ===
The IG-88 line was a derivative of the IG-86 sentinel droids used during the Clone Wars. IG-88B later became one of the galaxy&#x27;s most infamous bounty hunters.

=== Chirrut Îmwe ===
Chirrut Îmwe is a blind warrior who believes in the Force and is said to be one of the Guardians of the Whills. He aids the Rebel Alliance in stealing the plans for the Death Star in &quot;Rogue One&quot;, and he is killed during the Battle of Scarif.

The character has been portrayed by Donnie Yen in &quot;Rogue One&quot;.

=== Indara ===
Indara is a human Jedi Master of the Jedi Order who lived during the High Republic Era and trained a Padawan, Torbin. Often commanding an authoritative presence, the Jedi Master was skilled in several forms of combat, including wielding the Force to protect herself and others.

The character has been played by Carrie-Anne Moss in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

== J ==

=== Jabba the Hutt ===
=== Jannah ===
Jannah is a former First Order stormtrooper originally designated as TZ-1719 who joins the Resistance and befriends Finn. Later, Jannah accepts Lando&#x27;s offer to help her find her family.

The character has been portrayed by Naomi Ackie in &quot;Episode IX&quot;.

=== CT-5597 &quot;Jesse&quot; ===
CT-5597, or &quot;Jesse&quot;, is an ARC Trooper within the 501st Legion who fights in many battles throughout the Clone Wars. During the Siege of Mandalore, he is captured by Darth Maul to be used as bait in luring Ahsoka Tano to him, but is eventually rescued. When Order 66 is issued, Jesse is among the clones to attempt to execute Ahsoka, as well as Rex after he has his chip removed and sides with her. Along with all the other troopers aboard, Jesse is killed when the &quot;Venator&quot;-class Star Destroyer &quot;Tribunal&quot; they are on crashes on a small moon, and is buried by Ahsoka and Rex.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Jedi&quot;.

=== Dexter Jettster ===
Dexter Jettster is the Besalisk owner of Dex&#x27;s Diner, and an old friend of Obi-Wan Kenobi, who provides Kenobi with information regarding the planet Kamino.

The character has been voiced by Ronald Falk in &quot;Episode II&quot;.

=== Tiaan Jerjerrod ===
Moff Tiaan Jerjerrod is the commanding officer of the second Death Star. Jerjerrod is tasked by Darth Vader to hurry the completion of the second Death Star and warned that the Emperor is not as forgiving as Vader.

The character has been portrayed by Michael Pennington in &quot;Episode VI&quot;.

=== Cere Junda ===
Cere Junda is a former Jedi Knight who trained Trilla Suduri, survivor of Order 66, and the co-pilot of the Stinger Mantis. She becomes the mentor figure and master for Cal Kestis, while trying to escape her troubled past and resume her own role as a Jedi.

The character has been voiced by Debra Wilson in &quot;Jedi: Fallen Order&quot; and &quot;Jedi: Survivor&quot;.

== K ==

=== Alexsandr Kallus ===
Agent Alexsandr Kallus is a former member of the Imperial Security Bureau who led the efforts to suppress an uprising on the planet Lothal and developed a rivalry with Zeb Orrelios because Kallus took part in the attacks that wiped out much of his kind. He eventually begins to question his morality and loyalty to the Empire after he and Zeb are forced to work together to survive upon being stranded on a remote planet, near Geonosis. By the time Thrawn is promoted to Grand Admiral, Kallus has become a spy for the Rebel Alliance, and fully defects once his treason is discovered. Kallus plays a major role in the liberation of Lothal from Imperial occupation, and ends up befriending Zeb.

The character has been voiced by David Oyelowo in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Maz Kanata ===
=== Greef Karga ===
=== Syril Karn ===
Syril Karn is a Deputy Inspector for Preox-Morlana (Pre-Mor) Authority, a corporate conglomerate in charge of a trade sector. Karn works for Pre-Mor&#x27;s security services and is determined to capture Andor after he is suspected of murdering two Pre-Mor security employees.

The character has been portrayed by Kyle Soller in &quot;Andor&quot;. Soller described his character as having &quot;an extreme sense of need to impress, and fill a hole in himself. And so that really is about ascending to the top of whatever field he&#x27;s in. The field he&#x27;s chosen is one of restriction and complete control, and one of domination.&quot;

=== Dr. Emerie Karr ===
Doctor Emerie Karr is a female clone of Jango Fett who is part of the medical professional team working on a highly classified experiment at Mount Tantiss. She studies directly underneath Dr. Hemlock, the director of the Empire&#x27;s Advanced Science Division. However, she shows more compassion to her child test subjects than the others on her team.

The character has been voiced by Keisha Castle-Hughes in &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== KB ===
KB is a female human youngling who lived on At Attin with her parents Garree and Maree in the early New Republic Era and was best friends with another child called Fern. Around 9 ABY, another child called Wim found an old starship buried in the woods outside their city. After Wim, Fern, KB and Wim&#x27;s best friend Neel investigated the ship, they accidentally activated it and became lost in space. The group of kids then forged an alliance with the ship&#x27;s droid SM-33 and a Force-sensitive man called Jod Na Nawood to find their way home and avoid a crew of pirates.

The character has been played by Kyriana Kratter in &quot;Star Wars: Skeleton Crew&quot;.

=== Kassius Konstantine ===
Admiral Kassius Konstantine is an Imperial Navy officer who assists the Inquisitors, Darth Vader, and Grand Admiral Thrawn in pursuing the Rebels. He is killed during the Battle of Atollon.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Katuunko ===
Katuunko is the Toydarian monarch who aids the Republic during the Clone Wars; killed by Savage Oppress after the Battle of Sullust.

The character has been voiced by Brian George in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Cinta Kaz ===
Cinta Kaz is a human female who was a rebel within a network operated by Luthen Rael in resistance to the Galactic Empire.

The character has been portrayed by Varada Sethu in &quot;Andor&quot;.

=== Kelnacca ===
Kelnacca is a Wookiee Jedi Master of the Jedi Order who lived during the High Republic Era. In 230 BBY, he took on a Padawan, Yarzion Vell. After he completed Vell&#x27;s training, he had him tattoo his name on his head, following a tradition from Vell&#x27;s homeworld. In 148 BBY, he was stationed on the planet Brendok with Jedi Knight Sol, Jedi Master Indara, and her Padawan, Torbin. While investigating a vergence in the Force on the planet, the Jedi discovered a coven of witches led by Mother Aniseya.

The character has been played by Joonas Suotamo in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Obi-Wan Kenobi / Ben Kenobi ===
=== Cal Kestis ===
=== Agen Kolar ===
Agen Kolar is an Iridonian Zabrak Jedi Master and member of the Jedi Council. He used to have a green lightsaber like fellow Iridonian Zabrak Jedi Master Eeth Koth but after his Padawan Tan Yuster died during the Geonosian Arena he took his kyber crystal and replaced his green crystal with his Padawan&#x27;s blue crystal so he could remember him. He is the first Jedi who was killed while trying to arrest Darth Sidious.

The character has been portrayed by Tux Akindoyeni in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot;.

=== Plo Koon ===
Plo Koon is a Kel Dor Jedi Master and Jedi Council member in the prequel trilogy. He discovered Ahsoka Tano on her homeworld, Shili, and participated in many battles during the Clone Wars. He is killed when his Jedi starfighter is shot down at Cato Neimoidia by his own military escort (a squadron of ARC-170 starfighters led by Captain Jag) as part of Order 66.

The character has been portrayed by Alan Ruscoe in &quot;Episode I&quot;, by Matt Sloan in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot;, and voiced by James Arnold Taylor in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Mother Koril ===
Mother Koril is a Force-sensitive Iridonian Zabrak female who lived during the High Republic Era. She was a witch in Mother Aniseya&#x27;s exiled coven, who eventually settled on the planet Brendok after being persecuted. Around 156 BBY, Koril carried the twin children Mae-ho and Verosha Aniseya who were created by Mother Aniseya.

The character has been played by Margarita Levieva in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Eeth Koth ===
Eeth Koth is an Iridonian Zabrak Jedi Master and member of the Jedi Council. He was removed from the Jedi Council at the end of the Clone Wars and intended on leaving the Order, but Order 66 was issued before he could do so. Surviving, he goes into hiding and starts a family, but is eventually tracked down and killed by Darth Vader.

The character has been portrayed by Hassani Shapi in Episode I, and voiced by Chris Edgerly in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Pong Krell ===
Pong Krell is a Besalisk Jedi who serves as a temporary commander of the 501st Legion during the Battle of Umbara in the Clone Wars. He hates clones and has secret aspirations to be Count Dooku&#x27;s new apprentice, but is executed by the trooper Dogma after his treachery becomes known. His distinct anatomy allows him to wield two double-bladed lightsabers.

The character has been voiced by Dave Fennoy in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Orson Krennic ===
=== Black Krrsantan ===
=== Bo-Katan Kryze ===
=== Satine Kryze ===
Satine Kryze is the Duchess of Mandalore, sister of Bo-Katan, and romantic interest of Obi-Wan Kenobi. A pacifist leader, she tries not to get involved in the Clone Wars, and forms the Council of Neutral Systems, much to the disgust of the Death Watch, who try to assassinate and replace her numerous times throughout the war, but all their attempts are thwarted by the Jedi, particularly Kenobi. The Jedi Master had previously protected Satine in her youth, and the two formed a close bond, with Kenobi claiming that he would have left the Jedi Order a long time ago had Satine asked. Satine later watches her world fall to the Shadow Collective, under Darth Maul, who ultimately murders her in front of a captured Kenobi.

The character has been voiced by Anna Graves in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Kuiil ===
== L ==

=== Beru Whitesun Lars ===
Beru Lars is the wife of Owen, step-aunt by marriage and surrogate mother of Luke Skywalker, who takes him in after Luke&#x27;s mother Padmé Amidala dies in childbirth and his father Anakin Skywalker turns to the dark side and becomes Darth Vader, though she like Owen is told by Anakin&#x27;s former Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi that Anakin died, but unlike her husband does not seem to resent Obi-Wan. She and Owen are killed by stormtroopers at their home on Tatooine.

The character has been portrayed by Shelagh Fraser in &quot;Episode IV&quot;, and by Bonnie Piesse in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot; and &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;.

=== Cliegg Lars ===
Cliegg Lars is a moisture farmer who purchases, then frees and marries, Shmi Skywalker, becoming the stepfather of Anakin Skywalker, whom he meets only briefly. He loses his leg when pursuing the Sand People who had kidnapped Shmi. Cliegg passes away sometime between the onset of the Clone Wars and Anakin&#x27;s turn to the dark side.

The character has been portrayed by Jack Thompson in &quot;Episode II&quot;. The name Cliegg, and variations of it, have been in Star Wars drafts since 1974.

=== Owen Lars ===
Owen Lars is the stepson of Shmi, step-brother of Anakin and step-uncle and surrogate father of Luke Skywalker, who takes him in after Luke&#x27;s mother Padmé dies in childbirth and his father Anakin falls to the dark side of the Force and becomes Darth Vader, although Owen is told by Obi-Wan that his step-brother died, eventually coming to resent the Jedi Master for having taken Anakin away from Shmi and for tearing apart the Skywalker family. Owen and his wife, Beru, are killed by stormtroopers at their home on Tatooine, while Luke was away meeting with Obi-Wan &quot;Ben&quot; Kenobi.

The character has been portrayed by Phil Brown in &quot;Episode IV&quot;, and by Joel Edgerton in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot; and &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;.

=== Cut Lawquane ===
Cut Lawquane is a former clone trooper who deserted the army to live a quiet life as a farmer on Saleucami. He has a wife Suu and two children, Jek and Shaeeah. During the Clone Wars, he meets Captain Rex, and the pair eventually come to trust one another after working together to defend Cut&#x27;s family from Commando Droids, with Rex deciding not to report Cut. After the formation of the Galactic Empire, Cut and his family, with help from the Bad Batch, leave Saleucami due to increased military presence on the planet.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Lobot ===
Lobot is Lando Calrissian&#x27;s cyborg aide. He has a cybernetic implant that allows him to interface directly with Cloud City&#x27;s central computer.

The character has been portrayed by John Hollis in &quot;Episode V&quot;.

=== Jecki Lon ===
Jecki Lon is a Theelin-human hybrid Jedi Padawan who lived during the High Republic Era. She was the Padawan of Jedi Master Sol and was calm and mature for her age.

The character has been played by Dafne Keen in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Kino Loy ===
Kino Loy is a Trusty Foreman at the Imperial factory facility on the planet Narkina 5.

The character has been portrayed by Andy Serkis in &quot;Andor&quot;. Serkis previously portrayed Supreme Leader Snoke in the sequel trilogy.

== M ==

=== Antoc Merick ===
General Antoc Merrick who is a pilot and aide to Leia Organa. He led Rebel Starfighters in the attack on Scarif and led attacks on Imperial soldiers and Imperial starfighters. He is killed during this battle.

He is portrayed by Ben Daniels in &quot;Rogue One.&quot;

=== Crix Madine ===
Crix Madine is a Rebel general who comes up with the plan of destroying the shield generator for the second Death Star.

The character has been portrayed by Dermot Crowley in &quot;Episode VI&quot;.

=== Baze Malbus ===
Baze Malbus is a mercenary and friend of Chirrut Îmwe who aids the Rebel Alliance in stealing the plans for the Death Star in &quot;Rogue One&quot;. He is killed during the Battle of Scarif.

The character has been portrayed by Jiang Wen in &quot;Rogue One&quot;

=== Taron Malicos ===
Taron Malicos is a Jedi Master who fought in the Clone Wars and survived Order 66. Left stranded on Dathomir for years, he eventually succumbed to the dark side and sought to learn the Nightsisters&#x27; magic by manipulating Nightsister Merrin. He attempts to lure Cal Kestis to the dark side, but Kestis defeats him with Merrin&#x27;s help, who buries him alive.

The character has been voiced by Liam McIntyre in &quot;Jedi: Fallen Order&quot;.

=== Kleya Marki ===
Kleya Marki is a human female who served as a concierge at Luthen Rael&#x27;s gallery of artifacts and antiquities in the upper levels of the galactic capital Coruscant. She is also crucial to the operation of Rael&#x27;s resistance activities.

The character has been portrayed by Elizabeth Dulau in &quot;Andor&quot;.

=== Rafa and Trace Martez ===
Rafa Martez, a smuggler, and Trace Martez, a pilot and mechanic, are sisters from Coruscant who use a hangar and a laundromat as fronts for Rafa&#x27;s illegal affairs. After their parents were killed and the Jedi did little to nothing to help them, the sisters became embittered against the Order, and sought to make enough money to leave Coruscant. Near the end of the Clone Wars, the sisters befriend Ahsoka Tano, who helps them when a job to deliver spice to the Pyke Syndicate falls through, leading to Rafa and Trace changing their views of the Jedi. Shortly after the rise of the Galactic Empire, the sisters are hired by Captain Rex to retrieve data from a tactical droid on Corellia, where they have a run-in with the Bad Batch, looking for the same data. In the end, the Bad Batch give the data to Rafa and Trace after learning they want to use it to fight the Empire.

Rafa Martez has been voiced by Elizabeth Rodriguez, and Trace Martez has been voiced by Brigitte Kali, both appearing in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Darth Maul ===
=== Migs Mayfeld ===
=== Mart Mattin ===
Mart Mattin is a young human Rebel pilot who was in Hera Syndulla&#x27;s fighter squad during their ultimately ill-fated attack on Lothal City&#x27;s Imperial base. He is the only other Rebel pilot besides Hera and Chopper to survive the battle and escape captivity, and is later retrieved to join the Lothal Rebel cell in their guerilla fight against the Empire, implementing a secret plan devised by Ezra Bridger to bring in a pod of Purrgil against Admiral Thrawn&#x27;s fleet.

The character has been voiced by Zachary Gordon in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Dedra Meero ===
Dedra Meero is a supervisor for the Imperial Security Bureau who takes a particular interest into the actions of Cassian Andor and the growing rebellion.

The character has been portrayed by Denise Gough in &quot;Andor&quot;.

=== Ruescott Melshi ===
Sergeant Ruescott Melshi is a member of the Rebel Alliance&#x27;s special forces during the early stages of the Galactic Civil War. Portrayed by Duncan Pow, the character first appears in the film &quot;Rogue One&quot; (2016) as part of the team who sacrifices their lives to retrieve the plans for the new Death Star from the Imperial security facility on Scarif. Melshi later appears in the television series &quot;Andor&quot; (2022–present), set before the events of &quot;Rogue One&quot;, which chronicles how he and Cassian Andor met in, and broke out of, Imperial prison. Melshi has also made appearances in &quot;Star Wars&quot; books, audiobooks, and a video game.

=== Sly Moore ===
Sly Moore is an Umbaran personal aide of Palpatine and one of the few people aware of his identity as Darth Sidious.

The character has been portrayed by Sandi Findlay in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot;.

=== Mon Mothma ===
=== General Conan Antonio Motti ===
General Conan Antonio Motti makes an appearance in the Death Star conference room early in &quot;Episode IV&quot;. He gets Force choked by Darth Vader after he expresses little faith in Vader&#x27;s ability to use the Force.

The character was portrayed by Richard LeParmentier in the original Star Wars movie.

=== Peli Motto ===
=== Ki-Adi-Mundi ===
Ki-Adi-Mundi is a Cerean Jedi Master and Jedi Council member in the prequel trilogy. He is one of the leaders of the Jedi strike force sent to rescue Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, and Padmé Amidala on Geonosis, and a Jedi General during the Clone Wars. At the end of the Clone Wars, he leads his clone troopers in the Battle of Mygeeto, and is killed as a result of Order 66. Originally, Saesee Tiin was planned to die with him.

The character has been portrayed by Silas Carson in &quot;Episodes I-III&quot;, Derek Arnold in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;, and voiced by Brian George in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Jedi&quot;.

== N ==

=== Rugor Nass ===
Boss Rugor Nass is a Gungan leader who first established a treaty with the Naboo humans, and he later attends Padmé Amidala&#x27;s funeral. He was the one to banish Jar Jar Binks but he also let Jar Jar Binks be a general.

The character has been voiced by Brian Blessed in &quot;Episode I&quot;.

=== Jod Na Nawood ===
Jod Na Nawood is a Force-sensitive human male pirate during the New Republic Era, who operated under many aliases such as Crimson Jack, Silvo, Dash Zentin, or Jodwick Zank. Jod was previously trained by a fugitive Jedi in the ways of the Jedi arts before that Jedi was killed. As captain of his own pirate crew, Jod was deposed and imprisoned by his lieutenant Brutus around 9 ABY. Locked in the brig of Borgo Prime, he encountered a group of four children: Wim, KB, Neel, and Fern, where he helped them navigate dangers on their homeworld. The group worked alongside the droid SM-33 aboard the Onyx Cinder. He was known as Crimson Jack to Kh&#x27;ymm.

The character has been played by Jude Law in &quot;Star Wars: Skeleton Crew&quot;.

=== Neel ===
Neel is a male elephant-like alien youngling who lived on At Attin and was best friends with another child named Wim during the New Republic Era. Around 9 ABY, Wim found an old starship buried in the woods outside their city. After the two and two other children named KB and Fern investigated the ship, they accidentally activated it and became lost in space. The group of kids then forged an alliance with the ship&#x27;s droid SM-33 and a Force-sensitive man called Jod Na Nawood to find their way back home and avoid a crew of pirates.

The character&#x27;s voice is Robert Timothy Smith in &quot;Star Wars: Skeleton Crew&quot;.

=== Enfys Nest ===
Enfys Nest is the leader of a gang of pirates called the Cloud Riders, who are revealed to be supporters of the nascent Rebel Alliance.

The character has been portrayed by Erin Kellyman in &quot;Solo&quot;.

=== Captain Needa ===
Needa was a captain of the Imperial Star Destroyer Avenger in &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; (portrayed by Michael Culver) who pursued the Millennium Falcon into the Asteroid Field after the Battle of Hoth. After losing track of the craft Vader kills him via the Force.

=== 99 &quot;Ninety-Nine&quot; ===
&quot;99&quot; is a defective clone trooper who helps the Domino Squad during the Clone Wars. He is killed during one of the battles of Kamino. He is the namesake of Clone Force 99.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Jocasta Nu ===
Jocasta Nu is a Jedi librarian featured in the prequel trilogy. She survives Order 66, but is later killed by Darth Vader.

The character has been portrayed by Alethea McGrath in &quot;Episode II&quot;, and voiced by Flo Di Re in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Jedi&quot;.

=== Nien Nunb ===
Nien Nunb is an arms dealer of the Sullustan species who joins the Rebel Alliance in fighting the evil Galactic Empire.

The character was introduced in the 1983 film &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; where he was brought to life both as a puppet and a costumed actor during the film. Nunb was puppeteered by Mike Quinn and was portrayed by Richard Bonehill in wide shots. The character was voiced by Kipsang Rotich, a Kenyan student who spoke in his native Kalenjin, as well as in Kikuyu. Quinn and Rotich both returned for the role in the sequel trilogy, namely &quot;Star Wars: The Force Awakens&quot; (2015), &quot;Star Wars: The Last Jedi&quot; (2017), and &quot;Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker&quot; (2019). In the years since &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;&#x27;s release, the character has made appearances in various works within the &quot;Star Wars&quot; Expanded Universe.

== O ==

=== Commander CC-2237 &quot;Odd Ball&quot; ===
CC-2237, or &quot;Odd Ball&quot;, is a clone Commander and pilot, who participates in several battles throughout the Clone Wars under the command of Obi-Wan Kenobi, such as the Battle of Teth, the Battle of Umbara, the Battle of Coruscant, and the Battle of Utapau. A skilled pilot, Odd Ball flies an assortment of starfighters, including the V-19 Torrent and the ARC-170.

The character has been voiced by Temuera Morrison in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Barriss Offee ===
Barriss Offee is a Mirialan Jedi apprentice of Luminara Unduli and a close friend of Ahsoka Tano. She later betrays Ahsoka and frames her for a terrorist bombing after she becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Order&#x27;s wartime policies. Offee is eventually unmasked and defeated by Anakin Skywalker, resulting in her arrest.

The character has been portrayed by Nalini Krishan in &quot;Episode II&quot;, and voiced by Meredith Salenger in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Empire&quot;.

=== Hondo Ohnaka ===
Hondo Ohnaka is the leader of the space pirates known as the Ohnaka Gang which kidnaps and attempts to ransom Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, Count Dooku—and later Ahsoka Tano—to the highest bidder during the Clone Wars. He follows a code of honor and respects the Jedi, whom he ends up helping several times in the war, but is not above using sneaky tactics and treachery if it is for &quot;good business&quot;. Years after the Clone Wars, despite losing his crew to the Galactic Empire, Hondo continues his criminal activities while having dealings with the crew of the &quot;Ghost.&quot; He has sometimes been referred to as the &quot;Jack Sparrow&quot; of the Star Wars universe.

The character has been voiced by Jim Cummings in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, &quot;Rebels&quot;, and &quot;Forces of Destiny&quot;.

=== Ric Olié ===
Pilot who flies the queen&#x27;s ship while escaping Naboo and an N-1 starfighter as leader of Bravo Squadron.

The character has been portrayed by Ralph Brown in &quot;Episode I&quot;.

=== Omega ===
Omega is a young female clone who served as Nala Se&#x27;s medical assistant on Kamino, until joining Clone Force 99 to escape from the planet after their defiance to the Empire. She is later revealed to be an unaltered clone of Jango Fett, similar to Boba Fett. She is captured by the Empire as she is the only clone with a perfectly replicated M-count and she gets brought to Dr Hemlock&#x27;s base on Mount Tantiss. She later escapes Mount Tantiss with a lurca hound that she rescued called Batcher, and she also brings along a very reluctant Crosshair. She returns to Pabu, where Asajj Ventress (who was hired by Fennec Shand after Hunter and Wrecker complete a bounty for Shand) tests her for Force sensitivity, which she fails.

The character has been voiced by Michelle Ang in &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Ketsu Onyo ===
Ketsu Onyo is a Mandalorian bounty hunter and former estranged friend of Sabine Wren. She and Sabine were cadets at the Imperial Academy, later escaping and becoming bounty hunting partners before Ketsu left Sabine for dead and began working for the Black Sun. After they reconcile, Ketsu aids the Rebel Alliance.

The character has been voiced by Gina Torres in &quot;Rebels&quot; and &quot;Forces of Destiny&quot;.

=== Oola ===
Oola is a Twi&#x27;lek dancer enslaved by Jabba the Hutt and chained to his throne; she is killed by Jabba&#x27;s rancor after dancing for him.

The character has been portrayed by Femi Taylor in &quot;Episode VI&quot;. New scenes featuring the character were filmed for the Special Edition of &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;. When Taylor arrived for her reshoots, producers were stunned to discover she still fit into her original costume and had barely aged at all in the 15 years since originally shooting her scenes. Taylor credited this to her impressive dance career.

=== Savage Opress ===
Savage Opress is a Dathomirian Zabrak Nightbrother, and the brother of Darth Maul. He is hand picked by Asajj Ventress as part of her scheme to kill Count Dooku for the attempt on her life and is altered by the Nightsisters, becoming more of a berserker on Ventress&#x27; call to the point of killing Feral, (his adoptive brother), without remorse, Opress manages to become Dooku&#x27;s new apprentice and learns only a bit in the ways of the Sith before Ventress has him help her fight Dooku, due to his actions under him getting unwanted attention from the Jedi. However, in the heat of the moment and provoked by both of them, Opress tries to kill both Dooku and Ventress before escaping the Jedi and instructed by Mother Talzin to find Maul so he can complete his training to defend himself against the numerous enemies he has made. Finding Maul a shell of his former self on a junk planet, Opress manages to stir up his fellow nightbrother&#x27;s grudge with Obi-Wan to aid him in his revenge against the Jedi. He is later killed in a duel by Darth Sidious on Mandalore.

The character has been voiced by Clancy Brown in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Bail Organa ===
Bail Organa is Leia Organa&#x27;s adoptive father, a Senator of Alderaan and one of the Rebel Alliance&#x27;s founding members. He adopts Leia after his ally and her birth mother, Padmé, dies and her birth father, Anakin Skywalker, becomes Darth Vader. Bail is killed in the destruction of Alderaan by the Death Star.

The character has been portrayed by Jimmy Smits in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot;, &quot;Rogue One&quot;, and &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;, and voiced by Phil LaMarr in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, &quot;Rebels&quot;, &quot;Tales of the Jedi&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;. He first appeared in &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot;, portrayed by Jimmy Smits, though he appeared in scenes cut from &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot;, where he was portrayed by Adrian Dunbar, with Dunbar&#x27;s character retconned into a separate character named Bail Antilles.

=== Breha Organa ===
Breha Organa is Queen of Alderaan, wife of Bail Organa, and adoptive mother of Leia Organa. She is killed in the destruction of Alderaan.

The character has been portrayed by Rebecca Jackson Mendoza in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and by Simone Kessell in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;. Breha is also featured in the short story &quot;Eclipse&quot; and in the 2017 novel &quot;Leia, Princess of Alderaan&quot;.

=== Leia Organa ===
=== Garazeb &quot;Zeb&quot; Orrelios ===
Garazeb &quot;Zeb&quot; Orrelios is the former Captain of the Lasat high honor guard who rose up against the Empire, which led to the near-extinction of his people. He is the muscle of the &quot;Ghost&quot; crew, serving under call sign Spectre 4. The genocide campaign against his people left him with a gruff demeanor, as well as leading him into conflict with Agent Kallus, though eventually Kallus defects from the Empire to join the Alliance as a Rebel spy.

The character has been voiced by Steve Blum in &quot;Star Wars Rebels&quot;, &quot;The Mandalorian&quot; and will reprise Zeb in &quot;The Mandalorian &amp; Grogu&quot;. The physical appearance of the Lasat species is based on Ralph McQuarrie&#x27;s original conceptual artwork for Chewbacca. Art director Kilian Plunkett said: &quot;Zeb actually is very articulate and witty and funny, and that&#x27;s sort of juxtaposed with what he looks like, makes for an interesting character&quot;.

== P ==

=== Sheev Palpatine / Darth Sidious ===
=== Quarsh Panaka ===
Quarsh Panaka is the captain of the Queen Amidala&#x27;s guard.

The character has been portrayed by Hugh Quarshie in &quot;Episode I&quot;. In the novel &quot;Leia, Princess of Alderaan&quot;, he meets a young Leia Organa, but is subsequently assassinated by Saw Gerrera and his Partisans.

=== Baron Papanoida ===
Baron Papanoida is a Pantoran Senator and Chairman of the Pantoran Assembly.

The character has been portrayed by George Lucas in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and voiced by Corey Burton in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Gilad Pellaeon ===
Gilad Pellaeon is an Imperial officer who served as a captain in the naval forces of the Galactic Empire as part of Grand Admiral Thrawn&#x27;s Seventh Fleet. He was first introduced in Timothy Zahn&#x27;s &quot;Thrawn&quot; trilogy. The character made his live-action debut in the third season of &quot;The Mandalorian&quot;.

The character has been voiced by Jim Cummings in &quot;Rebels&quot; and voiced by Xander Berkely in &quot;Tales of the Empire&quot;. Berkeley previously portrayed the character in &quot;The Mandalorian.&quot;

=== Doctor Penn Pershing ===
=== Captain Phasma ===
=== Even Piell ===
Even Piell is a Lannik Jedi Master and Council Member. During the Clone Wars, he participated in a mission regarding the Nexus Route, a key hyperspace lane discovered in the Outer Rim. Piell was captured, imprisoned, and tortured in the prison known as the Citadel, along with Wilhuff Tarkin, who held the other half of the secret information. A rescue mission was sent, but Piell was killed by local wolf-like anoobas just after giving Ahsoka Tano his piece of the information.

The character has been portrayed by Michaela Cottrel in &quot;Episode I&quot;, and voiced by Bair Bless in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Firmus Piett ===
=== Darth Plagueis ===
=== Unkar Plutt ===
Unkar Plutt is a Crolute Junkboss on the planet Jakku who pays out portions of food in exchange for pieces of salvage. He attempts to bargain the droid BB-8 from Rey and then tries to steal it when she refuses, but Rey ends up fleeing the planet by stealing the &quot;Millennium Falcon&quot; from him.

The character has been portrayed by Simon Pegg in &quot;Episode VII&quot;, and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;Forces of Destiny&quot;.

=== Poggle the Lesser ===
Poggle the Lesser is the Archduke of Geonosis, part of the Techno Union and one of the Separatist leaders killed by Darth Vader on Mustafar. Poggle controls the Geonosian battle droid factories and commands the droid army that fought in the two battles of Geonosis. He also assists in the early planning and construction of the first Death Star.

The character has been voiced by Marton Csokas in &quot;Episode II&quot;, and voiced by Matthew Wood in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Commander CT-411 &quot;Ponds&quot; ===
CT-411, or &quot;Ponds&quot;, is a Clone Commander who serves Mace Windu in the Clone Wars. He helps organize clone commando units on Geonosis and fights on Ryloth and Malastare in later battles. He is eventually captured by a group of bounty hunters and executed by Aurra Sing in an attempt to lure Windu into a trap.

The character has been voiced by Temuera Morrison in &quot;Episode II&quot;, and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Yarael Poof ===
Yarael Poof was a Quermian Jedi High Council member who died between &quot;Episode I&quot; and &quot;Episode II&quot;.

The character has been portrayed by Michelle Taylor in &quot;Episode I&quot;.

=== Jek Tono Porkins ===
Jek Tono Porkins is an X-wing pilot codenamed &quot;Red Six&quot; who is killed during the Battle of Yavin, after his X-wing is struck by the Death Star&#x27;s turbolaser fire.

The character was portrayed by William Hootkins in &quot;Star Wars&quot;. Porkins has gained some comedic notoriety due to his size and untimely death, which was parodied in the &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode &quot;Blue Harvest&quot;.

=== Arihnda Pryce ===
Arihnda Pryce is the Imperial Governor of Lothal. She was killed when the Lothal Insurgents blew up the Imperial Dome during the Liberation of Lothal.

The character has been voiced by Mary Elizabeth McGlynn in &quot;Rebels&quot;. Her backstory is explored in the novel &quot;Star Wars: Thrawn&quot;.

=== Enric Pryde ===
Enric Pryde is a former Imperial Admiral who rose to prominence as Allegiant General of the First Order during Kylo Ren&#x27;s reign. He develops a rivalry with General Hux, whom he eventually executes after discovering his treason, and later is put in charge of the Sith Eternal&#x27;s fleet, the Final Order, during the Battle of Exegol, where he dies when the command bridge of his &quot;Resurgent&quot;-class Star Destroyer &quot;Steadfast&quot; is destroyed by Finn.

The character has been portrayed by Richard E. Grant in &quot;Episode IX&quot;.

=== Lom Pyke ===
Lom Pyke is Minister of the Pyke Syndicate during the Clone Wars who joins the Shadow Collective and participates in the attack on Sundari with his criminal allies. When the Jedi Council later investigate the disappearance of Sifo-Dyas, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker are sent to Oba Diah to confront the Pykes. Lom is forced to tell the truth behind the death of Sifo-Dyas to the Jedi, as well as the Pykes&#x27; involvement, though he offers his prisoner Silman in return for amnesty. When Count Dooku learns of this, he arrives on Oba Diah and kills Lom.

The character has been voiced by Matt Lanter in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

== Q ==

=== Qi&#x27;ra ===
=== Quarrie ===
Quarrie (voiced by Corey Burton) is a Mon Calamari engineer living on the planet Shantipole. He built the prototype B-wing, the &quot;Blade Wing&quot;, which was gifted to Hera in &quot;Wings of the Master&quot;, and later oversaw the secret construction of more B-wings for the Rebel Alliance at Senator Organa&#x27;s request.

The character has been voiced by Corey Burton in &quot;Rebels&quot;. He is named after &quot;Star Wars&quot; concept artist Ralph McQuarrie.

=== Qui-Gon Jinn ===
== R ==

=== Raddus ===
Raddus is a green-skinned Mon Calamari admiral of the Rebel Alliance. He disobeys orders of Rebel High Command and attacks Scarif with the Rebel fleet supporting the ground assault. He dies during the attack but successfully relays the Death Star plans. The Resistance MC85 Star Cruiser known as the &quot;Raddus&quot; is named for him after a petition to rename it by Admiral Gial Ackbar.

The character has been portrayed by Paul Kasey and voiced by Stephen Stanton in &quot;Rogue One&quot;.

=== Luthen Rael ===
Luthen Rael is a part of the Rebel Alliance who hires Cassian on his first mission as a Rebel operative. Publicly, Luthen poses as an eccentric antiques dealer from Coruscant.

The character has been portrayed by Stellan Skarsgård in &quot;Andor&quot;.

=== Lyn Rakish / The Fourth Sister ===
The Fourth Sister is the second Inquisitor introduced in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;. She was originally a Jedi Knight, but fell to the dark side of the Force and joined the Galactic Empire by becoming part of the Inquisitorius, Jedi hunters at the service of Darth Vader to hunt the Jedi into extinction. The Fourth Sister is later involved in trying to track down Obi-Wan Kenobi, a survivor of Order 66.

The character has been portrayed by Rya Kihlstedt in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Empire&quot;.

=== Dak Ralter ===
Dak Ralter is Luke Skywalker&#x27;s snowspeeder gunner who dies in the Battle of Hoth when their snow speeder is damaged by an Imperial Walker.

The character has been portrayed by John Morton in &quot;Episode V&quot;.

===Vice Admiral Edmon Rampart===
Vice Admiral Rampart moved up the ranks after the fall of the Republic. He was stationed on Kamino to oversee the clone trooper for the new Galactic Empire. He unquestionably loyal to Governor Tarkin. Rampart gets arrested after the Galactic Senate sees evidence of his order destroying a city. He is sent to a forced labor camp on Erebus and is labeled as a traitor to the Empire. He is later rescued by Clone Force 99 as they need him to locate Mount Tantiss and rescue a trapped Omega.

He is voiced by Noshir Dalal in &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Oppo Rancisis ===
Oppo Rancisis is a Thisspiasian Jedi Master and Jedi Council member. He was trained by fellow Jedi Master Yaddle and at the end of the Clone Wars, he survived Order 66.

The character has been portrayed by Jerome Blake in &quot;Episode I&quot;.

===Fenn Rau===
Fenn Rau is the leader of the Protectors of Concord Dawn, part of the elite Protectors organization who guard the royal family of Mandalore. A veteran of the Clone Wars, he accepted Imperial bribes to prevent rebel travel through his system, but later ordered his men to permit rebel passage to keep the Empire away after being captured by Sabine. He later sided with the Rebellion after his men were slaughtered by the Imperial Super Commandos and eventually joined Clan Wren in the Mandalorian Civil War.

The character has been voiced by Kevin McKidd in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Max Rebo ===
Max Rebo is an Ortolan keyboard player and leader of the Max Rebo Band.

The character has been portrayed by Simon Williamson in &quot;Episode VI&quot;, as well as making a cameo appearance in &quot;The Book of Boba Fett&quot;.

=== Koska Reeves ===
=== Ren ===
=== Captain CT-7567 &quot;Rex&quot; ===
=== Rey ===
=== Nossor Ri ===
Nossor Ri was the chieftain of the Quarren and led the Quarren Isolation League. Ri conspired with the CIS to attack the Mon Calamari during the Clone Wars. He eventually realized his mistake and betrayed the CIS. Decades later he sacrificed his life to help the Resistance escape the First Order attack on Mon Cala.

The character has been voiced by Corey Burton in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Kawlan Roken ===
Kawlan Roken is a human male dissident during the height of the Galactic Empire, who operated an underground network known as Hidden Path that smuggled surviving Jedi and Force-sensitives to safety during the Great Jedi Purge.

The character has been portrayed by O&#x27;Shea Jackson Jr. in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;.

=== Bodhi Rook ===
=== Roshti ===
Roshti is Governor of the planet Kiros and leader of a colony of 50,000 Togruta during the Clone Wars.

The character has been voiced by Corey Burton in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Rukh ===
Rukh is a Noghri assassin who serves as an agent and tracker under Grand Admiral Thrawn. He has a keen sense of smell which he uses to track down victims, and he wields an electrostaff. He first tracks the Spectres after they try to escape with vital information about the TIE Defender, and he captures Hera Syndulla after the Rebel Alliance&#x27;s failed attack on the Lothal TIE factory. Rukh battles Kanan during Hera&#x27;s escape, and after getting knocked off the roof, tracks the escapees. He battles both Zeb and Sabine, but is defeated and nearly beaten to death by Zeb until Sabine stops him and sends him back unconscious and covered in paint by Sabine to the city as a living message to the Imperial forces. Rukh is later killed after Zeb traps him in an generator during the final battle on Lothal.

The character has been voiced by Warwick Davis in &quot;Rebels&quot; and &quot;Tales of the Empire&quot;. Rukh originally appeared in the &quot;Star Wars Legends&quot; &quot;Thrawn&quot; novel trilogy, where he is Thrawn&#x27;s bodyguard who ultimately turns against and kills Thrawn.

=== Vernestra Rwoh ===
Vernestra Rwoh is a Mirialan female Jedi Master who lived during the High Republic Era. She was also occasionally nicknamed &quot;Vern&quot;, although she disliked it. Vernestra was the Padawan of Jedi Master Stellan Gios and she was promoted to the rank of Jedi Knight at the age of fifteen, making her the youngest Jedi to achieve that rank in a long time. Inspired by a Force vision, Vernestra wielded a unique purple lightsaber that could elasticize its blade to become a lightwhip. Vernestra was aromantic, focusing on her training, and eventually climbed the ranks of the Jedi Order to become a respected Master. Vernestra also was able to have odd visions while traveling through hyperspace.

The character has been played by Rebecca Henderson in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Tamara Ryvora ===
Tamara &quot;Tam&quot; Ryvora is a human female mechanic from Kuat who served as a member of Team Fireball on the Colossus, a refueling station in the Outer Rim Territories.

The character has been voiced by Suzie McGrath in &quot;Star Wars Resistance&quot;.

== S ==

=== Sabé ===
Sabé is one of Padmé Amidala&#x27;s handmaidens. Sabé is the queen&#x27;s decoy; for parts of the movie, the Sabé character is addressed as Amidala. She reappears in the &quot;Star Wars:Darth Vader&quot; comic series; shortly before the events of Return of the Jedi, Sabé seeks out Vader and attempts to kill him after she deems him responsible for killing Padmé. She later forms a temporary alliance with him after she deduces that Vader is Anakin.

The character has been portrayed by Keira Knightley in &quot;Episode I&quot;.

=== Vel Sartha ===
Vel Sartha is a Rebel leader on the planet Aldhani, and cousin of Mon Mothma.

In 2023, the character was portrayed by Faye Marsay in &quot;Andor&quot;.

=== Jun Sato ===
Jun Sato is the commander of the rebel cell Phoenix Squadron, which the &quot;Ghost&quot; crew joins. He is also the uncle of Rebel pilot Mart Mattin. He sacrifices himself during the Battle of Atollon in order for Ezra Bridger to get reinforcements.

The character has been voiced by Keone Young in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Gar Saxon ===
Gar Saxon is a Mandalorian warrior who serves under Darth Maul. Alongside Rook Kast, he aids Maul&#x27;s escape from Darth Sidious and commands his forces during the Siege of Mandalore, until Maul betrays them and allows them to be captured by the Republic in order to make his own escape. Following the Galactic Empire&#x27;s takeover of Mandalore, Saxon becomes Imperial Viceroy and Governor, wiping out the protectors, but is ultimately defeated by Sabine Wren and killed by Ursa Wren.

The character has been voiced by Ray Stevenson in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Tiber Saxon ===
Tiber Saxon is Gar Saxon&#x27;s brother, appointed Imperial Governor of Mandalore and leader of the Super Commandos after his brother was killed by Clan Wren. To put down the Mandalorian rebellion, he ordered the construction of a weapon known as an Arc Pulse Generator, code-named the &quot;Duchess&quot; (after the late Duchess Satine Kryze), developed by Sabine Wren when she was a cadet at the Imperial Academy on Mandalore. The weapon specifically targeted the alloy used in Mandalorian armor and superheated it, vaporizing the wearer. However, as Sabine had destroyed the plans and damaged the prototype when she defected, the weapon was not at its full potential; Grand Admiral Thrawn ordered the new Governor Saxon to capture Sabine to perfect the weapon. Imprisoned aboard Saxon&#x27;s &quot;Imperial I&quot;-class Star Destroyer in the Mandalorian capital, Sabine altered the weapon to affect the alloys in Imperial armor, before breaching its core with the Darksaber and escaping. The explosion vaporized the Star Destroyer, killing Saxon and those of his men still on board.

The character has been voiced by Tobias Menzies in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Nala Se ===
Nala Se is a Kaminoan scientist in charge of the cloning process. She cares for her medical assistant, a young female clone named Omega, and helps her and Clone Force 99 escape from Kamino after they betray the Empire.

The character has been voiced by Gwendoline Yeo in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Sebulba ===
Sebulba is a Dug podracer who competes against Anakin Skywalker. He is very arrogant and competitive, and will resort to any means to achieve victory, even cheating. Once a slave, Sebulba&#x27;s podracing skills bought his freedom.

The character has been voiced by Lewis MacLeod in &quot;Episode I&quot;.

=== Aayla Secura ===
Aayla Secura is a Twi&#x27;lek Jedi. She is one of the thousands of Jedi to fall victim of Order 66, getting betrayed and killed by her own clone troopers on Felucia. Aayla also appears as a disembodied voice empowering Rey to face the revived Darth Sidious.

The character has been portrayed by Amy Allen in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot;, and voiced by Jennifer Hale in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Episode IX&quot;.

=== Zev Senesca ===
Zev Senesca is a member of the Rebel Alliance and Rogue Squadron pilot, designated as &quot;Rogue Two&quot;, Senesca pilots a snowspeeder and dies during the Battle of Hoth in combat against the Imperial AT-AT walkers. He is also the pilot who locates Han Solo and Luke Skywalker, who are stranded in the snow away from the Rebel base on Hoth.

The character has been portrayed by Christopher Malcolm in &quot;Episode V&quot;.

=== Reva Sevander / The Third Sister ===
Reva Sevander is a ruthless, ambitious Inquisitor who survived Order 66 as a Jedi Youngling. She takes special interest in hunting down Obi-Wan Kenobi among other surviving Jedi, blaming him for Anakin Skywalker&#x27;s turn to the dark side to become Darth Vader. Secretly, she plans to use her position to assassinate Vader for killing her Youngling friends, stabbing and apparently killing the Grand Inquisitor and succeeding him in his role. Ultimately, she fails and is stabbed by Vader, revealing that her treachery was already suspected, and that the previous Grand Inquisitor survived her attempt at killing him. She survives and tries to seek further revenge on Vader by killing his young son, Luke, but she decides against it and reconciles with Kenobi.

The character has been portrayed by Moses Ingram in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;.

=== The Seventh Sister ===
The Seventh Sister is a Mirialan Inquisitor introduced in the second season of &quot;Rebels&quot;, who uses mini probe droids to track her targets. After the Grand Inquisitor&#x27;s death, she and the Fifth Brother are tasked with hunting the &quot;Ghost&quot; crew. They are both ultimately killed by Maul on Malachor.

The character has been voiced by Sarah Michelle Gellar in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Fennec Shand ===
=== Aurra Sing ===
Aurra Sing is a feared Palliduvan bounty hunter from Nar Shaddaa. She was once a member of the Jedi Order and had a past romantic relationship with Hondo Ohnaka. During the Clone Wars, Aurra takes jobs with other mercenaries such as Cad Bane, and even becomes a mentor and mother figure to a young Boba Fett. She is apparently killed by Tobias Beckett at a later point.

The character has been portrayed by Michonne Bourriague in &quot;Episode I&quot;, and voiced by Jaime King in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Tera Sinube ===
Tera Sinube is an elderly Cosian Jedi Master who wielded a white lightsaber based on a cane sword. Sinube spent most of his time studying in the Jedi Temple Archives, and formed a friendship with Ahsoka Tano while helping her recover her stolen lightsaber. After the rise of the Empire, Sinube&#x27;s body was discovered by Obi-Wan Kenobi in the Fortress Inquisitorius, preserved in amber, and likely meaning he survived Order 66 before being killed by Inquisitors.

The character has been voiced by Greg Baldwin in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== The Sixth Brother ===
The Sixth Brother is an Inquisitor of unknown species and origin, sent to hunt down and kill the rogue Jedi Ahsoka Tano after her escape from Order 66 based on the tip of a local villager who observed her using the Force. The Sixth Brother slaughters most of the community, and he is eventually killed by Tano after a quick duel.

The character has been voiced by Clancy Brown in &quot;Tales of the Jedi&quot;.

=== Baylan Skoll ===
Baylan Skoll is a former Jedi who survived Order 66 by fleeing into the Unknown Regions, where he took on Shin Hati as his apprentice. During the era of the New Republic, both operate as Dark Jedi mercenaries in search of power, working with Morgan Elsbeth. After they found Thrawn and the battle of Peridea, Skoll follows his own agenda to pursue a mysterious force calling out to him.

His name is an allusion to the celestial wolf Sköll in Norse mythology, the companion of the celestial wolf Hati.

The character was portrayed by Ray Stevenson in &quot;Ahsoka&quot;. After Stevenson&#x27;s death, Rory McCann was cast in the role.

=== Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader ===
=== Luke Skywalker ===
=== Shmi Skywalker ===
Shmi Skywalker is the mother of Anakin Skywalker, and Luke and Leia&#x27;s paternal grandmother. Qui-Gon Jinn attempts to bargain for her freedom from slavery but fails. Shmi encourages Anakin to leave Tatooine with Qui-Gon to seek his destiny, but Anakin finds it hard to leave without her. A widowed moisture farmer named Cliegg Lars later falls in love with Shmi, and after he purchases her freedom from Watto, they marry. Shmi dies in Anakin&#x27;s arms after being kidnapped and tortured by Tusken Raiders.

The character has been portrayed by Pernilla August in &quot;Episodes I-II&quot; and &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Snoke ===
=== Sy Snootles ===
Sy Snootles is a female Pa&#x27;lowick and lead vocalist of the Max Rebo Band. During the Clone Wars, she is Ziro the Hutt&#x27;s lover, but works as a spy for the Hutt Clan and eventually kills him.

The character has been performed by puppeteers Tim Rose and Mike Quinn in &quot;Episode VI&quot;, and voiced by Annie Arbogast in &quot;Episode VI&quot;, and voiced by Nika Futterman in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Osi Sobek ===
Osi Sobek is a Phindian CIS commander who serves as the warden of the prison known as &quot;The Citadel&quot; on the planet Lola Sayu. He is killed by Ahsoka Tano during a mission to break out Jedi Master Even Piell.

The character has been voiced by James Arnold Taylor in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Sol ===
Sol is a wise and a respected human male Jedi Master who lived at the end of the High Republic Era, who was dragged into a murder investigation that reunited him with his former Padawan, Osha Aniseya.

The character has been played by Lee Jung-jae in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Ben Solo / Kylo Ren ===
=== Han Solo ===
=== The Son ===
One of the Mortis gods, the Son is the embodiment of the dark side of the Force, child of the Father, and brother to the Daughter. Unlike his sister, he is often disobedient to their father and secretly wishes to kill him so that he could escape from Mortis. To this ends, he corrupts Ahsoka Tano with his dark influence, and attempts to seduce Anakin Skywalker, whom the Father believed to be the Chosen One and a possible successor, to the dark side, which he briefly succeeds in doing by showing him visions of his future, until the Father erases those visions from Anakin&#x27;s mind. While attempting to kill the Father, the Son accidentally kills his sister and, though devastated, does not stop from trying to achieve his goal. Realizing this, the Father commits suicide to render the Son mortal, who finally reconciles with him before Anakin kills him.

The character has been voiced by Sam Witwer in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== The Stranger / &quot;Qimir&quot; ===
A Sith warrior who trained Mae Aniseya in the ways of the Dark Side while also masquerading as a smuggler named &quot;Qimir&quot;. After Mae&#x27;s betrayal of him, he attempts to kill her, killing Yord Fandar and Jecki Lon in the process before being temporarily incapacitated by umbramoths. After freeing himself, the Stranger encountered Mae&#x27;s sister Osha, and later took her on as an acolyte after dueling her Jedi master Sol. It is revealed that he was previously the student of Jedi Master Vernestra Rwoh. The Stranger wears a helmet and arm bracer made of cortosis, a metal that can temporarily short out lightsabers, and wields a lightsaber that has a detachable &quot;shoto&quot; blade.

The character has been played by Manny Jacinto in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Lama Su ===
Lama Su is the Prime Minister of Kamino. During the Clone Wars, he is revealed to be in the employ of Darth Tyranus as part of the scheme to have the clones eliminate the Jedi.

The character has been voiced by Anthony Phelan in &quot;Episode II&quot;, and by Bob Bergen in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Trilla Suduri / The Second Sister ===
Trilla Suduri is an Inquisitor and former Jedi Padawan of Cere Junda, who was captured and tortured by the Empire after Cere betrayed her location under intense interrogation. She is assigned to hunt down Cal Kestis and retrieve a Holocron containing a list of Force-sensitive children. She is later killed by Darth Vader for her failure.

The character has been voiced by Elizabeth Grullon in &quot;Jedi: Fallen Order&quot;. The Second Sister also makes a cameo appearance in the comic series &quot;Darth Vader: Dark Lord of the Sith&quot;.

=== Cham Syndulla ===
Cham Syndulla is a Twi&#x27;lek freedom fighter who opposes the Separatists independently before allying with the Republic Army when the Clone Wars come to Ryloth. In the aftermath of the Clone Wars, Cham opposes the newly established Galactic Empire&#x27;s occupation of his world and becomes distanced from his daughter Hera after the death of her mother due to his single-minded determination to liberate Ryloth at any cost. The pair are later reconciled after Cham and his warriors Gobi and Numa team up with Hera&#x27;s crew to steal an Imperial carrier and shoot down an Imperial cruiser over Ryloth.

The character has been voiced by Robin Atkin Downes in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, &quot;Rebels&quot;, and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Hera Syndulla ===
=== Jacen Syndulla ===
Jacen Syndulla is a male human and Twi&#x27;lek hybrid who was born during the time of the Galactic Civil War. He was the son of General Hera Syndulla and the late Jedi Knight Kanan Jarrus, and the grandson of Twi&#x27;lek revolutionary leader Cham Syndulla.

The character has been portrayed by Evan Whitten in &quot;Ahsoka&quot;.

== T ==

=== Orn Free Taa ===
Orn Free Taa is a Twi&#x27;lek who represents Ryloth in the Galactic Senate during the prequel trilogy.

The character has been portrayed by Jerome Blake in &quot;Episode I&quot;, by Matt Rowan in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot;, and voiced by Phil LaMarr in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== General Taggi / Tagge===
General Taggi, portrayed by Don Henderson in the original &quot;Star Wars&quot; movie, makes an appearance in the Death Star conference room. He says that the Rebel Alliance should be taken more seriously, and seems appalled by the news of the dissolution of the Imperial Senate.

In Marvel Comics, the character is given a back story and is referred as &quot;Cassio Tagge&quot; or &quot;Grand General Tagge&quot;.

=== Mother Talzin ===
Mother Talzin is the Dathomirian leader of the Nightsister clans before and during the Clone Wars, and the biological mother of Maul, Savage Opress, and Feral. She possesses great magical powers, including mind control, manipulating matter, and turning into mist. Following General Grievous&#x27;s attack on Dathomir, she is one of the few surviving Nightsisters. Later, Talzin manipulates a cult into stealing the living Force within other beings and collect it in an orb for her. When enough is collected, Talzin intends to absorb the Force and gain great strength beyond any other Jedi or Sith. However, she is defeated by the combined efforts of Mace Windu and Jar Jar Binks. She is later killed by Grievous during a fight with Palpatine and Dooku.

The character has been voiced by Barbara Goodson in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Wat Tambor ===
Wat Tambor is the Skakoan Foreman of the Techno Union and Executive of Baktoid Armor Workshop before and during the Clone Wars. He serves on the Separatist Council during the Clone Wars and helps to fund and supply the Confederacy of Independent Systems. He is one of the Separatist leaders killed by Darth Vader on Mustafar.

The character has been voiced by Chris Truswell in &quot;Episode II&quot;, and voiced by Matthew Wood in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Ahsoka Tano / Fulcrum / Ashla ===
=== Wilhuff Tarkin ===
=== Tarfful ===
Tarfful is a Wookiee chieftain who, along with Chewbacca, commands the Wookiee warriors during the Battle of Kashyyyk, and later helps Yoda escape the clone troopers after Order 66 is given.

The character has been portrayed by Michael Kingma in &quot;Episode III&quot;. He also appears in the video game &quot;Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order&quot;.

=== Roos Tarpals ===
Roos Tarpals is a Gungan soldier who held the rank of Captain, and later General. He fought during the Clone Wars for the Gungan Grand Army and the Galactic Republic, starting with the Battle of the Grassy Plains in Naboo. He is killed in a confrontation with General Grievous, sacrificing his life to ensure the Confederate leader&#x27;s capture.

The character has been voiced by Steve Speirs in &quot;Episode I&quot;, and voiced by Fred Tatasciore in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Jaro Tapal ===
Jaro Tapal is a Lasat Jedi Master who trained Cal Kestis and sacrificed himself to help him escape during Order 66. Tapal&#x27;s death haunted Cal for years, who blamed himself for what happened, but he eventually found the strength to forgive himself.

The character has been voiced by Travis Willingham in &quot;Jedi: Fallen Order&quot;.

=== &quot;Tech&quot; ===
&quot;Tech&quot; is a defective clone trooper and member of Clone Force 99. He is the team&#x27;s brains, having genetic mutations that make him more intelligent and skilled with technology than other clones. Following Order 66, Tech along with most of the team rebel against the Empire and become mercenaries. He sacrifices himself for the Bad Batch so that the rest of them can return safely.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Lor San Tekka ===
Lor San Tekka is a former explorer and a devout follower of the Church of the Force, as well as an old ally of Luke Skywalker, living on the planet Jakku. He gives Poe Dameron a fragment of the map needed to find Luke, and is subsequently executed by Kylo Ren.

The character has been portrayed by Max von Sydow in &quot;Episode VII&quot;.

=== Carson Teva ===
=== Thrawn ===
=== Shaak Ti ===
Shaak Ti is a Togruta Jedi Master and member of the Jedi Council. She is killed by Darth Vader at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant during Order 66.

The character has been portrayed by Orli Shoshan in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot;, and voiced by Tasia Valenza in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Rose Tico ===
=== Saesee Tiin ===
Saesee Tiin is an Iktotchi Jedi Master and member of the Jedi High Council. He is the second of the four Jedi Masters who dies trying to arrest Darth Sidious. He uses a green lightsaber.

The character has been portrayed by Khan Bonfils in &quot;Episode I&quot;, by Jesse Jensen in &quot;Episode II&quot;, by Kenji Oates in &quot;Episode III&quot;, and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;. Initially, he and Ki-Adi Mundi were going to be gunned down in Order 66 on Mygeeto in Revenge of the Sith.

=== Torbin ===
Torbin is a human male who served as a Jedi of the Jedi Order during the High Republic Era. By 148 BBY, he was the Padawan of Jedi Master Indara. That year, he was stationed on the planet Brendok along with his Master, Jedi Knight Sol, and Jedi Master Kelnacca. While searching for a vergence in the Force on the planet, the Jedi discovered a coven of witches led by Mother Aniseya.

The character has been played by Dean-Charles Chapman in &quot;The Acolyte&quot;.

=== Trench ===
Trench is the Harch Admiral of the Separatist Navy who commands the blockade of the planet Christophsis. He is one of the most skilled military tacticians at the time and supposedly has a history of being able to track cloaked ships. He seemingly dies early in the Clone Wars, but later reemerges with cybernetics covering nearly half of his body. Trench is finally killed by Anakin Skywalker.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== CC-5385 &quot;Tup&quot; ===

CC-5385, or &quot;Tup&quot;, is a rookie clone trooper who has a teardrop tattoo on his face, and matching designs on his helmet. He participates in the Battle of Umbara, and was key to the capture of rogue Jedi General Pong Krell. During his time in the campaign on Ringo Vinda, Tup&#x27;s biochip malfunctions, leading him to carry out Order 66 earlier than intended. As Tup was being shipped back to Kamino for evaluation, he was kidnapped by the Separatists but recovered shortly afterwards. He dies of medical complications on Kamino during the ensuing investigation.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Gregar Typho ===
Gregar Typho is the nephew of Captain Panaka, and Amidala&#x27;s bodyguard.

The character has been portrayed by Jay Laga&#x27;aia in &quot;Episodes II-III&quot;, and voiced by James Mathis III in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

== U ==

=== Luminara Unduli ===
Luminara Unduli is a Mirialan Jedi Master in the prequel trilogy and Barriss Offee&#x27;s mentor. She is killed as a result of Order 66. Luminara&#x27;s body was used to lure Rebels and surviving Jedi into a trap, under the guise that she was still alive. Luminara later appears as a disembodied voice empowering Rey to face the revived Darth Sidious.

The character has been portrayed by Mary Oyaya in &quot;Episode II&quot;, Fay David in Episode III, and voiced by Cree Summer in &quot;Clone Wars&quot;, and by Olivia d&#x27;Abo in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Episode IX&quot;.

== V ==

=== Finis Valorum ===
Finis Valorum is the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic, who is ousted from office, allowing Palpatine to rise to power.

The character has been portrayed by Terence Stamp in &quot;Episode I&quot;, and voiced by Ian Ruskin in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;. &quot;Finis valorum&quot; is Late Latin for &quot;the end of values&quot;. According to performer Terence Stamp, the character was intended by George Lucas to be based on then-President of the United States Bill Clinton as a &quot;good but beleaguered man,&quot; although Stamp noted that this had been before the Clinton impeachment trial. Valorum&#x27;s name stems from the original drafts of &quot;The Star Wars&quot;, in which it belonged to a character combined with Vader, then Vader&#x27;s master, before being phased out of the original trilogy.

=== Vane ===
=== Cobb Vanth ===
=== Maximilian Veers ===
General Maximilian Veers is commander of the 501st Legion who leads the Empire&#x27;s attack on Hoth, commanding the lead AT-AT Imperial Walker.

The character has been portrayed by Julian Glover in &quot;Episode V&quot;.

=== Asajj Ventress ===
=== Iden Versio ===
=== Cikatro Vizago ===
Cikatro Vizago is a Devaronian crime lord who the &quot;Ghost&quot; crew occasionally runs errands and smuggles goods for in exchange for credits and information. He later aids the &quot;Ghost&quot; crew in getting past the Imperial blockade of Lothal, but is found out, sold as a slave to the Mining Guild and made to operate an ore crawler skimming Lothal&#x27;s surface for minerals. After being freed by Ezra&#x27;s team, he joins the Lothal rebels, and assists the &quot;Ghost&quot; crew in the final battle against Governor Pryce and Grand Admiral Thrawn.

The character has been voiced by Keith Szarabajka in &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== Paz Vizsla ===
=== Pre Vizsla ===
Pre Vizsla is a Mandalorian warlord and the leader of the Death Watch during the Clone Wars. He wields the Darksaber, an ancient lightsaber forged by his ancestor, Tarre Vizsla. As the governor of Concordia, one of Mandalore&#x27;s moons, Pre Vizsla initially forms a secret alliance with Count Dooku to take control of Mandalore by overthrowing its pacifist government led by Duchess Satine Kryze. Vizsla breaks ties with Dooku when their plan fails, and he later allies with Darth Maul and Savage Opress in recruiting the Black Sun, the Pyke Syndicate and the Hutt Clan to form a criminal organization known as the Shadow Collective. After ousting Duchess Satine, Vizsla betrays his allies and has them imprisoned, but Maul escapes and challenges Vizla to single combat. Vizsla accepts and is defeated by Maul, who executes him and takes over Mandalore and the Death Watch.

The character has been voiced by Jon Favreau in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Dryden Vos ===
Dryden Vos is a near-human crime lord who serves as the figurehead of the Crimson Dawn crime syndicate, led from the shadows by Darth Maul, and has history with Tobias Beckett, whom he recruited to steal coaxium for him. He is killed and replaced by his top lieutenant, Qi&#x27;ra.

The character has been portrayed by Paul Bettany in &quot;Solo&quot;. Vos also briefly appears as a hologram in the final season of &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, which establishes him as a lieutenant of Maul from during the Clone Wars.

=== Quinlan Vos ===
Quinlan Vos is a Kiffar Jedi Master in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, and the master of Jedi Aayla Secura. He teams up with (and falls in love with) Asajj Ventress in an attempt to assassinate Count Dooku, but ends up turning to the dark side. He is eventually redeemed with Ventress&#x27;s help, who sacrifices herself to save him. Vos later respectfully buries her on her homeworld, Dathomir, and is reinstated into the Jedi Order. He is one of the few known survivors of Order 66.

The character has been voiced by Al Rodrigo in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;. The character&#x27;s design was based on a background extra from the Tatooine set in &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot;, and this extra was retroactively made Vos on a secret mission for the Jedi Council.

=== Neeku Vozo ===
Neeku Vozo is a Kadas&#x27;sa&#x27;Nikto male mechanic who served as a member of Team Fireball on the Colossus. Neeku befriended the undercover Resistance spy Kazuda Xiono during his mission on the Colossus to investigate First Order influence

The character has been voiced by Josh Brener in &quot;Star Wars Resistance&quot;.

== W ==

=== Wicket W. Warrick ===
=== Watto ===
=== Taun We ===
Taun We is a Kaminoan administrator who guides Obi-Wan Kenobi during his visit to the cloning facility. Following the rise of the Empire, she is killed by Fennec Shand.

The character has been voiced by Rena Owen in &quot;Episode II&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;. During filming, Owen wore a maquette of the alien&#x27;s head atop a hardhat, providing her co-stars with the proper eye-line for talking with the character.

=== Zam Wesell ===
Zam Wesell is a Clawdite bounty hunter hired by Jango Fett to assassinate Padmé Amidala. She fails in her mission and is killed with a poison dart by Fett before she could reveal his involvement.

The character has been portrayed by Leeanna Walsman in &quot;Episode II&quot;.

=== Temmin &quot;Snap&quot; Wexley ===
Temmin &quot;Snap&quot; Wexley is a Resistance X-wing fighter pilot, and he dies during the Battle of Exegol. He is the son of wayward Rebel pilot Norra Wexley.

The character has been portrayed by Greg Grunberg in &quot;Episode VII&quot; and &quot;IX&quot;. He is also a major character in the &quot;Star Wars: Poe Dameron&quot; comic series, as well as the Aftermath trilogy as a resourceful teenager.

=== Wim ===
Wim is a male human youngling who lived on At Attin in the early New Republic Era together with his father Wendle and was best friends with another child called Neel. Around 9 ABY, Wim found an old starship buried in the woods outside their city. After he, Neel and two other children called KB and Fern investigated the ship they accidentally activated it and became lost in space. The group of kids then forged an alliance with the ship&#x27;s droid SM-33 and a Force-sensitive man called Jod Na Nawood to find back home and avoid a crew of pirates.

The character has been played by Ravi Cabot-Conyers in &quot;Star Wars: Skeleton Crew&quot;.

=== Mace Windu ===
=== Commander CC-3636 &quot;Wolffe&quot; ===
CC-3636, or &quot;Wolffe&quot;, is a Clone Commander of the 104th Battalion and leader of the &quot;Wolfpack&quot;, serving under Jedi Plo Koon during the Clone Wars. During the war, he gained a large scar on his right eye. He is one of the few clones to have removed his inhibitor chip and, as such, was not forced to carry out Order 66. During the Galactic Empire era, he ends up in the Seelos system with fellow clones Rex and Gregor, and later helps the Rebels free Lothal from Imperial occupation.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Rebels&quot;.

=== &quot;Wrecker&quot; ===
&quot;Wrecker&quot; is a defective clone trooper and member of Clone Force 99. He is the team&#x27;s muscles, having genetic mutations that make him much larger and stronger than other clone troopers. Following Order 66, Wrecker along with most of the team rebel against the Empire and become mercenaries. Though Wrecker&#x27;s biochip is later activated, causing him to briefly turn on his squadmates, though they manage to remove it from his brain and restore his free will.

The character has been voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;.

=== Sabine Wren ===
== X ==

=== Xi&#x27;an ===
Xi&#x27;an is a Twi&#x27;lek member of Ranzar Malk&#x27;s crew, who is skilled in fighting with a knife, the sister of Qin, and an old associate and former lover of Din Djarin. After her brother is captured and imprisoned aboard a New Republic transport, the crew tries to rescue with the help of Djarin. Xi&#x27;an and the others secretly planned to abandon Djarin once they released Qin, but he outsmarts and defeats them, resulting in their arrest.

The character has been portrayed by Natalia Tena in &quot;The Mandalorian&quot;.

=== Hamato Xiono ===
Hamato Xiono is a human male senator from the planet Hosnian Prime who served in the New Republic Senate and is the father of Resistance operative Kazuda Xiono. By 9 ABY, Xiono was performing his duties as a senator in the New Republic. During this time, his ideals for the direction the burgeoning republic should take directly clashed with warnings from General Hera Syndulla of the Imperial Grand Admiral Thrawn&#x27;s return, culminating in a failed attempt to court-martial her for disobeying direct orders.

The character has been voiced by Tzi Ma in &quot;Star Wars Resistance&quot;, and he is portrayed by Nelson Lee in &quot;Ahsoka&quot;.

=== Kazuda Xiono ===
Kazuda &quot;Kaz&quot; Xiono is a human male military pilot and later Resistance spy who served in the years following the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War. The son of Senator Hamato Xiono, Kazuda served with the Starfighter Corps of the New Republic Defense Fleet during the Cold War, at which point the Resistance recruited him to spy on the First Order.

The character has been voiced by Christopher Sean in &quot;Star Wars Resistance&quot;.

== Y ==

=== Yaddle ===
Yaddle is a female member of Yoda&#x27;s mysterious species who appears as a member of the Jedi Council. She trained Cal Kestis&#x27;s Master Jaro Tapal and she is killed attempting to stop Dooku from turning to the dark side.

The character has been portrayed by Phil Eason in &quot;Episode I&quot;, and voiced by Bryce Dallas Howard in &quot;Star Wars: Tales of the Jedi&quot;. She was created from a concept art by Iain McCaig for a young Yoda.

=== Jarek Yeager ===
Jarek Yeager is a human male mechanic who owned a repair shop on the Colossus during the era of the New Republic. A former rebel pilot, commander, and veteran of the Galactic Civil War, Yeager once served with the Alliance to Restore the Republic.

The character has been voiced by Scott Lawrence in &quot;Star Wars Resistance&quot;.

=== Yoda ===
=== Wullf Yularen ===
Wullf Yularen is an Imperial officer on the first Death Star. During the Clone Wars, Yularen served as an admiral in the Republic Navy, and a leader of Anakin Skywalker&#x27;s fleet. He is later transferred to colonel and also the leader of the Imperial Security Bureau. He was killed in the destruction of the Death Star.

The character has been portrayed by Robert Clarke in &quot;Episode IV&quot;, voiced by Tom Kane in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; and &quot;Rebels&quot;, and portrayed by Malcolm Sinclair in &quot;Andor&quot;.

== Z ==

=== Ziro the Hutt ===
Ziro is a Galactic Basic-speaking Hutt crime lord, Jabba the Hutt&#x27;s flamboyant uncle, and Mama the Hutt&#x27;s son, who secretly plots to overthrow the Hutt Clan and usurp all their power. During the Clone Wars, he makes a secret plan with Count Dooku to have Jabba&#x27;s son captured by Assajj Ventress and blame the Jedi for the incident, but their scheme fails, as Jabba&#x27;s son is rescued by Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka Tano, and Ziro is discovered and arrested by Padmé Amidala. While in prison, he hires Aurra Sing to assassinate Amidala, but she fails. Later, fearing that Ziro will give the Republic the Hutt Council&#x27;s records that he had hidden away, Jabba hires Cad Bane and a team of bounty hunters to break him out of prison, with them taking several Senators hostage in exchange for Ziro&#x27;s release. Ziro then meets with the rest of the Hutt Clan on Nal Hutta, but refuses to tell them where he had hidden the records and, thus, is imprisoned. He is broken out by his lover, Sy Snootles, shortly after, and the two of them head over to Mama the Hutt&#x27;s house on Teth, where the records are located. However, Snootles betrays Ziro and reveals that she was hired by Jabba to find the records, before killing him.

The character has been voiced by Corey Burton in &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

=== Zuckuss ===
Zuckuss is a Gand bounty hunter among those who answer Darth Vader&#x27;s call to capture the &quot;Millennium Falcon&quot;. He is a skilled tracker, and often works alongside the droid 4-LOM.

The character has been portrayed by Cathy Munroe in &quot;Episode V&quot;. The action figure of the character released in Kenner&#x27;s original &quot;Star Wars&quot; action figure line was misidentified as his droid colleague &quot;4-LOM&quot;.

==See also==
* Lists of &quot;Star Wars&quot; actors
* Lists of &quot;Star Wars&quot; film actors
* Lists of &quot;Star Wars&quot; television series actors
* List of Star Wars creatures
* List of &quot;The Mandalorian&quot; characters
* List of &quot;The Book of Boba Fett&quot; characters
* List of &quot;Star Wars&quot; droid characters
* List of &quot;Star Wars Legends&quot; characters
* List of &quot;Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic&quot; characters
* List of &quot;Star Wars&quot; books

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="50" end="59" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q242446" start="193" end="202" title="Lucasfilm" label="Lucasfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="247" end="270" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="403" end="412" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551295" start="422" end="451" title="Star Wars expanded to other media" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars Legends&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q21527419" start="563" end="577" title="Skywalker Saga" label="Skywalker Saga"/>
<link wikidata="" start="619" end="644" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="Star Wars: The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q52383" start="787" end="792" title="Droid (Star Wars)" label="droid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="833" end="883" title="Droid (Star Wars)#List of droid characters" label="the list of &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; droid characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808802" start="1125" end="1173" title="List of Star Wars Legends characters" label="list of &amp;quot;Star Wars Legends&amp;quot; characters"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1178" end="1247" title="List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters" label="list of &amp;quot;Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic&amp;quot; characters"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1468" end="1481" title="Star Wars Jedi: Survivor" label="Jedi Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51766" start="2065" end="2075" title="Darth Maul" label="Darth Maul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307262" start="2459" end="2474" title="Julian Holloway" label="Julian Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001639" start="2661" end="2672" title="Gallius Rax" label="Gallius Rax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610592" start="3014" end="3029" title="Stephen Stanton" label="Stephen Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3133" end="3153" title="Star Wars: Aftermath: Life Debt" label="Aftermath: Life Debt"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3164" end="3204" title="Star Wars: Aftermath: Empire&amp;#x27;s End" label="&amp;quot;Aftermath: Empire&amp;#x27;s End&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q73612" start="3578" end="3588" title="Fiona Shaw" label="Fiona Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="3816" end="3827" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q63514190" start="3869" end="3887" title="Jodie Turner-Smith" label="Jodie Turner-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="4071" end="4078" title="Padawan (Star Wars)" label="Padawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="4107" end="4117" title="Jedi Order" label="Jedi Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="4190" end="4199" title="the Force" label="the Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q195691" start="4336" end="4352" title="Amandla Stenberg" label="Amandla Stenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="4362" end="4373" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480812" start="4460" end="4470" title="Tantive IV" label="Tantive IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="4562" end="4567" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q51788" start="4572" end="4577" title="R2-D2" label="R2-D2"/>
<link wikidata="Q112100766" start="4779" end="4791" title="Peter Geddis" label="Peter Geddis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111104" start="4822" end="4834" title="Rohan Nichol" label="Rohan Nichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488" start="5826" end="5838" title="Clancy Brown" label="Clancy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q358990" start="6922" end="6932" title="James Hong" label="James Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q946074" start="7055" end="7065" title="Mos Eisley" label="Mos Eisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q51740" start="7108" end="7122" title="Obi-Wan Kenobi" label="Obi-Wan Kenobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873" start="7130" end="7140" title="lightsaber" label="lightsaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="7508" end="7513" title="Jedha" label="Jedha"/>
<link wikidata="Q229029" start="7762" end="7777" title="Thandiwe Newton" label="Thandiwe Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="7842" end="7847" title="The Force" label="Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q358421" start="8147" end="8156" title="Tom Baker" label="Tom Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="8220" end="8231" title="Jedi" label="Jedi Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q77001957" start="8244" end="8249" title="Grogu" label="Grogu"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="8255" end="8263" title="Order 66 (Star Wars)" label="Order 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="8291" end="8296" title="Naboo" label="Naboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q401182" start="8351" end="8361" title="Ahmed Best" label="Ahmed Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="8427" end="8436" title="Streaming television" label="web-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273568" start="8437" end="8452" title="Children&amp;#x27;s television series" label="children&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="8453" end="8462" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8469" end="8501" title="Star Wars: Jedi Temple Challenge" label="Star Wars: Jedi Temple Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q562973" start="8603" end="8621" title="Oliver Ford Davies" label="Oliver Ford Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q51792" start="8786" end="8802" title="General Grievous" label="General Grievous"/>
<link wikidata="Q24953533" start="8866" end="8876" title="Caleb Dume" label="Caleb Dume"/>
<link wikidata="Q24953533" start="8909" end="8921" title="Kanan Jarrus" label="Kanan Jarrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242702" start="9127" end="9141" title="Archie Panjabi" label="Archie Panjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q229426" start="9507" end="9519" title="Keri Russell" label="Keri Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q51755" start="9690" end="9701" title="Ahsoka Tano" label="Ahsoka Tano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354478" start="10025" end="10037" title="Jason Spisak" label="Jason Spisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q621613" start="10116" end="10129" title="bounty hunter" label="bounty hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="10164" end="10175" title="Darth Vader" label="Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901" start="10200" end="10217" title="Millennium Falcon" label="Millennium Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51794" start="10244" end="10256" title="Jabba the Hutt" label="Jabba&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750900" start="10351" end="10358" title="Wookiee" label="Wookiee"/>
<link wikidata="Q51803" start="10408" end="10417" title="Chewbacca" label="Chewbacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="10469" end="10478" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q51790" start="10490" end="10499" title="Boba Fett" label="Boba Fett"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="10646" end="10663" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10673" end="10687" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q508242" start="10896" end="10911" title="Ralph McQuarrie" label="Ralph McQuarrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q946074" start="11013" end="11023" title="Mos Eisley" label="Mos Eisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="11047" end="11057" title="Star Wars (film)" label="A New Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365387" start="11095" end="11110" title="Stuart Freeborn" label="Stuart Freeborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="11199" end="11214" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="11265" end="11275" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138844" start="11295" end="11311" title="The Tenth Planet" label="The Tenth Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862119" start="11497" end="11505" title="Riot gun" label="Riot gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q54216677" start="11599" end="11613" title="Tobias Beckett" label="Tobias Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="11627" end="11635" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51803" start="11640" end="11649" title="Chewbacca" label="Chewbacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="11759" end="11769" title="Enfys Nest" label="Enfys Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q132058" start="11841" end="11856" title="Jonathan Kasdan" label="Jonathan Kasdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18684239" start="12107" end="12119" title="Adria Arjona" label="Adria Arjona"/>
<link wikidata="Q54304" start="12263" end="12283" title="mission to Dantooine" label="mission to Dantooine"/>
<link wikidata="Q234058" start="12615" end="12627" title="Rhea Perlman" label="Rhea Perlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51789" start="12821" end="12834" title="Padmé Amidala" label="Padmé Amidala"/>
<link wikidata="Q51789" start="13031" end="13037" title="Padmé Amidala" label="Padmé."/>
<link wikidata="Q4346488" start="13072" end="13090" title="Robin Atkin Downes" label="Robin Atkin Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51796" start="13201" end="13216" title="Clone trooper" label="clone Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q51740" start="13262" end="13276" title="Obi-Wan Kenobi" label="Obi-Wan Kenobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187552" start="13324" end="13330" title="Utapau (Star Wars)" label="Utapau"/>
<link wikidata="Q529851" start="13445" end="13461" title="Temuera Morrison" label="Temuera Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="13504" end="13521" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17487638" start="14091" end="14103" title="Billie Lourd" label="Billie Lourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q108941" start="14117" end="14130" title="Carrie Fisher" label="Carrie Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q673007" start="14559" end="14572" title="Tony Amendola" label="Tony Amendola"/>
<link wikidata="Q97365172" start="14756" end="14770" title="The Bad Batch (Star Wars)" label="Clone Force 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="14794" end="14800" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="15943" end="15960" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51794" start="16094" end="16108" title="Jabba the Hutt" label="Jabba the Hutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935109" start="16215" end="16227" title="Phil Tippett" label="Phil Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121742" start="16311" end="16328" title="underground comix" label="underground comix"/>
<link wikidata="Q435278" start="16340" end="16352" title="Robert Crumb" label="Robert Crumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807376" start="16391" end="16399" title="Tim Rose (actor)" label="Tim Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q124733059" start="16454" end="16465" title="Mark Dodson (actor)" label="Mark Dodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q495321" start="16775" end="16785" title="Rick Baker" label="Rick Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523981" start="17068" end="17081" title="Garrick Hagon" label="Garrick Hagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q377619" start="17733" end="17751" title="Adrienne Wilkinson" label="Adrienne Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="17811" end="17820" title="Corellian" label="Corellian"/>
<link wikidata="Q238464" start="18182" end="18192" title="Simon Pegg" label="Simon Pegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60315766" start="18282" end="18329" title="Star Wars (2015 comic book)" label="2015 &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; Marvel comics series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18425" end="18447" title="Star Wars: Darth Vader" label="Star Wars: Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18489" end="18498" title="Star Wars: Aftermath trilogy" label="Aftermath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001639" start="18568" end="18583" title="Mercurial Swift" label="Mercurial Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001639" start="18600" end="18609" title="Jas Emari" label="Jas Emari"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001639" start="18620" end="18632" title="Norra Wexley" label="Norra Wexley"/>
<link wikidata="Q733195" start="18692" end="18704" title="New Republic (Star Wars)" label="New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193668" start="18980" end="18996" title="Benicio del Toro" label="Benicio del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="19373" end="19382" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096076" start="19604" end="19616" title="Silas Carson" label="Silas Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811834" start="19653" end="19667" title="Toby Longworth" label="Toby Longworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105414" start="19684" end="19696" title="Gideon Emery" label="Gideon Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q837921" start="19806" end="19813" title="Yavin 4" label="Yavin 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488048" start="19897" end="19911" title="Alex McCrindle" label="Alex McCrindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q925891" start="19949" end="19961" title="Michael Bell (actor)" label="Michael Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982285" start="20002" end="20016" title="Ian McElhinney" label="Ian McElhinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="20128" end="20153" title="May the Force be with you" label="May the Force be with you"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339750" start="20458" end="20470" title="Nick Gillard" label="Nick Gillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346488" start="20513" end="20531" title="Robin Atkin Downes" label="Robin Atkin Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q295964" start="20828" end="20839" title="Jon Favreau" label="Jon Favreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q463585" start="21190" end="21202" title="Indira Varma" label="Indira Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="21951" end="21968" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581437" start="22325" end="22339" title="Robbie Daymond" label="Robbie Daymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559261" start="22615" end="22626" title="Dave Filoni" label="Dave Filoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q294647" start="23185" end="23199" title="Mads Mikkelsen" label="Mads Mikkelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443390" start="23412" end="23427" title="Kumail Nanjiani" label="Kumail Nanjiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="23881" end="23886" title="Jedha" label="Jedha"/>
<link wikidata="Q46995496" start="23950" end="23962" title="Alfie Curtis" label="Alfie Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834458" start="23997" end="24011" title="Michael Smiley" label="Michael Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201004" start="24340" end="24355" title="Charlie Barnett (actor)" label="Charlie Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="24365" end="24376" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="24804" end="24821" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078506" start="25531" end="25542" title="Lloyd Sherr" label="Lloyd Sherr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326686" start="25612" end="25618" title="Zabrak (Star Wars)" label="Zabrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="25643" end="25651" title="Dathomir" label="Dathomir"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="25716" end="25729" title="Savage Opress" label="Savage Opress"/>
<link wikidata="Q51766" start="25734" end="25738" title="Darth Maul" label="Maul"/>
<link wikidata="Q51771" start="25798" end="25802" title="Sith" label="Sith"/>
<link wikidata="Q14417" start="25812" end="25826" title="Asajj Ventress" label="Asajj Ventress"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25938" end="25950" title="Nightsisters (Star Wars: The Clone Wars)" label="Nightsisters"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26045" end="26070" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="Star Wars: The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26104" end="26111" title="List of Star Wars: The Clone Wars episodes#:~:text=&amp;quot;-,Monster,-&amp;quot;" label="Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q108093986" start="26824" end="26844" title="Ryan Kiera Armstrong" label="Ryan Kiera Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26854" end="26878" title="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew" label="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="27224" end="27232" title="Malachor" label="Malachor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183126" start="27268" end="27292" title="Philip Anthony-Rodriguez" label="Philip Anthony-Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q317563" start="27333" end="27342" title="Sung Kang" label="Sung Kang"/>
<link wikidata="Q356541" start="27687" end="27698" title="Phil LaMarr" label="Phil LaMarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q51770" start="28540" end="28549" title="Palpatine" label="Palpatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="28649" end="28665" title="Anakin Skywalker" label="Anakin Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="28765" end="28782" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="28892" end="28898" title="Kijimi" label="Kijimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21772117" start="28909" end="28912" title="Rey (Star Wars)" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21772120" start="28914" end="28918" title="Finn (Star Wars)" label="Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21782656" start="28923" end="28934" title="Poe Dameron" label="Poe Dameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="28960" end="28965" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q232889" start="29119" end="29136" title="Shirley Henderson" label="Shirley Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21772117" start="29486" end="29489" title="Rey (Star Wars)" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125180" start="29853" end="29869" title="Claire Davenport" label="Claire Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q237194" start="30276" end="30287" title="Wanda Sykes" label="Wanda Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133061" start="30932" end="30942" title="Clone Wars (Star Wars)" label="Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="30982" end="30990" title="Order 66 (Star Wars)" label="Order 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="31004" end="31019" title="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="31032" end="31043" title="Darth Vader" label="Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q51771" start="31064" end="31075" title="Inquisitorius" label="Inquisitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q24953533" start="31220" end="31232" title="Kanan Jarrus" label="Kanan Jarrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="31250" end="31255" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="31275" end="31281" title="Lothal (Star Wars)" label="Lothal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="31351" end="31358" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="31429" end="31435" title="Force ghost" label="spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q51771" start="31563" end="31567" title="Sith" label="Sith"/>
<link wikidata="Q214223" start="31631" end="31643" title="Jason Isaacs" label="Jason Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="31832" end="31839" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q314659" start="31853" end="31866" title="Rupert Friend" label="Rupert Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q529851" start="32390" end="32406" title="Temuera Morrison" label="Temuera Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="32449" end="32466" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32527" end="32533" title="List of Star Wars planets and moons#Rodia" label="Rodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q621613" start="32534" end="32547" title="bounty hunter" label="bounty hunter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32553" end="32567" title="List of Star Wars species (P–T)#Rodian" label="the Tetsu Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="32583" end="32593" title="crime boss" label="crime boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q51794" start="32594" end="32608" title="Jabba the Hutt" label="Jabba the Hutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="32653" end="32660" title="Quechuan languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="32666" end="32670" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="32711" end="32720" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="32780" end="32788" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007182" start="32935" end="32949" title="Han shot first" label="Han shot first"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198867" start="33053" end="33063" title="Paul Blake (actor, born 1949)" label="Paul Blake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33141" end="33151" title="Larry Ward (voice actor)" label="Larry Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="33206" end="33213" title="Quechuan languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33363" end="33404" title="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace" label="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33542" end="33567" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="Star Wars: The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="33585" end="33594" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q54862" start="33626" end="33647" title="Star Wars Battlefront (2015 video game)" label="Star Wars Battlefront"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="34789" end="34806" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096076" start="35402" end="35414" title="Silas Carson" label="Silas Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="35459" end="35468" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="35501" end="35513" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="35593" end="35609" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q182788" start="35639" end="35652" title="Newt Gingrich" label="Newt Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="35657" end="35670" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830582" start="36011" end="36022" title="Alan Ruscoe" label="Alan Ruscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087025" start="36027" end="36041" title="Christopher Truswell" label="Chris Truswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q259182" start="36528" end="36532" title="Hati Hróðvitnisson" label="Hati"/>
<link wikidata="Q738737" start="36589" end="36594" title="Sköll" label="Sköll"/>
<link wikidata="Q20069680" start="36633" end="36646" title="Ivanna Sakhno" label="Ivanna Sakhno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189470" start="37038" end="37051" title="Jimmi Simpson" label="Jimmi Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846589" start="37153" end="37165" title="Mayfeld" label="Migs Mayfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q85786022" start="37295" end="37306" title="Moff Gideon" label="Moff Gideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859256" start="37491" end="37504" title="Richard Brake" label="Richard Brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="38361" end="38375" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="39389" end="39406" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q105082052" start="39786" end="39809" title="Guardians of the Whills" label="Guardians of the Whills"/>
<link wikidata="Q311723" start="39988" end="39998" title="Donnie Yen" label="Donnie Yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q206890" start="40353" end="40369" title="Carrie-Anne Moss" label="Carrie-Anne Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="40379" end="40390" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q47456743" start="40675" end="40686" title="Naomi Ackie" label="Naomi Ackie"/>
<link wikidata="Q51766" start="40925" end="40935" title="Darth Maul" label="Darth Maul"/>
<link wikidata="Q51755" start="40965" end="40976" title="Ahsoka Tano" label="Ahsoka Tano"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="41391" end="41408" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176702" start="42011" end="42029" title="Michael Pennington" label="Michael Pennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q194032" start="42368" end="42380" title="Debra Wilson" label="Debra Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="42531" end="42555" title="Imperial Security Bureau" label="Imperial Security Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="42614" end="42620" title="Lothal (Star Wars)" label="Lothal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="42708" end="42734" title="Ethnic cleansing" label="wiped out much of his kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q51780" start="42931" end="42937" title="Grand Admiral Thrawn" label="Thrawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q218800" start="43209" end="43222" title="David Oyelowo" label="David Oyelowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451452" start="43618" end="43629" title="Kyle Soller" label="Kyle Soller"/>
<link wikidata="Q51795" start="44010" end="44020" title="Jango Fett" label="Jango Fett"/>
<link wikidata="Q466150" start="44357" end="44377" title="Keisha Castle-Hughes" label="Keisha Castle-Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45056" end="45080" title="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew" label="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="45341" end="45358" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="45524" end="45531" title="Sullust" label="Sullust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066454" start="45567" end="45579" title="Brian George" label="Brian George"/>
<link wikidata="Q47459178" start="45790" end="45802" title="Varada Sethu" label="Varada Sethu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990705" start="46387" end="46401" title="Joonas Suotamo" label="Joonas Suotamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="46411" end="46422" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3971250" start="47044" end="47051" title="Kel Dor" label="Kel Dor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="47274" end="47288" title="Cato Neimoidia" label="Cato Neimoidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830582" start="47430" end="47441" title="Alan Ruscoe" label="Alan Ruscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789352" start="47471" end="47481" title="Matt Sloan (voice actor)" label="Matt Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536187" start="47528" end="47547" title="James Arnold Taylor" label="James Arnold Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q240206" start="47968" end="47985" title="Margarita Levieva" label="Margarita Levieva"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="47995" end="48006" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543788" start="48447" end="48460" title="Chris Edgerly" label="Chris Edgerly"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="48537" end="48541" title="Jedi" label="Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="48619" end="48625" title="Umbara" label="Umbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q51727" start="48694" end="48712" title="Count Dooku" label="Count Dooku&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="48776" end="48785" title="Treason" label="treachery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228760" start="48907" end="48918" title="Dave Fennoy" label="Dave Fennoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51740" start="49128" end="49142" title="Obi-Wan Kenobi" label="Obi-Wan Kenobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="49146" end="49154" title="Pacifism" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850508" start="49799" end="49810" title="Anna Graves" label="Anna Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q512456" start="50400" end="50414" title="Shelagh Fraser" label="Shelagh Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910306" start="50449" end="50462" title="Bonnie Piesse" label="Bonnie Piesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q356383" start="50921" end="50934" title="Jack Thompson (actor)" label="Jack Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q325398" start="51694" end="51704" title="Phil Brown (actor)" label="Phil Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q381768" start="51739" end="51752" title="Joel Edgerton" label="Joel Edgerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="52398" end="52415" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700477" start="52682" end="52693" title="John Hollis" label="John Hollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27560621" start="52938" end="52948" title="Dafne Keen" label="Dafne Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="52958" end="52969" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q206922" start="53119" end="53130" title="Andy Serkis" label="Andy Serkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20501302" start="53181" end="53201" title="Supreme Leader Snoke" label="Supreme Leader Snoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586871" start="53209" end="53223" title="Star Wars sequel trilogy" label="sequel trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q609458" start="53485" end="53496" title="Ben Daniels" label="Ben Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262794" start="53701" end="53715" title="Dermot Crowley" label="Dermot Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q716069" start="53992" end="54001" title="Jiang Wen" label="Jiang Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q63581338" start="54316" end="54326" title="Cal Kestis" label="Cal Kestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q982780" start="54449" end="54462" title="Liam McIntyre" label="Liam McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256321" start="55781" end="55800" title="Elizabeth Rodriguez" label="Elizabeth Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="56019" end="56030" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="56063" end="56076" title="Squadron (aviation)" label="fighter squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498272" start="56426" end="56433" title="Purrgil" label="Purrgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q139611" start="56505" end="56519" title="Zachary Gordon" label="Zachary Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257674" start="56755" end="56767" title="Denise Gough" label="Denise Gough"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="56859" end="56873" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314569" start="56960" end="56970" title="Duncan Pow" label="Duncan Pow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19590955" start="57018" end="57027" title="Rogue One" label="Rogue One"/>
<link wikidata="Q19907" start="57122" end="57132" title="Death Star" label="Death Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="57172" end="57178" title="Scarif" label="Scarif"/>
<link wikidata="Q60462338" start="57232" end="57237" title="Andor (TV series)" label="Andor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970919" start="57336" end="57349" title="Cassian Andor" label="Cassian Andor"/>
<link wikidata="Q367085" start="58020" end="58040" title="Richard LeParmentier" label="Richard LeParmentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="58057" end="58066" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096076" start="58585" end="58597" title="Silas Carson" label="Silas Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066454" start="58684" end="58696" title="Brian George" label="Brian George"/>
<link wikidata="Q449118" start="59048" end="59061" title="Brian Blessed" label="Brian Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="59798" end="59806" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59816" end="59840" title="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew" label="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew"/>
<link wikidata="" start="60463" end="60487" title="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew" label="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q54349360" start="60688" end="60701" title="Erin Kellyman" label="Erin Kellyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614101" start="60858" end="60872" title="Michael Culver" label="Michael Culver"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901" start="60890" end="60907" title="Millennium Falcon" label="Millennium Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51796" start="61087" end="61100" title="clone trooper" label="clone trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="61193" end="61199" title="Kamino (Star Wars)" label="Kamino"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="61273" end="61290" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="61452" end="61463" title="Darth Vader" label="Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645045" start="61502" end="61517" title="Alethea McGrath" label="Alethea McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637978" start="61688" end="61697" title="Sullustan" label="Sullustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="61720" end="61734" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="61756" end="61771" title="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="61826" end="61844" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848487" start="61959" end="61969" title="Mike Quinn (puppeteer)" label="Mike Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001437" start="61991" end="62007" title="Richard Bonehill" label="Richard Bonehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q24176183" start="62051" end="62065" title="Bill Kipsang Rotich" label="Kipsang Rotich"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="62069" end="62074" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028135" start="62108" end="62116" title="Kalenjin language" label="Kalenjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33587" start="62132" end="62138" title="Kikuyu language" label="Kikuyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586871" start="62191" end="62205" title="Star Wars sequel trilogy" label="sequel trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62220" end="62248" title="Star Wars: The Force Awakens" label="Star Wars: The Force Awakens"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62269" end="62293" title="Star Wars: The Last Jedi" label="Star Wars: The Last Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62318" end="62350" title="Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker" label="Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551295" start="62494" end="62533" title="Star Wars Expanded Universe" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; Expanded Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q529851" start="62999" end="63015" title="Temuera Morrison" label="Temuera Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="63058" end="63075" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964082" start="63494" end="63508" title="Nalini Krishan" label="Nalini Krishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q274923" start="63550" end="63567" title="Meredith Salenger" label="Meredith Salenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q310292" start="64377" end="64389" title="Jim Cummings" label="Jim Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q124357" start="64642" end="64653" title="Ralph Brown" label="Ralph Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q455059" start="65463" end="65475" title="Michelle Ang" label="Michelle Ang"/>
<link wikidata="Q25455117" start="65599" end="65610" title="Sabine Wren" label="Sabine Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q241471" start="65874" end="65885" title="Gina Torres" label="Gina Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742364" start="66138" end="66149" title="Femi Taylor" label="Femi Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66232" end="66281" title="Changes in Star Wars re-releases#Return of the Jedi" label="Special Edition of &amp;quot;Return of the Jedi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14417" start="66657" end="66671" title="Asajj Ventress" label="Asajj Ventress"/>
<link wikidata="Q51727" start="66702" end="66713" title="Count Dooku" label="Count Dooku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224307" start="66764" end="66776" title="Nightsisters" label="Nightsisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q335303" start="66797" end="66806" title="berserker" label="berserker"/>
<link wikidata="Q54289" start="67618" end="67627" title="Mandalore" label="Mandalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488" start="67663" end="67675" title="Clancy Brown" label="Clancy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q73416" start="68083" end="68094" title="Jimmy Smits" label="Jimmy Smits"/>
<link wikidata="Q356541" start="68196" end="68207" title="Phil LaMarr" label="Phil LaMarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q73416" start="68388" end="68399" title="Jimmy Smits" label="Jimmy Smits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825024" start="68497" end="68510" title="Adrian Dunbar" label="Adrian Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="68541" end="68547" title="retcon" label="retcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421701" start="68795" end="68818" title="Rebecca Jackson Mendoza" label="Rebecca Jackson Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484578" start="68854" end="68868" title="Simone Kessell" label="Simone Kessell"/>
<link wikidata="Q952156" start="69583" end="69593" title="Steve Blum" label="Steve Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q508242" start="69777" end="69792" title="Ralph McQuarrie" label="Ralph McQuarrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q51803" start="69832" end="69841" title="Chewbacca" label="Chewbacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q487427" start="70212" end="70225" title="Hugh Quarshie" label="Hugh Quarshie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="70541" end="70553" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q965261" start="70596" end="70608" title="Corey Burton" label="Corey Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q51780" start="70780" end="70800" title="Grand Admiral Thrawn" label="Grand Admiral Thrawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q434029" start="70850" end="70862" title="Timothy Zahn" label="Timothy Zahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555385" start="70870" end="70896" title="Thrawn trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Thrawn&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108882382" start="70946" end="70958" title="The Mandalorian season 3" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q56876444" start="70968" end="70983" title="The Mandalorian" label="The Mandalorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310292" start="71025" end="71037" title="Jim Cummings" label="Jim Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q361610" start="71074" end="71088" title="Xander Berkely" label="Xander Berkely"/>
<link wikidata="Q112170063" start="71098" end="71117" title="Tales of the Empire" label="Tales of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21601024" start="72001" end="72006" title="Jakku" label="Jakku"/>
<link wikidata="Q238464" start="72292" end="72302" title="Simon Pegg" label="Simon Pegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="72345" end="72362" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q315118" start="72804" end="72817" title="Marton Csokas" label="Marton Csokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q459532" start="72859" end="72871" title="Matthew Wood (sound editor)" label="Matthew Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q51725" start="73009" end="73019" title="Mace Windu" label="Mace Windu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="73081" end="73089" title="Geonosis" label="Geonosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q529851" start="73300" end="73316" title="Temuera Morrison" label="Temuera Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="73358" end="73375" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351454" start="73861" end="73877" title="William Hootkins" label="William Hootkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="73887" end="73896" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="74014" end="74024" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723846" start="74045" end="74057" title="Blue Harvest" label="Blue Harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189385" start="74273" end="74295" title="Mary Elizabeth McGlynn" label="Mary Elizabeth McGlynn"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74364" end="74381" title="Star Wars: Thrawn" label="Star Wars: Thrawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q380856" start="74919" end="74935" title="Richard E. Grant" label="Richard E. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q312535" start="75578" end="75589" title="Matt Lanter" label="Matt Lanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q965261" start="75685" end="75697" title="Corey Burton" label="Corey Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3971250" start="75704" end="75716" title="Mon Calamari (fictional race)" label="Mon Calamari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495345" start="75782" end="75788" title="B-wing" label="B-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q965261" start="76028" end="76040" title="Corey Burton" label="Corey Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q508242" start="76119" end="76134" title="Ralph McQuarrie" label="Ralph McQuarrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255153" start="76451" end="76468" title="Raddus (MC85 Star Cruiser)" label="MC85 Star Cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371569" start="76609" end="76619" title="Paul Kasey" label="Paul Kasey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610592" start="76634" end="76649" title="Stephen Stanton" label="Stephen Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q208667" start="76910" end="76927" title="Stellan Skarsgård" label="Stellan Skarsgård"/>
<link wikidata="Q435652" start="77432" end="77445" title="Rya Kihlstedt" label="Rya Kihlstedt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77569" end="77580" title="List of Star Wars air, aquatic, and ground vehicles#Snowspeeder (T-47 Airspeeder)" label="snowspeeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502903" start="77660" end="77675" title="Walker (Star Wars)" label="Imperial Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249578" start="77714" end="77725" title="John Morton (actor)" label="John Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312133" start="79160" end="79172" title="Kevin McKidd" label="Kevin McKidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q51808" start="79271" end="79284" title="Max Rebo Band" label="Max Rebo Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q965261" start="79897" end="79909" title="Corey Burton" label="Corey Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667862" start="80227" end="80250" title="O&amp;#x27;Shea Jackson Jr." label="O&amp;#x27;Shea Jackson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q965261" start="80454" end="80466" title="Corey Burton" label="Corey Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q108270" start="81358" end="81371" title="Warwick Davis" label="Warwick Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551295" start="81463" end="81492" title="Star Wars expanded universe" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars Legends&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555385" start="81493" end="81525" title="Thrawn trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Thrawn&amp;quot; novel trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52746927" start="82135" end="82144" title="Aromanticism" label="aromantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24529652" start="82367" end="82384" title="Rebecca Henderson" label="Rebecca Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="82394" end="82405" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q52346040" start="82667" end="82687" title="Star Wars Resistance" label="Star Wars Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="82965" end="82983" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="83205" end="83220" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231429" start="83386" end="83397" title="Faye Marsay" label="Faye Marsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q60462338" start="83407" end="83412" title="Andor (TV series)" label="Andor"/>
<link wikidata="Q372947" start="84300" end="84313" title="Ray Stevenson" label="Ray Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873" start="85357" end="85366" title="Darksaber (fictional weapon)" label="Darksaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852090" start="85510" end="85524" title="Tobias Menzies" label="Tobias Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q449072" start="85818" end="85832" title="Gwendoline Yeo" label="Gwendoline Yeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536830" start="86177" end="86190" title="Lewis MacLeod (actor)" label="Lewis MacLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="86397" end="86404" title="Felucia" label="Felucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21772117" start="86459" end="86462" title="Rey (Star Wars)" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614736" start="86535" end="86544" title="Amy Allen (actress)" label="Amy Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q195041" start="86591" end="86604" title="Jennifer Hale" label="Jennifer Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112800" start="87065" end="87084" title="Christopher Malcolm" label="Christopher Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q101528973" start="87953" end="87965" title="Moses Ingram" label="Moses Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q180665" start="88379" end="88400" title="Sarah Michelle Gellar" label="Sarah Michelle Gellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="88613" end="88625" title="Hondo Ohnaka" label="Hondo Ohnaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q52374" start="88698" end="88706" title="Cad Bane" label="Cad Bane"/>
<link wikidata="Q54216677" start="88802" end="88816" title="Tobias Beckett" label="Tobias Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q233038" start="88932" end="88942" title="Jaime King" label="Jaime King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032111" start="89082" end="89092" title="cane sword" label="cane sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q51755" start="89191" end="89202" title="Ahsoka Tano" label="Ahsoka Tano"/>
<link wikidata="Q51740" start="89319" end="89333" title="Obi-Wan Kenobi" label="Obi-Wan Kenobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949750" start="89495" end="89507" title="Greg Baldwin" label="Greg Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488" start="89930" end="89942" title="Clancy Brown" label="Clancy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q86010165" start="90241" end="90255" title="Morgan Elsbeth" label="Morgan Elsbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q738737" start="90433" end="90438" title="Sköll" label="Sköll"/>
<link wikidata="Q259182" start="90495" end="90499" title="Hati Hróðvitnisson" label="Hati"/>
<link wikidata="Q372947" start="90533" end="90546" title="Ray Stevenson" label="Ray Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q971177" start="90600" end="90611" title="Rory McCann" label="Rory McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q51736" start="90817" end="90829" title="Qui-Gon Jinn" label="Qui-Gon Jinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266831" start="91216" end="91230" title="Tusken Raiders" label="Tusken Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q237255" start="91269" end="91284" title="Pernilla August" label="Pernilla August"/>
<link wikidata="Q51808" start="91445" end="91458" title="Max Rebo Band" label="Max Rebo Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807376" start="91629" end="91637" title="Tim Rose (actor)" label="Tim Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848487" start="91642" end="91652" title="Mike Quinn (puppeteer)" label="Mike Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539467" start="91750" end="91764" title="Nika Futterman" label="Nika Futterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536187" start="92066" end="92085" title="James Arnold Taylor" label="James Arnold Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q491318" start="92365" end="92377" title="Lee Jung-jae" label="Lee Jung-jae"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="92387" end="92398" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18918" start="93363" end="93373" title="Sam Witwer" label="Sam Witwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134241" start="94182" end="94195" title="Manny Jacinto" label="Manny Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="94205" end="94216" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q51727" start="94343" end="94356" title="Count Dooku" label="Darth Tyranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q773512" start="94501" end="94511" title="Bob Bergen" label="Bob Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q63581338" start="94821" end="94831" title="Cal Kestis" label="Cal Kestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="95073" end="95089" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="95337" end="95343" title="Ryloth" label="Ryloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346488" start="95822" end="95840" title="Robin Atkin Downes" label="Robin Atkin Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q104153367" start="96287" end="96293" title="Ahsoka (TV series)" label="Ahsoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q356541" start="96572" end="96583" title="Phil LaMarr" label="Phil LaMarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945226" start="96703" end="96716" title="Don Henderson" label="Don Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="96733" end="96754" title="Star Wars (film)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="96834" end="96848" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q578189" start="97900" end="97915" title="Barbara Goodson" label="Barbara Goodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087025" start="98327" end="98341" title="Christopher Truswell" label="Chris Truswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q459532" start="98383" end="98395" title="Matthew Wood (sound editor)" label="Matthew Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750900" start="98614" end="98622" title="Kashyyyk" label="Kashyyyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601576" start="98733" end="98747" title="Michael Kingma" label="Michael Kingma"/>
<link wikidata="" start="98816" end="98844" title="Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order" label="Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="99103" end="99109" title="killed in action" label="killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737010" start="99152" end="99172" title="altruistic suicide" label="sacrificing his life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428289" start="99256" end="99268" title="Steve Speirs" label="Steve Speirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q847133" start="99309" end="99324" title="Fred Tatasciore" label="Fred Tatasciore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403592" start="99663" end="99680" title="Travis Willingham" label="Travis Willingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="100171" end="100188" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q203215" start="100571" end="100584" title="Max von Sydow" label="Max von Sydow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23410" start="100847" end="100859" title="Orli Shoshan" label="Orli Shoshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515945" start="100906" end="100919" title="Tasia Valenza" label="Tasia Valenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6400048" start="101214" end="101226" title="Khan Bonfils" label="Khan Bonfils"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="101353" end="101370" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16713577" start="101942" end="101962" title="Dean-Charles Chapman" label="Dean-Charles Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161310" start="101972" end="101983" title="The Acolyte (TV series)" label="The Acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="102435" end="102452" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="103125" end="103142" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324210" start="103309" end="103326" title="Jay Laga&amp;#x27;aia" label="Jay Laga&amp;#x27;aia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130764" start="103373" end="103389" title="James C. Mathis III" label="James Mathis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q21772117" start="103768" end="103771" title="Rey (Star Wars)" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629925" start="103844" end="103854" title="Mary Oyaya" label="Mary Oyaya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="103882" end="103891" title="Fay David" label="Fay David"/>
<link wikidata="Q262838" start="103922" end="103933" title="Cree Summer" label="Cree Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q266361" start="103968" end="103985" title="Olivia d&amp;#x27;Abo" label="Olivia d&amp;#x27;Abo"/>
<link wikidata="Q77298" start="104243" end="104256" title="Terence Stamp" label="Terence Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="104368" end="104378" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77298" start="104437" end="104450" title="Terence Stamp" label="Terence Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="104482" end="104494" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="104515" end="104545" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="104546" end="104558" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200400" start="104653" end="104678" title="Clinton impeachment" label="Clinton impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502903" start="105073" end="105094" title="Walker (Star Wars)" label="AT-AT Imperial Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q499644" start="105133" end="105146" title="Julian Glover" label="Julian Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471621" start="105260" end="105270" title="Devaronian" label="Devaronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388258" start="105836" end="105852" title="Keith Szarabajka" label="Keith Szarabajka"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873" start="106022" end="106031" title="Darksaber (fictional weapon)" label="Darksaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q295964" start="106825" end="106836" title="Jon Favreau" label="Jon Favreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472275" start="106944" end="106954" title="figurehead" label="figurehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q242707" start="107207" end="107219" title="Paul Bettany" label="Paul Bettany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14417" start="107572" end="107586" title="Asajj Ventress" label="Asajj Ventress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704721" start="107941" end="107951" title="Al Rodrigo" label="Al Rodrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058295" start="108482" end="108493" title="Josh Brener" label="Josh Brener"/>
<link wikidata="Q52346040" start="108503" end="108523" title="Star Wars Resistance" label="Star Wars Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q86762044" start="108752" end="108764" title="Fennec Shand" label="Fennec Shand"/>
<link wikidata="Q434301" start="108800" end="108809" title="Rena Owen" label="Rena Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126762" start="108895" end="108903" title="maquette" label="maquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q275182" start="109278" end="109293" title="Leeanna Walsman" label="Leeanna Walsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001639" start="109508" end="109520" title="Norra Wexley" label="Norra Wexley"/>
<link wikidata="Q309592" start="109559" end="109572" title="Greg Grunberg" label="Greg Grunberg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="109662" end="109684" title="Star Wars: Poe Dameron" label="Star Wars: Poe Dameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q122781779" start="110364" end="110382" title="Ravi Cabot-Conyers" label="Ravi Cabot-Conyers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="110392" end="110416" title="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew" label="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="111026" end="111043" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="111638" end="111655" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111805" end="111816" title="List of The Mandalorian characters#Ranzar Malk" label="Ranzar Malk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111885" end="111888" title="List of The Mandalorian characters#Qin" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232163" start="112255" end="112267" title="Natalia Tena" label="Natalia Tena"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="112469" end="112481" title="Kazuda Xiono" label="Kazuda Xiono"/>
<link wikidata="Q598178" start="112869" end="112875" title="Tzi Ma" label="Tzi Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q52346040" start="112885" end="112905" title="Star Wars Resistance" label="Star Wars Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q465406" start="112936" end="112946" title="Nelson Lee" label="Nelson Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q24702856" start="113387" end="113403" title="Christopher Sean" label="Christopher Sean"/>
<link wikidata="Q52346040" start="113413" end="113433" title="Star Wars Resistance" label="Star Wars Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q229775" start="113781" end="113800" title="Bryce Dallas Howard" label="Bryce Dallas Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q112170063" start="113810" end="113838" title="Tales of the Jedi (TV series)" label="Star Wars: Tales of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141130" start="114218" end="114232" title="Scott Lawrence" label="Scott Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q52346040" start="114242" end="114262" title="Star Wars Resistance" label="Star Wars Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305700" start="114717" end="114725" title="Tom Kane" label="Tom Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887051" start="114797" end="114813" title="Malcolm Sinclair (actor)" label="Malcolm Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q965261" start="116148" end="116160" title="Corey Burton" label="Corey Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="116264" end="116275" title="Darth Vader" label="Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901" start="116309" end="116326" title="Millennium Falcon" label="Millennium Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q52383" start="116395" end="116400" title="4-LOM" label="4-LOM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116439" end="116451" title="Cathy Munroe" label="Cathy Munroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598254" start="116665" end="116702" title="Lists of Star Wars actors" label="Lists of &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q104389401" start="116705" end="116747" title="List of Star Wars film actors" label="Lists of &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; film actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842773" start="116750" end="116805" title="List of Star Wars television series actors" label="Lists of &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; television series actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498272" start="116808" end="116835" title="List of Star Wars creatures" label="List of Star Wars creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q86010165" start="116838" end="116884" title="List of The Mandalorian characters" label="List of &amp;quot;The Mandalorian&amp;quot; characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q111182614" start="116887" end="116939" title="List of The Book of Boba Fett characters" label="List of &amp;quot;The Book of Boba Fett&amp;quot; characters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116942" end="116988" title="Droid (Star Wars)#List of droid characters" label="List of &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; droid characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808802" start="116991" end="117039" title="List of Star Wars Legends characters" label="List of &amp;quot;Star Wars Legends&amp;quot; characters"/>
<link wikidata="" start="117042" end="117111" title="List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters" label="List of &amp;quot;Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic&amp;quot; characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q783985" start="117114" end="117149" title="List of Star Wars books" label="List of &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303199" wikidata="Q28930" url="?curid=303199" title="Bernardo O'Higgins">
<text>Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins Riquelme (; 20 August 1778 – 24 October 1842) was a Chilean independence leader who freed Chile from Spanish rule in the Chilean War of Independence. He was a wealthy landowner of Basque-Spanish and Irish ancestry. Although he was the second Supreme Director of Chile (1817–1823), he is considered one of Chile&#x27;s founding fathers, as he was the first holder of this title to head a fully independent Chilean state.

He was Captain General of the Chilean Army, Brigadier of the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata, General Officer of Gran Colombia and Grand Marshal of Peru.

==Early life==
Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins, a member of the O&#x27;Higgins family, was born in the Chilean city of Chillán in 1778, the illegitimate son of Ambrosio O&#x27;Higgins, 1st Marquis of Osorno, a Spanish officer born in County Sligo, Ireland, who became governor of Chile and later viceroy of Peru. His mother was Isabel Riquelme, a prominent local; the daughter of Don Simón Riquelme y Goycolea, a member of the Chillán &quot;Cabildo&quot;, or town council.

O&#x27;Higgins spent his early years with his mother&#x27;s family in central-southern Chile and was never acknowledged by his father, and later he lived with the Albano family, who were his father&#x27;s commercial partners, in Talca. At age 15, O&#x27;Higgins was sent to Lima by his father. He had a distant relationship with Ambrosio, who supported him financially and was concerned with his education, but the two never met in person. At the time of his son&#x27;s birth, Ambrosio was only a junior military officer. Two years later, Isabel married Don Félix Rodríguez, a friend of her father. O&#x27;Higgins used his mother&#x27;s surname until the death of his father in 1801.

Bernardo&#x27;s father continued his professional rise and became Viceroy of Peru; at seventeen Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins was sent to London to complete his studies. There, studying history and the arts, O&#x27;Higgins became acquainted with American ideas of independence and developed a sense of nationalist pride. He met Francisco de Miranda, a Venezuelan idealist and believer in independence, and joined a Masonic Lodge established by Miranda, dedicated to achieving the independence of Latin America.

In 1798 O&#x27;Higgins went to Spain from Great Britain, his return to the Americas delayed by the French Revolutionary Wars. His father died in 1801, leaving O&#x27;Higgins a large piece of land, the &quot;Hacienda Las Canteras&quot;, near the Chilean city of Los Ángeles. O&#x27;Higgins returned to Chile in 1802, adopted his biological father&#x27;s surname, and began life as a gentleman farmer. In 1806, he was appointed to the &quot;cabildo&quot; as the representative of Laja. In 1808 Napoleon took control of Spain, triggering a sequence of events in South America. In Chile, the commercial and political elite decided to form an autonomous government to rule in the name of the imprisoned king Ferdinand VII; this was to be one of the first in a number of steps toward national independence, in which O&#x27;Higgins would play a leading role.

==Role in Chilean independence movement==
On 18 September 1810, O&#x27;Higgins joined the revolt against the now French-dominated Spanish government. The criollo leaders in Chile did not support Joseph Bonaparte&#x27;s rule in Spain, and a limited self-government under the Government &quot;Junta&quot; of Chile was created, with the aim of restoring the legitimate Spanish throne. This date is now recognized as Chile&#x27;s Independence Day. O&#x27;Higgins was a close friend of Juan Martínez de Rozas, an old friend of his father, and one of the more radical leaders. O&#x27;Higgins strongly recommended that a national congress be created, and was elected a deputy to the first National Congress of Chile in 1811 as a representative of the Laja district. Tensions between the royalist and increasingly pro-independence factions, to which O&#x27;Higgins remained attached as a junior member, continued to grow.
The anti-Royalist camp in Chile was deeply split along lines of patronage and personality, political beliefs, and geography (between the rival regional groupings of Santiago and Concepción). The Carrera family had already seized power several times in different coups, and supported a specifically Chilean nationalism, as opposed to the broader Latin American focus of the Lautaro Lodge grouping, which included O&#x27;Higgins and the Argentine José de San Martín. José Miguel Carrera, the most prominent member of the Carrera family, enjoyed a power base in Santiago; that of de Rozas, and later O&#x27;Higgins, lay in Concepción.

As a result, O&#x27;Higgins was to find himself increasingly in political and military competition with Carrera—although early on, O&#x27;Higgins was nowhere near as prominent as his later rival. De Rozas initially appointed O&#x27;Higgins to a minor military position in 1812, possibly because of his illegitimate origins, poor health, or lack of military training. Much of O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; early military knowledge stemmed from Juan Mackenna, an immigrant of Irish descent and a former client of Ambrosio&#x27;s, whose advice centred mainly on the use of cavalry. In 1813, when the Spanish government made its first attempt to reconquer Chile—sending an expedition led by Brigadier Antonio Pareja—Carrera, as a former national leader and now Commander in Chief of the Army, was by far the more prominent figure of the two, and a natural choice to lead the military resistance.

O&#x27;Higgins was back on his estates in Laja, having retired from the Army the previous year due to poor health, when news came of the invasion. O&#x27;Higgins mobilised his local militia and marched to Concepcion, before moving on to Talca, meeting up with Carrera, who was to take command of the new army. Carrera sent O&#x27;Higgins to cut the Spanish off at Linares; O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; victory there resulted in his promotion to colonel. The unsuccessful Siege of Chillan followed, where O&#x27;Higgins produced a brave but unspectacular performance; however, as commander, Carrera took most of the blame for the defeat, weakening his prestige with the &quot;Junta&quot; back in Santiago. O&#x27;Higgins continued to campaign against the royalists, fighting with a reckless courage that would make him famous. In October, fighting at the Battle of El Roble under Carrera, O&#x27;Higgins took effective command at a crucial moment and gave one of his more famous orders:
Lads! Live with honor, or die with glory! He who is brave, follow me!

Despite being injured, O&#x27;Higgins went on to pursue the royalist forces from the field. The &quot;Junta&quot; in Santiago reassigned command of the army from Carrera, who had retreated during the battle, to O&#x27;Higgins, who then appointed Juan Mackenna as commandant-general. Carrera was subsequently captured and imprisoned by the royalist forces; in his absence, in May 1814 O&#x27;Higgins supported the Treaty of Lircay, which promised a halt to the fighting. Once released, however, Carrera violently opposed both O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; new role and the treaty, overthrowing the &quot;Junta&quot; in a coup in July 1814 and immediately exiling Mackenna.

O&#x27;Higgins turned to focus on Carrera, and their forces met at the battle of Las Tres Acequias, where Carrera&#x27;s brother Luis inflicted a modest defeat on O&#x27;Higgins. Further conflict was postponed by the news that the royalists had decided to ignore the recent treaty, and were threatening Concepción under the leadership of General Mariano Osorio. Carrera and O&#x27;Higgins decided to reunite the army and face the common threat. Carrera&#x27;s plan was to draw the Spaniards to the Angostura del Paine, while O&#x27;Higgins preferred the town of Rancagua. They decided to make a stand at the Angostura de Paine, a gorge that formed an easily defended bottleneck. At the last hour, however, O&#x27;Higgins instead garrisoned the nationalist forces at the main square of Rancagua. Carrera did not arrive with reinforcements, and O&#x27;Higgins and his forces were promptly surrounded in October. After an entire day of fighting at the battle of Rancagua, the Spanish commander, Mariano Osorio, was victorious—but O&#x27;Higgins managed to break out with a few of his men, issuing the command:Those who can ride, ride! We will break through the enemy!

Like Carrera and other nationalists, O&#x27;Higgins retreated to Argentina with the survivors and remained there for three years while the royalists were in control. Mackenna, still a key supporter, was killed by Luis Carrera in a duel in 1814, deepening the feud.

==O&#x27;Higgins as Supreme Director==
While in exile, O&#x27;Higgins met the Argentine General José de San Martín, a fellow member of the Lautaro Lodge, and together the men returned to Chile in 1817 to defeat the royalists. Initially, the campaign went well, with the two commanders achieving a victory at the battle of Chacabuco. San Martín sent his troops down the mountain starting at midnight on 11 February to prepare for an attack at dawn. As the attack commenced, his troops were much closer to the Spanish than anticipated, and they fought hard and heroically. Argentine General Miguel Estanislao Soler&#x27;s troops had to go down a tiny path that proved long and arduous and took longer than expected. General O&#x27;Higgins—supposedly seeing his homeland and overcome with passion—defied the plan of attack and charged along with his 1,500 troops. What happened during this theatre of the battle is fiercely debated. O&#x27;Higgins claimed that the Spanish stopped their retreat and started advancing towards his troops. He said that, if he were to lead his men back up the narrow path and retreat, they would have been massacred one by one. San Martín saw O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; early advancement and ordered Soler to charge the Spanish flank, which took the pressure off O&#x27;Higgins and allowed his troops to stand their ground. 

The ensuing firefight continued into the afternoon, and the tides turned for the Patriots as Soler captured a key Spanish artillery point. At this point, the Spanish set up a defensive square around the Chacabuco Ranch. O&#x27;Higgins charged the centre of the Spanish position, and Soler got into place behind the Spanish forces, effectively cutting off any chance of retreat. O&#x27;Higgins and his men overwhelmed the Spanish troops, who attempted to retreat, but Soler&#x27;s men cut off their retreat and pushed towards the ranch. Hand-to-hand combat ensued in and around the ranch, until every Spanish soldier was dead or taken captive. Five hundred Spanish soldiers were killed, and 600 were taken captive. The Patriot forces lost 12 men in the battle, but an additional 120 died of their wounds.

The Second Battle of Cancha Rayada in 1818, however, was a victory for the Royalists, and it was not until the Battle of Maipú that ultimate victory was assured. San Martín was initially offered the position of power in the newly free Chile, but he declined, in order to continue the fight for independence in the rest of South America. O&#x27;Higgins accepted the position instead and became the leader of an independent Chile. He was granted dictatorial powers as Supreme Director on 16 February 1817. On 12 February 1818, Chile proclaimed itself an independent republic.

Throughout the war with the royalists, O&#x27;Higgins had engaged in an ongoing feud with José Miguel Carrera. After their retreat in 1814, O&#x27;Higgins had fared much better than Carrera, who found little support forthcoming from San Martín, O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; political ally. Carrera was imprisoned to prevent his involvement in Chilean affairs; after his escape, he ended up taking the winning side in the Argentine Federalist war, helping to defeat the directorate in 1820. 

Marching south to attack O&#x27;Higgins, now ruler of Chile, Carrera was arrested by supporters of O&#x27;Higgins and executed under questionable circumstances in 1821; his two brothers had already been killed by royalist forces in the preceding years, bringing the long-running feud to an end. The argument as to the relative contribution of these two great Chilean independence leaders, however, has continued up to the modern day, and O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; decision not to intervene to prevent the execution coloured many Chileans&#x27; views of his reign.

For six years, O&#x27;Higgins was a largely successful leader, and his government initially functioned well. Within Chile, O&#x27;Higgins established markets, courts, colleges, libraries, hospitals, and cemeteries, and began important improvements in agriculture. He undertook various military reforms. He founded the Chilean Military Academy in 1817, aiming to professionalise the officer corps. O&#x27;Higgins remained concerned about the threat of invasion, and had declared after the battle of Chacabuco that &quot;this victory and another hundred shall be of no significance if we do not gain control of the sea&quot;. Alongside the Military Academy, he founded the modern Chilean Navy under the command of the Scottish officer Lord Cochrane, establishing the First Chilean Navy Squadron, the Academy for Young Midshipmen (the predecessor of the current Naval Academy), and the Chilean Marine Corps. O&#x27;Higgins continued in his desire to see independence across Latin America, utilising his new forces to support San Martín, sending the Liberating expedition to Perú. Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins once planned to expand Chile by liberating the Philippines from Spain and incorporating the islands. In this regard he tasked the Scottish naval officer, Lord Thomas Cochrane, in a letter dated 12 November 1821, expressing his plan to conquer Guayaquil, the Galapagos Islands, and the Philippines. There were preparations, but the plan didn&#x27;t push through because O&#x27;Higgins was exiled. Nevertheless, in the middle of the 19th century, there was another plan by Chilean officials to also assist in the Philippine Revolution and the Philippine-American War by sending an armada across the Pacific. However, the plan also did not come to fruition.

In time, however, O&#x27;Higgins began to alienate important political groupings within the still-fragile Chilean nation. O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; proposed radical and liberal reforms, such as the establishment of democracy and the abolition of titles of nobility, were resisted by the powerful large landowners. He offended the church in Chile early on—in particular, the Bishop of Santiago, Jose Rodriguez Zorrilla. Having offended the aristocracy and the church, he also lost the support of the businesspeople, his last semi-powerful ally within the country. The government became bankrupt, forcing O&#x27;Higgins to send Antonio José de Irisarri to the United Kingdom to negotiate a £1 million loan—Chile&#x27;s first foreign debt—whilst a massive earthquake in central Chile added more difficulty for the ruler.

In 1822, O&#x27;Higgins established a new &quot;controversial&quot; constitution, which many regarded as a desperate attempt to hang on to power. The deaths of his political enemies, including Carrera and Manuel Rodríguez, returned to haunt him, with some accusing him of abusing state power. The provinces increasingly viewed him as centralising power to an excessive degree.

O&#x27;Higgins was deposed by a conservative coup on 28 January 1823. Chile&#x27;s new dictator, Ramón Freire, formerly O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; &quot;closest ally&quot;, had slowly turned against O&#x27;Higgins in the preceding years. Freire had fought under O&#x27;Higgins at the Battle of Maipú, was promoted to colonel for his services to the independence, and was finally named Intendant of Concepción. His friendship with O&#x27;Higgins started to crack by degrees, however, until in 1822 he resigned his position in disagreement. His name became a rallying point for those discontented with O&#x27;Higgins, but the two of them never came to an armed conflict. O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; abdication was typically dramatic: baring his chest, he offered up his life should his accusers demand it of him. In return, the &quot;junta&quot; declared they held nothing against O&#x27;Higgins, and saluted him. O&#x27;Higgins was made governor of Concepción, an appointment which did not last long: it was time for him to leave Chile.

==Peruvian independence and O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; final years==
After being deposed, O&#x27;Higgins embarked from the port of Valparaíso in July 1823, in the British corvette &quot;Fly&quot;, never to see Chile again. Originally destined for Ireland, while he was passing through Peru he was strongly encouraged by Simón Bolívar to join the nationalist effort there. Bolívar&#x27;s government granted O&#x27;Higgins the &quot;Hacienda de Cuiva&quot; and the &quot;Hacienda Montalván&quot; in San Vicente de Cañete, near Lima. O&#x27;Higgins lived in exile for the rest of his life accompanied by his illegitimate son, Pedro Demetrio O&#x27;Higgins (1817–1868), his mother, and his half-sister, Rosa Rodríguez Riquelme (1781–1850). According to a 2001 documentary, O&#x27;Higgins also had a daughter, Petronila (born circa 1809) by Patricia Rodríguez.

O&#x27;Higgins travelled to join Bolívar&#x27;s army in its final liberation of Peru, but upon arrival, he found that Bolívar did not intend to give him a command—instead appointing him a general of Gran Colombia and making him a special court-martial judge for Chilean volunteers. Making his way back to Lima, O&#x27;Higgins heard of Sucre&#x27;s victory at the Battle of Ayacucho. He returned to Bolívar for the victory celebrations but as a civilian. &quot;Señor&quot;, he toasted, addressing Bolívar, &quot;America is free. From now on General O&#x27;Higgins does not exist; I am only Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins, a private citizen. After Ayacucho, my American mission is over.&quot;

When Andrés de Santa Cruz became head of the Peru-Bolivian Confederation in 1836, O&#x27;Higgins endorsed his integrationist policies, and wrote a letter of support to him the following year when the Confederation came under attack from the Chilean forces of Diego Portales—ultimately offering to act as a mediator in the conflict. With the rise of Agustín Gamarra, O&#x27;Higgins found himself out of favour in Peru. Meanwhile, the Chilean government had begun to rehabilitate O&#x27;Higgins, reappointing him to his old rank of captain-general in the Chilean 
Army.

From exile, O&#x27;Higgins argued for the establishment of a Chilean settlement in the Strait of Magellan in his correspondence with the Minister of State. No action was taken on O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; arguments, but in 1842 Chile began to organise an expedition to settle the strait following a request by an American to be allowed to establish a tug boat service in the area.

In 1842, the National Congress of Chile finally voted to allow O&#x27;Higgins to return to Chile. After travelling to Callao to embark for Chile, however, O&#x27;Higgins began to succumb to cardiac problems and was too weak to travel. His doctor ordered him to return to Lima, where on 24 October 1842, aged 64, O&#x27;Higgins died.

==Legacy==

After his death, his remains were first buried in Peru, before being repatriated to Chile in 1869. O&#x27;Higgins had wished to be buried in the city of Concepción, but this was never to be. For a long time, they remained in a marble coffin in the Cementerio General de Santiago, and in 1979 his remains were transferred by Augusto Pinochet to the Altar de la Patria, in front of the Palacio de La Moneda. In 2004, his body was temporarily stored at the Chilean Military School during the building of the Plaza de la Ciudadanía, before being finally laid to rest in the new underground Crypt of the Liberator.
O&#x27;Higgins is widely commemorated today, both in Chile and beyond. One of the administrative regions of Chile was named Libertador General Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins Region in his honour, as were other placenames such as the village of Villa O&#x27;Higgins. The main thoroughfare of the Chilean capital, Santiago, is Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins. There is also the Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins National Park. In the town of San Vicente de Cañete, situated in the Lima Region of Peru, a park and street are named after him. A statue of O&#x27;Higgins is located in a park in Guatemala City, the capital of Guatemala.

There is a bust of O&#x27;Higgins in O&#x27;Higgins Square by the bridge in Richmond, south-west London. Each year the borough&#x27;s mayor is joined by members of the Chilean Embassy for a ceremony, and a wreath is placed there. A blue plaque was erected in his honour at Clarence House in Richmond, where he lived while studying in London.
A 1992 bronze sculpture of O&#x27;Higgins was executed by Julian Martinez, the same sculptor responsible for the nearby statue of Benito Juárez. Previously, the bust was installed at Hermann Park&#x27;s International Sculpture Garden. It rests on a granite pedestal and was acquired by the City of Houston through FAMAE/Arcomet in 1992.

There is also a bust in his honour in Merrion Square in Dublin, Ireland and in the Garavogue River Walkway in Sligo, Ireland, and a sculpture near Central Railway Station in Plaza Iberoamericana, near 58 Chalmers St, Sydney. In Buenos Aires, there is a large statue of him in the centre of the Plaza República de Chile, and several localities in Argentina are named after him. A plaque has also been erected in Cádiz, Spain, in the Plaza de Candelaria, where he resided for four years. In 2005, a bust was erected &quot;To the Liberator of Chile&quot; by the Chilean Embassy in the Parque Morazan in San José, Costa Rica. There is a bust of Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins on a marble plinth on the east side of Avenida da Liberdade in downtown Lisbon, Portugal. A statue of Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins in the city of Concepción was destroyed during the 2010 earthquake in Chile.

In 1949, American composer Henry Cowell composed an opera on the life of O&#x27;Higgins titled &quot;O&#x27;Higgins of Chile&quot;. The libretto was written by Elizabeth Harald, but the work was never orchestrated nor staged.

In 1955, the football team O&#x27;Higgins F.C. was founded, named after him.

The Order of Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins, Chile&#x27;s highest award for foreign citizens, is named in honour of O&#x27;Higgins.

The Chilean Navy has named several vessels in his honour. They include a frigate (1816), a corvette (1866), an armoured cruiser (1897–1933), a light cruiser (1951–1992), and a submarine (2003–present).

The SS &quot;Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins&quot;, one of the standard Liberty ships (#2168), was laid down on 23 September 1943 and launched on 13 October 1943. It was scrapped in 1959.

The Chilean Base General Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins Riquelme research station in Antarctica is named in his honour. It is located on the northernmost part of the continent.

On 28 October 2010, An Post (the Irish Post Office) and CorreosChile (the Chilean Post Office) issued 82c and $500 se-tenant stamps to commemorate the bicentenary of the beginning of the struggle for Chilean Independence. The stamps honour two men with Irish backgrounds, who played a crucial role in the quest for Chile&#x27;s liberation, Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins and John MacKenna.

==See also==

* Bust of Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins (Houston)
* Bust of Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins (Washington, D.C.)
* Francisco de Miranda
* History of Chile
* Irish Chileans
* Irish military diaspora
* Irish regiments
* José de San Martín
* José Miguel Carrera
* Juan Albano Pereira Márquez
* Juan de la Cruz y Bernardotte
* Juan Mackenna
* List of famous alumni of UNMSM.
* O&#x27;Higgins Pioche
* Simón Bolívar
* Talca Foundation

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Ambrose Bernard O&#x27;Higgins&quot;. &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913.
* Ávila, A. &quot;The Latin American revolutions seen from the XXI century&quot;. &quot;Journal of Ibero-American History&quot; Vol. 1, No. 1, (2008) pp. 9–39
* Clissold, Stephen. &quot;The O&#x27;Higgins of Chile&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (June 1957) 7#6 pp. 396–403; father and son.
* Crow, John A. &quot;The Epic of Latin America&quot; (Fourth Edition); University of California Press, 1992.
* Cruz, J.L. &quot;The Army of the Andes: Chilean and Rioplatense Politics in an Age of Military Organisation, 1814–1817.&quot; &quot;Journal of Latin American Studies&quot;. 2014 Feb 1:29–58. 
* Lynch J. &quot;Spanish American Independence in Recent Historiography&quot;. In: McFarlane A. – Posada Carbó E. (eds.) &quot;Independence and Revolution in Spanish America&quot; (London: Institute of Latin American Studies, 1999)
* Ossa, Juan Luis &quot;Armies, politics and revolution. Chile, 1808–1826&quot; (Liverpool University Press, 2014).
* Ossa-Santa-Cruz, Juan Luis. &quot;Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins&#x27; government through the eyes of five North American agents, 1817–1823.&quot; &quot;Co-herencia&quot; 13, no. 25 (2016): 139–166. online
* &quot;O&#x27;Higgins, Bernardo&quot;, Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online; accessed 13 October 2008. online

===In Spanish===
* Archivo de don Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins Santiago: Nascimento, 1946–, 36 v.
* Arana, Diego Barros &quot;Historia General de Chile&quot; 16 vol. Santiago: Imprenta Cervantes.
* Ruiz Moreno, Isidoro, &quot;Campañas militares argentinas. La política y la guerra&quot; (Buenos Aires: Emecé, 2005) 
* Valencia, Avaria Luis, &quot;O&#x27;Higgins, el buen genio de América&quot; (Santiago de Chile: Universitaria, 1980) 

==External links==

* Web Blog of &quot;Respetable Lodge Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins # 392&quot; – &quot;Of Free and Acepted Masones of the Argentina,&quot; Argentine Freemasonery
* Sepúlveda, Alfredo: &quot;Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins: The Rebel Son of a Viceroy&quot;
* Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28930" start="0" end="32" title="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins Riquelme"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="114" end="119" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072889" start="145" end="172" title="Chilean War of Independence" label="Chilean War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="191" end="200" title="landowner" label="landowner"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="204" end="210" title="Basque people" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="211" end="218" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="223" end="228" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114942" start="266" end="291" title="List of presidents of Chile" label="Supreme Director of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q343436" start="342" end="357" title="founding father" label="founding father"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="452" end="467" title="Captain general" label="Captain General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745472" start="475" end="487" title="Chilean Army" label="Chilean Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="489" end="498" title="Brigadier general" label="Brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q738144" start="506" end="545" title="United Provinces of the Río de la Plata" label="United Provinces of the Río de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="547" end="562" title="General officer" label="General Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="566" end="579" title="Gran Colombia" label="Gran Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773429" start="584" end="605" title="Grand Marshal of Peru" label="Grand Marshal of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071828" start="664" end="685" title="O&amp;#x27;Higgins family" label="O&amp;#x27;Higgins family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774" start="719" end="726" title="Chillán" label="Chillán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388469" start="760" end="806" title="Ambrosio O&amp;#x27;Higgins, 1st Marquis of Osorno" label="Ambrosio O&amp;#x27;Higgins, 1st Marquis of Osorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q179325" start="834" end="846" title="County Sligo" label="County Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q886517" start="896" end="911" title="viceroy of Peru" label="viceroy of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q11683721" start="928" end="943" title="Isabel Riquelme" label="Isabel Riquelme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024827" start="1041" end="1048" title="Cabildo (council)" label="Cabildo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16584207" start="1237" end="1250" title="Albano family" label="Albano family"/>
<link wikidata="Q17374044" start="1303" end="1308" title="Founding of Talca" label="Talca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="1348" end="1352" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="1825" end="1840" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Viceroy of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1891" end="1897" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q311447" start="2081" end="2101" title="Francisco de Miranda" label="Francisco de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="2105" end="2114" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="2168" end="2181" title="Masonic Lodge" label="Masonic Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="2307" end="2320" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="2364" end="2389" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910" start="2526" end="2537" title="Los Ángeles, Bío Bío" label="Los Ángeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024827" start="2704" end="2711" title="Cabildo (council)" label="cabildo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475" start="2743" end="2747" title="Laja (Chile)" label="Laja"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2757" end="2765" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="2968" end="2981" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="3272" end="3279" title="Criollo people" label="criollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726" start="3313" end="3329" title="Joseph Bonaparte" label="Joseph Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290938" start="3392" end="3429" title="Government Junta of Chile (1810)" label="Government &amp;quot;Junta&amp;quot; of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q463638" start="3599" end="3621" title="Juan Martínez de Rozas" label="Juan Martínez de Rozas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968468" start="3800" end="3826" title="National Congress of Chile" label="National Congress of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475" start="3862" end="3866" title="Laja (Chile)" label="Laja"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="3898" end="3906" title="royalist" label="royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="4197" end="4205" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="4210" end="4220" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865398" start="4227" end="4234" title="Carrera (surname)" label="Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q769231" start="4405" end="4418" title="Lautaro Lodge" label="Lautaro Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q134160" start="4477" end="4495" title="José de San Martín" label="José de San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q734977" start="4497" end="4516" title="José Miguel Carrera" label="José Miguel Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="4652" end="4662" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q434975" start="5099" end="5112" title="Juan Mackenna" label="Juan Mackenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291482" start="5353" end="5367" title="Antonio Pareja" label="Antonio Pareja"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475" start="5591" end="5595" title="Laja (Chile)" label="Laja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="5754" end="5764" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4469" start="5786" end="5791" title="Talca" label="Talca"/>
<link wikidata="Q14494" start="5913" end="5920" title="Linares, Chile" label="Linares"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509933" start="6012" end="6028" title="Siege of Chillan" label="Siege of Chillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870957" start="6395" end="6413" title="Battle of El Roble" label="Battle of El Roble"/>
<link wikidata="Q434975" start="6844" end="6857" title="Juan Mackenna" label="Juan Mackenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518856" start="7011" end="7027" title="Treaty of Lircay" label="Treaty of Lircay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871541" start="7333" end="7360" title="battle of Las Tres Acequias" label="battle of Las Tres Acequias"/>
<link wikidata="Q201200" start="7391" end="7395" title="Luis Carrera" label="Luis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518856" start="7536" end="7542" title="Treaty of Lircay" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="7565" end="7575" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350251" start="7608" end="7622" title="Mariano Osorio" label="Mariano Osorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582" start="7824" end="7832" title="Rancagua" label="Rancagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582" start="8047" end="8055" title="Rancagua" label="Rancagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310755" start="8211" end="8229" title="battle of Rancagua" label="battle of Rancagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q134160" start="8790" end="8808" title="José de San Martín" label="José de San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q769231" start="8833" end="8846" title="Lautaro Lodge" label="Lautaro Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425658" start="9006" end="9025" title="battle of Chacabuco" label="battle of Chacabuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314051" start="9283" end="9306" title="Miguel Estanislao Soler" label="Miguel Estanislao Soler"/>
<link wikidata="Q333088" start="10850" end="10880" title="Second Battle of Cancha Rayada" label="Second Battle of Cancha Rayada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073849" start="10957" end="10972" title="Battle of Maipú" label="Battle of Maipú"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657253" start="11377" end="11418" title="Chilean Declaration of Independence" label="proclaimed itself an independent republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481616" start="11844" end="11854" title="Federalist Party (Argentina)" label="Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425658" start="12953" end="12972" title="battle of Chacabuco" label="battle of Chacabuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q208711" start="13143" end="13155" title="Chilean Navy" label="Chilean Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334994" start="13198" end="13211" title="Thomas Cochrane, 10th Earl of Dundonald" label="Lord Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452621" start="13230" end="13257" title="First Chilean Navy Squadron" label="First Chilean Navy Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640550" start="13348" end="13368" title="Chilean Marine Corps" label="Chilean Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q911652" start="13511" end="13540" title="Liberating expedition to Perú" label="Liberating expedition to Perú"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="13851" end="13862" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q422082" start="14077" end="14098" title="Philippine Revolution" label="Philippine Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="14107" end="14130" title="Philippine-American War" label="Philippine-American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="14473" end="14481" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="14519" end="14528" title="landowner" label="landowner"/>
<link wikidata="Q602627" start="14843" end="14867" title="Antonio José de Irisarri" label="Antonio José de Irisarri"/>
<link wikidata="Q112316715" start="14921" end="14952" title="Chilean independence debt" label="Chile&amp;#x27;s first foreign debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685434" start="14962" end="14997" title="1822 Valparaíso earthquake" label="massive earthquake in central Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397004" start="15241" end="15257" title="Manuel Rodríguez Erdoiza" label="Manuel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332" start="15511" end="15523" title="Ramón Freire" label="Ramón Freire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="15806" end="15816" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260782" start="16513" end="16520" title="deposition (politics)" label="deposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="16563" end="16573" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q170013" start="16603" end="16611" title="corvette" label="corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="16679" end="16686" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="16752" end="16765" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853969" start="16929" end="16950" title="San Vicente de Cañete" label="San Vicente de Cañete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="16957" end="16961" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="17594" end="17598" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q934157" start="17652" end="17670" title="Battle of Ayacucho" label="Battle of Ayacucho"/>
<link wikidata="Q467959" start="17979" end="17999" title="Andrés de Santa Cruz" label="Andrés de Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q899706" start="18019" end="18046" title="Peru-Bolivian Confederation" label="Peru-Bolivian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q965953" start="18233" end="18247" title="Diego Portales" label="Diego Portales"/>
<link wikidata="Q379638" start="18323" end="18338" title="Agustín Gamarra" label="Agustín Gamarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="18386" end="18390" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18790" end="18824" title="Chilean colonization of the Strait of Magellan" label="an expedition to settle the strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="18889" end="18897" title="tug boat" label="tug boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105037" start="19038" end="19044" title="Callao" label="Callao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="19191" end="19195" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="19419" end="19429" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053309" start="19514" end="19544" title="Cementerio General de Santiago" label="Cementerio General de Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="19590" end="19606" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977666" start="19614" end="19632" title="Llama de la Libertad" label="Altar de la Patria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146881" start="19650" end="19670" title="Palacio de La Moneda" label="Palacio de La Moneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9060973" start="19771" end="19793" title="Plaza de la Ciudadanía" label="Plaza de la Ciudadanía"/>
<link wikidata="Q590080" start="19973" end="19989" title="regions of Chile" label="regions of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133" start="20000" end="20049" title="Libertador General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins Region" label="Libertador General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="20079" end="20089" title="placenames" label="placenames"/>
<link wikidata="Q992143" start="20113" end="20133" title="Villa O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Villa O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="20181" end="20189" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088670" start="20194" end="20244" title="Alameda del Libertador Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702858" start="20264" end="20301" title="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins National Park" label="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853969" start="20318" end="20339" title="San Vicente de Cañete" label="San Vicente de Cañete"/>
<link wikidata="Q487356" start="20577" end="20583" title="Richmond Bridge, London" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500974" start="20587" end="20595" title="Richmond, London" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201922" start="20717" end="20723" title="wreath" label="wreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="20743" end="20754" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q928357" start="20860" end="20876" title="bronze sculpture" label="bronze sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q630780" start="21229" end="21243" title="Merrion Square" label="Merrion Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493933" start="21274" end="21289" title="Garavogue River" label="Garavogue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="21301" end="21306" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="21419" end="21431" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="21602" end="21607" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="21791" end="21811" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José, Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q790492" start="21895" end="21915" title="Avenida da Liberdade" label="Avenida da Liberdade"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="21928" end="21934" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151835" start="22033" end="22048" title="2010 Chile earthquake" label="2010 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q434610" start="22087" end="22099" title="Henry Cowell" label="Henry Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="22300" end="22308" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q719722" start="22314" end="22333" title="O&amp;#x27;Higgins F.C." label="O&amp;#x27;Higgins F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2300740" start="22369" end="22401" title="Order of Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Order of Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q208711" start="22495" end="22507" title="Chilean Navy" label="Chilean Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098848" start="22518" end="22547" title="Chilean ship O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="several vessels in his honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098787" start="22562" end="22571" title="Chilean frigate O&amp;#x27;Higgins (1816)" label="a frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098770" start="22580" end="22590" title="Chilean corvette O&amp;#x27;Higgins (1866)" label="a corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584709" start="22599" end="22618" title="Chilean cruiser O&amp;#x27;Higgins (1897)" label="an armoured cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608583" start="22632" end="22647" title="USS Brooklyn (CL-40)" label="a light cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134853" start="22665" end="22676" title="Chilean submarine O&amp;#x27;Higgins (SS-23)" label="a submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="22758" end="22770" title="Liberty ship" label="Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318477" start="22887" end="22932" title="Base General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins Riquelme" label="Base General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins Riquelme"/>
<link wikidata="Q482490" start="23066" end="23073" title="An Post" label="An Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172893" start="23102" end="23114" title="Correos de Chile" label="CorreosChile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064495" start="23161" end="23177" title="Se-tenant (philately)" label="se-tenant stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q28930" start="23446" end="23487" title="Bust of Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins (Houston)" label="Bust of Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins (Houston)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161210" start="23490" end="23540" title="Bust of Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins (Washington, D.C.)" label="Bust of Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins (Washington, D.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q311447" start="23543" end="23563" title="Francisco de Miranda" label="Francisco de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q472967" start="23566" end="23582" title="History of Chile" label="History of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259522" start="23585" end="23599" title="Irish Chileans" label="Irish Chileans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071671" start="23602" end="23625" title="Irish military diaspora" label="Irish military diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071671" start="23628" end="23643" title="Irish regiments" label="Irish regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q134160" start="23646" end="23664" title="José de San Martín" label="José de San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q734977" start="23667" end="23686" title="José Miguel Carrera" label="José Miguel Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16584207" start="23689" end="23716" title="Juan Albano Pereira Márquez" label="Juan Albano Pereira Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q17274503" start="23719" end="23748" title="Juan de la Cruz y Bernardotte" label="Juan de la Cruz y Bernardotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q434975" start="23751" end="23764" title="Juan Mackenna" label="Juan Mackenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q270145" start="23792" end="23797" title="UNMSM" label="UNMSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071829" start="23801" end="23822" title="O&amp;#x27;Higgins Pioche" label="O&amp;#x27;Higgins Pioche"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="23825" end="23838" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17374044" start="23841" end="23857" title="Talca Foundation" label="Talca Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q943158" start="25392" end="25411" title="Diego Barros Arana" label="Arana, Diego Barros"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303201" wikidata="Q1571002" url="?curid=303201" title="Heckelphone">
<text>The heckelphone () is a musical instrument invented by Wilhelm Heckel and his sons. The idea to create the instrument was initiated by Richard Wagner, who suggested its concept at the occasion of a visit of Wilhelm Heckel in 1879. Introduced in 1904, the heckelphone resembles an oboe but is pitched an octave lower, similar to the bass oboe. In addition to the pitch difference, the heckelphone has a larger bore.

==General characteristics==
The heckelphone is a double reed instrument of the oboe family, but with a wider bore and hence a heavier and more penetrating tone. It is pitched an octave below the oboe and furnished with an additional semitone taking its range down to A. It reads in treble clef sounding one octave lower than written. It was intended to provide a broad oboe-like sound in the middle register of the large orchestrations of the turn of the twentieth century. In the orchestral repertoire it is generally used as the bass of an oboe section incorporating the oboe and the cor anglais (English horn), filling the gap between the oboes and bassoons. 

The heckelphone is approximately in length and heavy enough to require that the instrument rest on the floor, supported by a short metal peg attached to the underside of its bulbous bell (&quot;Liebesfuss&quot;). An alternate second bell, called a &quot;muting&quot; bell, is also available, which serves to muffle the instrument for playing in a small ensemble. This arrangement is unique among double-reed instruments. It is played with a double reed that closely resembles a bassoon reed or large cor anglais reed. 

Smaller piccolo- and terz-heckelphones were developed, pitched respectively in (high) F and E, but few were made, and they were less successful than the baritone-range instrument.

==Musical uses==
The first use of the heckelphone was in Richard Strauss&#x27;s 1905 opera &quot;Salome&quot;. The instrument was subsequently employed in the same composer&#x27;s &quot;Elektra&quot;, as well as &quot;An Alpine Symphony&quot; (though this part frequently calls for notes that are below the range of the heckelphone), &quot;Josephslegende&quot; and &quot;Festliches Präludium&quot;. It was adopted as part of the large orchestral palette of such works as Edgard Varèse&#x27;s &quot;Amériques&quot; (1918–1921) and &quot;Arcana&quot; (1925–1927), George Gershwin &quot;Rhapsody in Blue&quot; (1924) and Carlos Chávez&#x27;s &quot;Sinfonía de Antígona&quot; (1933). Aaron Copland&#x27;s &quot;Short Symphony&quot; (Symphony No. 2, 1931–1933) calls for a player to double on cor anglais and heckelphone, but a cor anglais may be used for the entire part if a heckelphone is unavailable.

The heckelphone was also used by Gordon Jacob in his &quot;Variations on Annie Laurie&quot; which was performed in the first Hoffnung Music Festival Concert at the Royal Festival Hall, London, UK, in 1956. See Annetta Hoffnung&#x27;s biography of Gerard Hoffnung and the sleeve notes to the complete Decca recording of the concert in question.

The heckelphone is often confused with F. Lorée&#x27;s redesigned &quot;hautbois baryton&quot; which was introduced in 1889, the term &quot;bass oboe&quot; being widely used to describe both instruments. Among English composers of the early-20th century there was some vogue for the use of a &quot;bass oboe&quot;, for example in Gustav Holst&#x27;s orchestral suite &quot;The Planets&quot; (1916), as well as in several works of Frederick Delius (&quot;A Mass of Life&quot;, 1904–1905; &quot;Dance Rhapsody No. 1&quot;, 1908), Arnold Bax&#x27;s &quot;Symphony No. 1&quot; (1921), and Havergal Brian&#x27;s &quot;Gothic Symphony&quot; (1919–1927) and &quot;Symphony No. 4 (Das Siegeslied)&quot;. However, it is not in all cases clear which of the two instruments is intended—indeed, it is possible that sometimes the composers themselves were unclear as to the distinction. Strauss, however, mentions both instruments in his 1904 revision of Hector Berlioz&#x27;s &quot;Grand Traité d&#x27;instrumentation et d&#x27;orchestration modernes&quot;, and (like Varèse) specifies the instrument by name in his orchestral scores, so preventing any ambiguity.

The heckelphone has also been employed in chamber music, one of the most notable instances being Hindemith&#x27;s &quot;Trio&quot; for Heckelphone, Viola, and Piano, Op. 47 (1928). Graham Waterhouse wrote &quot;Four Epigraphs after Escher&quot;, Op. 35 (1993) for the same instrumentation.

The heckelphone is also featured in the orchestral music of Finnish composer Kalevi Aho. It is heard in his operas &quot;Insect Life&quot; (1985–1987), &quot;The Book of Secrets&quot; (1998), and &quot;Before We Are All Drowned&quot; (1995/1999), in the Symphonies no. 6 (1979–1980), 11 (1997–1998), 13 (2003), 15 (2009–2010), 17 (2017), and in his Piano Concerto no. 1 (1988–1989), Contrabassoon Concerto (2004–2005) and Oboe Concerto (2007). American composer William P. Perry used the heckelphone as part of a double reed quartet in his score for the film &quot;The Mysterious Stranger&quot;.
There is a part for heckelphone in the concert band piece &quot;Two Sketches From The Orient &quot; by composer Cecil Burleigh, Op. 55 arranged by N. Clifford Page, published by Oliver Ditson Company 1926 and 1928.

==Modern use==

For all its potential in adding weight to the lower registers of the woodwind section, the heckelphone remains a rarity on the orchestral scene—only about 150 heckelphones have been produced, of which around 100 are believed to be extant—and is seldom carried on the regular roster of professional orchestras. Competent players are thus rare. The most prominent American heckelphone players now are Mark Perchanok and Andrew Shreeves, both of New York City. Shreeves plays regularly with the Metropolitan Opera while Perchanok has performed many new and older compositions for the instrument and has recorded with the Paul Winter Consort. Other notable American players include Robert Howe of Massachusetts, most known for recital work, and Arthur Grossman of Seattle, Washington.

The first annual meeting of the North American Heckelphone Society took place on August 6, 2001, at the Riverside Church in New York City, with six heckelphonists in attendance—possibly the first occasion upon which six such instruments had been assembled under one roof. Later meetings have included as many as 14 instruments. The group met annually in New York through 2006.

The centennial of the heckelphone in 2004–5 led to the publication of a number of articles on the instrument in organological journals. Among these were two in the German-language &quot;Rohrblatt&quot; by the Cologne player Georg Otto Klapproth; a comprehensive review article by Robert Howe and Peter Hurd, &quot;The Heckelphone at 100&quot;, in the 2004 &quot;Journal of the American Musical Instrument Society&quot;; and a two-part article by Michael Finkelman in the 2005 issues of &quot;The Double Reed&quot;.

A recent development is the Lupophon (Lupophone), essentially an extended Heckelphone able to play lower notes such as those called for in the Alpine Symphony.

==Selected solo and chamber works==
* Mielenz, Hans Concerto, Op. 60 for heckelphone and orchestra
* Ewazen, Eric Quintet for Heckelphone and String Quartet

==Discography==
* Robert Howe, Heckelphone; Alan Lurie, Michael Dulac, piano (2005). &quot;Centennial Recital for Heckelphone&quot;. Wilbraham Music.
*Paul Winter Consort (1990). &quot;Earth: Voices of a Planet&quot;. Living Music.
*Paul Winter Consort (1995). &quot;The Man Who Planted Trees&quot;. Living Music.
*Paul Winter Consort (2010). &quot;Miho:Journey To The Mountain&quot;. Living Music 
*Winter, Paul (1994). &quot;Prayer for the Wild Things&quot;. Living Music.
*Grossman and others (2002). &quot;Music by Paul Hindemith&quot;. Centaur Records.
*Arthur Grossman, Heckelphone; Lisa Bergman, piano. &quot;Arthur Grossman Plays Heckelphone&quot;. Wilhelm Heckel GmbH.
*Vittorio Piredda, &quot;Voci in guerra&quot; (2018) for heckelphone, harp, cello and photosongs.

==See also==
*Bassoon
*Bass oboe
*Piccolo heckelphone
*Lupophon
*List of musical instruments
*List of woodwind instruments

==References==
==External links==
*Wilhelm Heckel GmbH
*Website dedicated to the heckelphone with an extensive repertoire list, information on individual instruments and players
*Heckelphone page at Contrabass Mania site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1571002" start="4" end="15" title="Heckelphone" label="heckelphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q459149" start="55" end="69" title="Wilhelm Heckel" label="Wilhelm Heckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="135" end="149" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="280" end="284" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="303" end="309" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q29811838" start="465" end="476" title="double reed" label="double reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="495" end="499" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185041" start="1002" end="1028" title="cor anglais" label="cor anglais (English horn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="1058" end="1062" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="1068" end="1075" title="bassoon" label="bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410359" start="1274" end="1284" title="Liebesfuss" label="Liebesfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="1838" end="1853" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="1866" end="1871" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q723407" start="1878" end="1884" title="Salome (opera)" label="Salome"/>
<link wikidata="Q731927" start="1967" end="1974" title="Elektra (opera)" label="Elektra"/>
<link wikidata="Q304423" start="1999" end="2017" title="An Alpine Symphony" label="An Alpine Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288488" start="2121" end="2135" title="Josephslegende" label="Josephslegende"/>
<link wikidata="Q57247" start="2252" end="2265" title="Edgard Varèse" label="Edgard Varèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844852" start="2279" end="2288" title="Amériques" label="Amériques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859924" start="2317" end="2323" title="Arcana (Varèse)" label="Arcana"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="2343" end="2358" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2359" end="2387" title="Rhapsody in Blue#Orchestration" label="&amp;quot;Rhapsody in Blue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q357326" start="2399" end="2412" title="Carlos Chávez" label="Carlos Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484926" start="2426" end="2446" title="Sinfonía de Antígona" label="Sinfonía de Antígona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350215" start="2715" end="2727" title="Gordon Jacob" label="Gordon Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q647390" start="2846" end="2865" title="Royal Festival Hall" label="Royal Festival Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2867" end="2873" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423961" start="3066" end="3074" title="F. Lorée" label="F. Lorée"/>
<link wikidata="Q808215" start="3167" end="3176" title="bass oboe" label="bass oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="3357" end="3369" title="Gustav Holst" label="Gustav Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q303508" start="3400" end="3411" title="The Planets" label="The Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q312698" start="3457" end="3473" title="Frederick Delius" label="Frederick Delius"/>
<link wikidata="Q143198" start="3555" end="3565" title="Arnold Bax" label="Arnold Bax"/>
<link wikidata="Q552046" start="3612" end="3626" title="Havergal Brian" label="Havergal Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661495" start="3640" end="3655" title="Symphony No. 1 (Brian)" label="Gothic Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="3969" end="3983" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836883" start="3997" end="4065" title="Treatise on Instrumentation" label="Grand Traité d&amp;#x27;instrumentation et d&amp;#x27;orchestration modernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="4222" end="4235" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="4277" end="4286" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541977" start="4361" end="4378" title="Graham Waterhouse" label="Graham Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q115816068" start="4391" end="4418" title="Four Epigraphs after Escher" label="Four Epigraphs after Escher"/>
<link wikidata="Q521079" start="4548" end="4558" title="Kalevi Aho" label="Kalevi Aho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4592" end="4603" title="Insect Life" label="Insect Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4629" end="4648" title="The Book of Secrets (Opera)" label="The Book of Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4673" end="4698" title="Before We Are All Drowned" label="Before We Are All Drowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016489" start="4933" end="4949" title="William P. Perry" label="William P. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="5368" end="5376" title="woodwind" label="woodwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="5791" end="5809" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473439" start="5917" end="5936" title="Paul Winter Consort" label="Paul Winter Consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="5992" end="6005" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729463" start="6040" end="6055" title="Arthur Grossman" label="Arthur Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="6059" end="6078" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156586" start="6185" end="6201" title="Riverside Church" label="Riverside Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6205" end="6218" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704822" start="7003" end="7011" title="Lupophon" label="Lupophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q509955" start="7237" end="7249" title="Eric Ewazen" label="Ewazen, Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="8085" end="8092" title="Bassoon" label="Bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q808215" start="8094" end="8103" title="Bass oboe" label="Bass oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190599" start="8105" end="8124" title="Piccolo heckelphone" label="Piccolo heckelphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704822" start="8126" end="8134" title="Lupophon" label="Lupophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033564" start="8136" end="8163" title="List of musical instruments" label="List of musical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645538" start="8165" end="8193" title="List of woodwind instruments" label="List of woodwind instruments"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303202" wikidata="Q4893492" url="?curid=303202" title="Bernard O'Higgins">
<text>Bernard O&#x27;Higgins (?–1564) was an Irish Roman Catholic bishop. He served as the Bishop of Elphin from 1542 to 1564.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4893492" start="0" end="22" title="Bernard O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Bernard O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="39" end="44" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="45" end="59" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917840" start="85" end="101" title="Bishop of Elphin" label="Bishop of Elphin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303214" wikidata="Q438866" url="?curid=303214" title="Tony Knowles">
<text>Tony Knowles may refer to:

* Tony Knowles (politician) (born 1943), former governor of the U.S. state of Alaska
* Tony Knowles (snooker player) (born 1955), English snooker player
* Tony Knowles (chemist), former president, British Columbia Institute of Technology

==See also==
* Tony Knowles Coastal Trail, a bike trail in Anchorage, Alaska named for the American politician</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q438866" start="0" end="12" title="Tony Knowles" label="Tony Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q878712" start="30" end="55" title="Tony Knowles (politician)" label="Tony Knowles (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392959" start="115" end="144" title="Tony Knowles (snooker player)" label="Tony Knowles (snooker player)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822723" start="183" end="205" title="Tony Knowles (chemist)" label="Tony Knowles (chemist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822724" start="282" end="308" title="Tony Knowles Coastal Trail" label="Tony Knowles Coastal Trail"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303215" wikidata="Q456813" url="?curid=303215" title="John Geoghan">
<text>John Joseph &quot;Jack&quot; Geoghan ( ; June4, 1935August23, 2003) was an American serial child rapist and Catholic priest assigned to parishes in the Archdiocese of Boston in Massachusetts. He was reassigned to several parish posts involving interaction with children, even after receiving treatment for pedophilia.

The investigation and prosecution of Geoghan were one of the numerous cases of priests accused of child sexual abuse in a scandal that rocked the archdiocese in the 1990s and 2000s. It led to the resignation of Boston&#x27;s archbishop, Cardinal Bernard Francis Law, on December 13, 2002. Law lost the support of fellow clergy and the laity after it was shown that his response to allegations against dozens of priests consisted of assigning them to different parishes, thus allowing sexual abuse of additional children to take place.

Geoghan was convicted of sexual abuse, laicized, and sentenced in 2002 to nine to ten years in Souza-Baranowski Correctional Center, a maximum security prison. Less than a year later, he was murdered there by Joseph Druce, an inmate serving a life sentence. &quot;The Boston Globe&quot;″s coverage of Geoghan&#x27;s abuse opened the door for public knowledge of the sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic archdiocese of Boston and Catholic churches nationwide in general. This coverage is a key plot element of Tom McCarthy&#x27;s film &quot;Spotlight&quot; (2015).

==Career==
John Joseph Geoghan was born in Boston on June 4, 1935, to an Irish Catholic family. He lost his father when he was only five years old, and was subsequently raised by his maternal uncle, Mark Keohane, who was a Catholic priest within the archdiocese of Boston. Geoghan attended local parochial schools. Intending to become a priest after his father&#x27;s death, he attended Cardinal O&#x27;Connell Seminary. An assessment in 1954 noted him as having a &quot;very pronounced immaturity&quot;. He graduated in 1962 and was ordained.

On February 13, 1962, Geoghan was assigned as an assistant pastor at Blessed Sacrament Parish in Saugus, Massachusetts. That December, he talked a man out of committing suicide from jumping off the Mystic River Bridge. While Geoghan was assigned to Blessed Sacrament, Anthony Benzevich allegedly told church officials that the junior priest was observed bringing boys into his bedroom. Benzevich would later deny this allegation. In 1998, Benzevich told reporters he was branded as a troublemaker for reporting Geoghan, and that church officials hinted that he might be sent to Peru if he persisted. In 1995 Geoghan admitted to having molested four boys during his tenure at Blessed Sacrament.

Geoghan was assigned to St. Bernard&#x27;s Parish in Concord starting on September 22, 1966. He was transferred after seven months there; church records offered no explanation for his reassignment. On April 20, 1967, Geoghan was assigned to St. Paul&#x27;s Parish in Hingham. Around 1968, a man complained to church authorities that he had caught Geoghan molesting his son. As a result, Geoghan was sent to the Seton Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, for treatment for his pedophilia. In the early 1970s, parishioner Joanne Mueller accused Geoghan of molesting her four young sons. Mueller has said that she informed Paul E. Miceli and he asked her to keep quiet. Miceli disputes her account. The church later reached a settlement with Mueller.

Geoghan&#x27;s next assignment was at St. Andrew&#x27;s Parish in Boston&#x27;s Jamaica Plain neighborhood, starting on June 4, 1974. On February 9, 1980, John E. Thomas told Bishop Thomas Vose Daily that Geoghan admitted to molesting seven boys. Daily called Geoghan and told him to go home. Geoghan admitted to the abuse, but said that he did &quot;not feel it serious or a pastoral problem.&quot; He was placed on sick leave three days later and ordered by Cardinal Humberto Medeiros to undergo counseling. Under the care of doctors Robert Mullins and John H. Brennan, Geoghan underwent psychoanalysis and psychotherapy.

On February 25, 1981, Geoghan returned to pastoral work at St. Brendan&#x27;s Parish in Dorchester. While there, he allegedly raped and fondled a boy. In 1982 the family of seven of Geoghan&#x27;s victims complained to Bishop Daily that Geoghan had arranged to meet one of his victims at an ice cream shop in Jamaica Plain and was at the time in the company of another boy. On September 18, 1984, Cardinal Bernard Francis Law, the new Archbishop of Boston, removed Geoghan from the parish after complaints that he was molesting children.

Law assigned Geoghan to St. Julia&#x27;s Parish in Weston on November 13, 1984. He was put in charge of three youth groups, including altar boys. On December 7, auxiliary bishop John Michael D&#x27;Arcy wrote to Law complaining about Geoghan&#x27;s assignment to St. Julia&#x27;s because of his &quot;history of homosexual involvement with young boys&quot;. That same month, Mullins wrote that Geoghan had &quot;fully recovered&quot;, and Brennan stated that there was no need for restrictions on his work as a priest.

In 1986 new allegations of sexual abuse were made against Geoghan. From April 3–12, 1989, he was treated at the Saint Luke Institute in Silver Spring, Maryland, where he was diagnosed with homosexual pedophilia. On April 28, 1989, auxiliary bishop Robert Joseph Banks ordered Geoghan to leave the ministry. Instead, Geoghan was placed on sick leave on May 24 and, between August 10 to November 4, was treated at The Institute of Living in Hartford, Connecticut. Upon his release, Geoghan was described as &quot;moderately improved&quot;. Institute officials recommended that he return to assignment. Banks was concerned about the conclusions of the institute&#x27;s discharge summary. On December 13, the institute sent Banks a letter explaining the discharge summary, stating that, &quot;The probability he [Geoghan] would act out again is quite low. However, we could not guarantee that it would not re-occur.&quot; Psychiatrists concluded that Geoghan had &quot;atypical pedophilia in remission&quot; and a &quot;mixed personality disorder with obsessive-compulsive, histrionic and narcissistic features&quot; but decided he could be safely reassigned.

On November 28, 1990, Banks recommended that Geoghan return to the parish, but left the decision up to Cardinal Law and another bishop. On October 23, 1991, the church received a complaint about Geoghan &quot;proselytizing&quot; with a boy at a pool.

==Retirement==
In 1993, Geoghan retired from active ministry at the age of 58. He moved into the Regina Cleri residence for retired priests. Three years later, after more allegations surfaced against him, he spent several months in therapy in the Southdown Institute in Ontario, Canada.

==Sexual abuse charges==
Over a 30-year career in six parishes, Geoghan was accused of sexual abuse involving more than 130 boys. He was prosecuted in Cambridge for charges of molestation that took place in 1991. Geoghan was defrocked in 1998 by Pope John Paul II. He was found guilty on February 21, 2002, of indecent assault and battery for grabbing the buttocks of a 10-year-old boy in a swimming pool at the Waltham Boys and Girls Club in 1991, and was sentenced to nine to ten years in prison.

After initially agreeing to a $30 million settlement with 86 of Geoghan&#x27;s victims, the Boston archdiocese pulled out of it, finally settling with them for $10 million.

Boston&#x27;s Suffolk County prosecuted Geoghan in two other sexual abuse cases. One case was dropped without prejudice when the alleged victim decided not to testify. In the second case, a judge dismissed the conviction of Geoghan in two rapes, after hotly contested arguments, because the statute of limitations had run out. The Commonwealth&#x27;s appeal of that ruling was active at the time of Geoghan&#x27;s death. Remaining charges of indecent assault in that case were still pending prosecution.

==Murder==

On August 23, 2003, while in protective custody at the maximum security Souza-Baranowski Correctional Center in Lancaster, Geoghan was strangled and stomped to death in his cell by inmate Joseph Lee Druce (born Darrin Ernest Smiledge; April 15, 1965). Druce was serving a sentence of life without the possibility of parole for killing a man who allegedly made sexual advances toward him.

Geoghan was trapped in his cell by Druce, who jammed the door closed so Correction Officers could not reach him. Druce then strangled and stomped Geoghan to death. An autopsy revealed Geoghan&#x27;s cause of death to be &quot;ligature strangulation and blunt chest trauma.&quot;

Druce was said to have planned the murder of Geoghan for more than a month, considering him a &quot;prize&quot;. Druce was sexually abused in a boarding school as a child. Also, since Geoghan had taught another inmate how to sexually abuse children, Druce&#x27;s crimes were partly due to the fact that he felt he had to take revenge on all child sexual abusers. The press raised questions about prison officials&#x27; judgment in placing these two men in the same unit for protective custody. In addition, they had been warned by an inmate that Druce intended to attack Geoghan. It was noted while two officers are normally stationed in the unit where Geoghan and Druce were being held, there was only one officer in the unit at the time – one had left temporarily to escort another inmate to a medical station. Union officials had noted there were staffing cuts previously at the prison, which they feel led to the prison being a more dangerous and volatile place. It has also been suggested Druce had been offered money to kill Geoghan, or Druce thought he would gain prestige from fellow prisoners for doing so.

A Worcester jury found Druce guilty of first-degree murder on January 25, 2006, after the jury rejected his insanity defense. During the trial Druce was seen with a black eye he received from an individual who surprised him in his cell. The man who had surprised Druce was reported to have been wearing correction officers&#x27; pants, suggesting a reprisal by prison staff for the embarrassment surrounding Geoghan&#x27;s murder. Druce was sentenced a second time to life in prison without the possibility of parole.

In June 2007, &quot;The Boston Herald&quot; received a handwritten letter signed &quot;Joseph Lee Druce&quot;, stating &quot;The truth about Officer involvement in John Geogan&#x27;s (sic) death&quot;, along with an address for a YouTube video. The address contained a video taken by security cameras inside of Souza-Baranowski Correctional Center, made during the murder. The 10-minute video shows the attempts made by correctional officers to open the cell door (as many as five pulling at one time) along with videos showing resuscitation efforts on Geoghan by emergency personnel. Inmates at Souza-Baranowski do not have Internet access. Department of Correction officials investigated who posted the video, as it was from an internal security camera.

Geoghan was buried in Holyhood Cemetery in Brookline, Massachusetts, on August 28, 2003.

==Effects of the Geoghan case on other church leaders==

===Robert Joseph Banks===
Robert Joseph Banks, then an auxiliary bishop in Boston, had recommended in 1989 that Geoghan remain as a parish priest despite receiving an assessment that he would likely continue to act on his pedophilia. Banks was appointed bishop of the Diocese of Green Bay in 1990. He retired in 2003, having reached the church&#x27;s mandatory retirement age of 75 years. Banks remains Bishop Emeritus of Green Bay.

===John Michael D&#x27;Arcy===
John Michael D&#x27;Arcy, who had written an unheeded letter of warning to Cardinal Law about Geoghan&#x27;s behavior, was transferred from Boston to Indiana on February 26, 1985, and ended his career as bishop of the Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend. D&#x27;Arcy retired in 2009 and died in 2013.

===Bernard Francis Law===
After Cardinal Law resigned as Boston&#x27;s archbishop in December 2002, he relocated to Rome in 2004 where he served as archpriest of the Basilica of St. Mary Major, the largest Catholic Marian church in Rome. It was &quot;commonly believed that he would live out his retirement in Rome&quot; after he retired at age 80 in 2011. Law died in Rome on December 20, 2017.

==In popular culture==
Canadian punk-rock band Billy Talent&#x27;s song &quot;Devil in a Midnight Mass&quot; from the album &quot;Billy Talent II&quot; (2006) addresses Geoghan&#x27;s story from a victim&#x27;s perspective. Bob Rivers recorded a parody of &quot;Keep Your Hands to Yourself&quot;, originally by The Georgia Satellites, about Geoghan.

The 2015 film &quot;Spotlight&quot; depicts the &quot;Boston Globe&quot; investigation into the Boston Archdiocese, spurred by Geoghan&#x27;s trial that would lead to his eventual imprisonment. Geoghan is briefly depicted in the film in a scene taking place in 1976 at a Boston police station, played by an uncredited actor.

==See also==
*Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
*&quot;Crimen sollicitationis&quot;
*Pontifical secret
*&quot;Deliver Us from Evil&quot; (2006 film)
*&quot;Sex Crimes and the Vatican&quot; (&quot;Panorama&quot; documentary episode)
*Barbara Blaine, founder of SNAP (Survivors Network for those Abused by Priests)
*John Jay Report

==References==
==External links==
*Diocesan and court records relating to John Geoghan
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q456813" start="0" end="11" title="John Geoghan" label="John Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q456813" start="18" end="22" title="John Geoghan" label="Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q456813" start="29" end="36" title="John Geoghan" label="Geoghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="91" end="103" title="child rapist" label="child rapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="108" end="116" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="117" end="123" title="Priesthood in the Catholic Church" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q143028" start="152" end="173" title="Archdiocese of Boston" label="Archdiocese of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="177" end="190" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137449" start="199" end="233" title="Parish transfers of abusive Catholic priests" label="reassigned to several parish posts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8388" start="306" end="316" title="pedophilia" label="pedophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="417" end="435" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="544" end="554" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="556" end="564" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q384038" start="565" end="584" title="Bernard Francis Law" label="Bernard Francis Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959693" start="894" end="902" title="Loss of clerical state (Catholic Church)" label="laicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571553" start="950" end="986" title="Souza-Baranowski Correctional Center" label="Souza-Baranowski Correctional Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876598" start="990" end="1013" title="maximum security prison" label="maximum security prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q456813" start="1064" end="1076" title="Joseph Druce" label="Joseph Druce"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="1119" end="1135" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458730" start="1221" end="1279" title="sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic archdiocese of Boston" label="sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic archdiocese of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191177" start="1284" end="1312" title="sexual abuse by priests in the United States" label="Catholic churches nationwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q514527" start="1364" end="1376" title="Tom McCarthy (director)" label="Tom McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154496" start="1395" end="1404" title="Spotlight (film)" label="Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1463" end="1469" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="1493" end="1507" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11318286" start="1716" end="1732" title="parochial school" label="parochial school"/>
<link wikidata="Q257438" start="2062" end="2083" title="Saugus, Massachusetts" label="Saugus, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="2134" end="2141" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q151947" start="2163" end="2182" title="Tobin Bridge" label="Mystic River Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="2600" end="2608" title="child molestation" label="molested"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="2713" end="2720" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305817" start="2927" end="2934" title="Hingham, Massachusetts" label="Hingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="3090" end="3099" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="3101" end="3109" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8388" start="3133" end="3143" title="pedophilia" label="pedophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167412" start="3380" end="3390" title="settlement (law)" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3444" end="3468" title="Forest Hills, Boston#St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Parish" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q985993" start="3486" end="3499" title="Jamaica Plain" label="Jamaica Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="3581" end="3587" title="Bishop in the Catholic Church" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q642732" start="3588" end="3605" title="Thomas Vose Daily" label="Thomas Vose Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="3866" end="3874" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q976773" start="3875" end="3892" title="Humberto Medeiros" label="Humberto Medeiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="3996" end="4010" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="4015" end="4028" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024037" start="4119" end="4129" title="Dorchester, Boston" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="4157" end="4161" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q384038" start="4437" end="4456" title="Bernard Francis Law" label="Bernard Francis Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q143028" start="4466" end="4486" title="Archbishop of Boston" label="Archbishop of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565620" start="4621" end="4627" title="Weston, Massachusetts" label="Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701081" start="4748" end="4772" title="John Michael D&amp;#x27;Arcy" label="John Michael D&amp;#x27;Arcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="4882" end="4892" title="homosexual" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401751" start="5202" end="5222" title="Saint Luke Institute" label="Saint Luke Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="5226" end="5249" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157746" start="5338" end="5357" title="Robert Joseph Banks" label="Robert Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742201" start="5502" end="5525" title="The Institute of Living" label="The Institute of Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="5529" end="5537" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="5539" end="5550" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540067" start="6106" end="6132" title="mixed personality disorder" label="mixed personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q231578" start="6138" end="6158" title="obsessive-compulsive personality disorder" label="obsessive-compulsive"/>
<link wikidata="Q845787" start="6160" end="6170" title="histrionic personality disorder" label="histrionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060310" start="6175" end="6187" title="narcissistic personality disorder" label="narcissistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="6769" end="6784" title="Ontario" label="Ontario, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="6938" end="6947" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800765" start="7012" end="7021" title="defrocked" label="defrocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="7033" end="7050" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="7106" end="7113" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796687" start="7118" end="7125" title="Battery (crime)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q54072" start="7475" end="7489" title="Suffolk County, Massachusetts" label="Suffolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q109701697" start="7563" end="7580" title="without prejudice" label="without prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="7752" end="7774" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="7812" end="7818" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400323" start="8007" end="8025" title="protective custody" label="protective custody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427213" start="8090" end="8099" title="Lancaster, Massachusetts" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992231" start="8262" end="8300" title="Whole life tariff" label="life without the possibility of parole"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="9803" end="9822" title="first-degree murder" label="first-degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="9872" end="9888" title="insanity defense" label="insanity defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="10303" end="10320" title="The Boston Herald" label="The Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571553" start="10594" end="10630" title="Souza-Baranowski Correctional Center" label="Souza-Baranowski Correctional Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055969" start="10908" end="10923" title="internet in prisons" label="Internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887020" start="11062" end="11079" title="Holyhood Cemetery" label="Holyhood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142" start="11083" end="11107" title="Brookline, Massachusetts" label="Brookline, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q869234" start="11455" end="11475" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Green Bay" label="Diocese of Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="11802" end="11809" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q868925" start="11870" end="11902" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend" label="Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="12067" end="12071" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190552" start="12099" end="12109" title="archpriest" label="archpriest"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="12117" end="12143" title="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Basilica of St. Mary Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245071" start="12157" end="12179" title="Catholic Marian church buildings" label="Catholic Marian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q154815" start="12395" end="12407" title="Billy Talent" label="Billy Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267336" start="12426" end="12450" title="Devil in a Midnight Mass" label="Devil in a Midnight Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q863256" start="12478" end="12493" title="Billy Talent II" label="Billy Talent II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933798" start="12572" end="12582" title="Bob Rivers" label="Bob Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017587" start="12610" end="12637" title="Keep Your Hands to Yourself" label="Keep Your Hands to Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683782" start="12659" end="12681" title="The Georgia Satellites" label="The Georgia Satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154496" start="12719" end="12728" title="Spotlight (film)" label="Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q573565" start="13039" end="13073" title="Catholic Church sexual abuse cases" label="Catholic Church sexual abuse cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140035" start="13081" end="13103" title="Crimen sollicitationis" label="Crimen sollicitationis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954094" start="13111" end="13128" title="Pontifical secret" label="Pontifical secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184339" start="13130" end="13174" title="Deliver Us from Evil (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;Deliver Us from Evil&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q928485" start="13182" end="13208" title="Sex Crimes and the Vatican" label="Sex Crimes and the Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858751" start="13259" end="13273" title="Barbara Blaine" label="Barbara Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067260" start="13340" end="13355" title="John Jay Report" label="John Jay Report"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303218" wikidata="Q375102" url="?curid=303218" title="Rear-end collision">
<text>A rear-end collision, often called rear-ending or, in the UK, a shunt, occurs when a forward-moving vehicle crashes into the back of another vehicle (often stationary) in front of it. Similarly, rear-end rail collisions occur when a train runs into the end of a preceding train on the same track. Common factors contributing to rear-end collisions include driver inattention or distraction, tailgating, panic stops, brake checking and reduced traction due to wet weather or worn pavement.

According to the National Highway Safety Administration (NHTSA), rear-end collisions account for 7.5% of fatal automobile collisions. However, they account for 29% of all automobile accidents, making them one of the most frequent types of automobile accidents in the United States.

==Overview==
Typical scenarios for rear-ends are a sudden deceleration by the first car (for example, to avoid someone crossing the street) so that the driver behind it does not have time to brake and collides with it. Alternatively, the following car may accelerate more rapidly than the leading one (for example, leaving an intersection), resulting in a collision.

Generally, if two vehicles have similar physical structures, crashing into another car is equivalent to crashing into a rigid immovable surface (like a wall) at half of the closing speed. This means that rear-ending a stationary car while travelling at 50 km/h (30 mph) is equivalent, in terms of deceleration, to crashing into a wall at 25 km/h (15 mph). The same is true for the vehicle crashed into. However, if one of the vehicles is significantly more rigid (e.g. a small car hits the rear of a heavy truck) then the deceleration is more typically reflected by the full closing speed for the less rigid vehicle.

A typical medical consequence of rear-ends, even in collisions at moderate speed, is whiplash. In more severe cases, permanent injuries such as herniation may occur. The rearmost passengers in minivans, benefiting little from the short rear crumple zone, are more likely to be injured or killed.

For purposes of insurance and policing, the driver of the car that rear-ends the other car is almost always considered at fault due to following too closely, or lack of attention. An exception is if the rear-ended vehicle is in reverse gear. If the driver of the car that was rear-ended files a claim against the driver who hit them, the second driver could be responsible for all damages to the other driver&#x27;s car. According to data from the NHTSA, the percentage of rear-end accidents in all crashes is 23–30%.

The Ford Pinto received widespread concern when it was alleged that a design flaw could cause fuel-fed fires in rear-end collisions.

Recent developments in automated safety systems have reduced the number of rear-end collisions.

==See also==

*Following distance
*Road collision types
*Tailgating

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375102" start="2" end="20" title="Rear-end collision" label="rear-end collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q375102" start="35" end="46" title="Rear-end collision" label="rear-ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q375102" start="64" end="69" title="Rear-end collision" label="shunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="100" end="107" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128410" start="204" end="219" title="classification of railway accidents" label="rail collisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="233" end="238" title="train" label="train"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="290" end="295" title="railway track" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030694" start="391" end="401" title="tailgating" label="tailgating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956034" start="416" end="430" title="brake checking" label="brake checking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="474" end="487" title="road surface#Surface deterioration" label="worn pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="661" end="680" title="automobile accident" label="automobile accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="757" end="770" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="831" end="843" title="deceleration" label="deceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="1029" end="1039" title="accelerate" label="accelerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147223" start="1844" end="1852" title="Whiplash (medicine)" label="whiplash"/>
<link wikidata="Q697117" start="1903" end="1913" title="Spinal disc herniation" label="herniation"/>
<link wikidata="Q223189" start="1952" end="1960" title="minivans" label="minivans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776962" start="2000" end="2012" title="crumple zone" label="crumple zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="2072" end="2081" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="2086" end="2094" title="policing" label="policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="2284" end="2291" title="Transmission (mechanics)" label="reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="2437" end="2444" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="2504" end="2509" title="NHTSA" label="NHTSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059377" start="2579" end="2589" title="Ford Pinto" label="Ford Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q124639186" start="2821" end="2839" title="Following distance" label="Following distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339478" start="2841" end="2861" title="Road collision types" label="Road collision types"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030694" start="2863" end="2873" title="Tailgating" label="Tailgating"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303222" wikidata="Q57434" url="?curid=303222" title="Václav Klaus">
<text>Václav Klaus (; born 19 June 1941) is a Czech economist and politician who served as the second president of the Czech Republic from 2003 to 2013. From July 1992 until the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in January 1993, he served as the second and last prime minister of the Czech Republic while it was a federal subject of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic, and then as the first prime minister of the newly independent Czech Republic from 1993 to 1998.

During the Communist era, Klaus worked as a bank clerk and forecaster. After the fall of Communism in November 1989, he became the Minister of Finance in the &quot;government of national unity&quot;. In 1991, Klaus was the principal co-founder of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS). He was prime minister from 1992 to 1997, and from January to February 1993 he held certain powers of the Presidency.

His government fell in the autumn of 1997; after the elections in the spring of 1998, he became the president of the Chamber of Deputies (1998–2002). After ODS lost the parliamentary elections of 2002, he withdrew from politics briefly, before being elected President of the Czech Republic in February 2003. He was re-elected in 2008 for a second five-year term. His presidency was marked by many controversies over his strong opinions on issues ranging from global warming denial to Euroscepticism, and a wide-ranging amnesty declared in his last months of office, triggering his indictment by the Czech Senate on charges of high treason.

Klaus left active politics after his second presidential term ended in March 2013 but continues to comment on domestic and foreign policy issues. His political views have been referred to as &quot;Klausism&quot;.

==Early life==
Klaus was born in Prague during the Nazi occupation, and grew up in the large, then middle-class neighbourhood of Vinohrady. Klaus has claimed that he helped build barricades during the Prague uprising in May 1945, at the age of three.

Klaus studied Economics of Foreign Trade at the University of Economics, Prague, graduating in 1963. He also spent some time at universities in Italy (1966) and at Cornell University in the United States in 1969. He then pursued a postgraduate academic career at the State Institute of Economics of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, which, according to his autobiography, he was forced to leave in 1970.

Soon after that he was employed by the Czechoslovak State Bank, where he held various staff positions from 1971 to 1986, as well as working abroad in various Soviet-aligned countries, usually considered a privilege at the time. In 1987, Klaus joined the Institute for Prognostics of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences.

==Rise to premiership==
Klaus entered Czechoslovak politics during the Velvet Revolution in 1989, during the second week of the political uprising, when he offered his services as an economic advisor to the Civic Forum, whose aim was to unify the anti-government movements in Czechoslovakia and overthrow the Communist regime. Klaus became Czechoslovakia&#x27;s Minister of Finance in the &quot;government of national unity&quot; on 10 December 1989.

In October 1990, Klaus was elected chairman of the Civic Forum. Two months later, he led supporters of a free-market economy into the break-away Civic Democratic Party ( or ODS). Following a period of strong economic growth, Klaus led ODS to the largest vote share (29.73%) in Czech legislative elections on 5–6 June 1992. ODS emerged as by far the largest party, with 76 seats, and Klaus thus became the first democratically elected Prime Minister of the Czech Republic.

ODS also performed strongly in the Czechoslovak federal election held the same day, becoming the largest party with 48 seats, double the number of the runners-up, the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS). However, ODS would still have needed support from HZDS to form a government. When he began coalition talks with HZDS leader Vladimir Meciar, Klaus told Meciar that unless HZDS was willing to agree to a tighter federation, the only alternative was for the Czechs and Slovaks to form independent nations. As Meciar was unwilling to agree to the former option, on 23 July the two leaders agreed to dissolve Czechoslovakia, to take effect on 1 January 1993.

Klaus led ODS to be the party with the largest vote share (29.62%) in the 1996 legislative elections, and remained prime minister in a minority government. However, towards the end of 1997 he was forced to step down as prime minister by opponents in his party in connection with accusations of funding irregularities in the ODS.

During his term as prime minister, President Václav Havel heavily criticized Klaus&#x27; policy of voucher privatization of previously state-owned enterprises. The policy was designed to bring about a speedy transition from command economy to free-market economy, but Havel cited the voucher privatization as a cause of the country&#x27;s subsequent economic problems.

==Leader of the opposition (1997–2002)==
At a party congress in late 1997, Klaus was re-elected as chairman of ODS by 227 votes to 72 votes. The defeated faction subsequently left ODS, and in early 1998 established a new party, the Freedom Union (), with President Havel&#x27;s support.

ODS finished second in early elections in 1998, behind the Czech Social Democratic Party (ČSSD). Either party could have formed a majority with the support of other parties, but Freedom Union chairman Jan Ruml, despite his animosity to Klaus, refused to support ČSSD. Instead, Klaus negotiated the &quot;Opposition Agreement&quot; () with ČSSD chairman Miloš Zeman, his long-time political adversary. During the following legislative period, ODS allowed Zeman&#x27;s ČSSD to rule with a minority government, in exchange for a number of parliamentary posts, including the post of the President of the Chamber of Deputies, occupied by Klaus himself. The Opposition Agreement led to public demonstrations, particularly against an attempt to regulate Czech Television. This led Zeman to announce that he would not stand again for the post of prime minister.

In the elections of June 2002, ODS was again defeated by ČSSD under their new leader Vladimír Špidla, who had previously opposed the Opposition Agreement, and instead formed a coalition with centrist parties. After a long period of deliberation, and even though ODS won Senate elections in October 2002, Klaus did not run for re-election as party chairman at the December ODS congress. However, he was made honorary chairman of the party. Against his declared preference, Klaus was succeeded as party leader by Mirek Topolánek.

==Presidency (2003–2013)==

Having lost two general elections in a row, Klaus announced his intention to step down from the leadership and run for president to succeed his political opponent Václav Havel. The governing coalition was unable to agree on a common candidate to oppose him.

Klaus was elected President of the Czech Republic on 28 February 2003, in the third round of the election, in which both chambers vote together at a joint session of the Parliament by secret ballot between the two top candidates. He won with a majority of 142 votes out of 281. It was widely reported that Klaus won due to the support of Communist Members of Parliament, support which his opponent, Jan Sokol, had publicly refused to accept. Klaus denied that he owed the Communists any debt for his election.

===Use of vetoes===
Although Klaus regularly criticized Václav Havel for using his Presidential Veto powers to block laws and promised restraint, he used his veto more frequently than Havel. He vetoed the Anti-Discrimination Law passed by parliament in 2008, describing it as a dangerous threat to personal freedoms. He also vetoed a bill implementing the European Union&#x27;s Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation, and Restriction of Chemicals policy, saying it was a burden for private businesses.

===Euroscepticism===

Klaus&#x27; Euroscepticism, alongside his scepticism of human impact on the environment and climate change, formed the cornerstones of his policy as president. He expressed the opinion that accession to the European Union would mean a significant reduction of Czech sovereignty, and did not endorse either side in the 2003 accession referendum, in which 77% voted yes.
Klaus has alleged a gradual loss of sovereignty for member states in favour of the EU. He promoted the publication of a text by the Irish Eurosceptic Anthony Coughlan. In 2005 Klaus called for the EU to be &quot;scrapped&quot; and replaced by a free trade area to be called the &quot;Organisation of European States&quot;. He also claimed that the EU as an institution undermines freedom, calling the EU &quot;as big a threat to freedom as the Soviet Union was&quot;. In 2005 he remarked to a group of visiting politicians from the United States that the EU was a &quot;failed and bankrupt entity&quot;.
In November 2008, during a stay in Ireland after a state visit, Klaus held a joint press conference with Declan Ganley, head of Libertas, which was at that time campaigning for a &quot;no&quot; vote in a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. Members of the Irish government called this an &quot;inappropriate intervention&quot;, and &quot;unusual and disappointing&quot;.

====European Parliament====

On 5 December 2008, members of the Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament visited the Czech Republic prior to the start of the Czech presidency of the European Union. They were invited by Václav Klaus to meet him at Prague Castle. The chairman of Green Group, Daniel Cohn-Bendit, brought a European flag and presented it to Klaus. Cohn-Bendit also said that he &quot;did not care about Klaus&#x27; opinions on the Lisbon Treaty, that Klaus would simply have to sign it&quot;. This was criticised by some Czech commentators as &quot;undue interference in Czech affairs&quot;.

At the same meeting, Irish MEP Brian Crowley told Klaus that the Irish people wanted ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon and were &quot;insulted&quot; by Klaus&#x27; association with Declan Ganley and Libertas. Klaus responded that &quot;the biggest insult to the Irish people is not to accept the results of the Irish referendum&quot;. Crowley replied, &quot;You will not tell me what the Irish think. As an Irishman, I know it best&quot;. British Eurosceptic journalist Christopher Booker wrote that the meeting &quot;confirms the inability of the Euro-elite to accept that anyone holds views different from their own&quot;.

On 19 February 2009, Klaus made a speech to the European Parliament where he criticized what he perceived as the European Union&#x27;s lack of democracy, continuing integration and economic policies:

The present decision-making system of the European Union is different from a classic parliamentary democracy, tested and proven by history. In a normal parliamentary system, part of the MPs support the government and part support the opposition. In the European Parliament, this arrangement has been missing. Here, only one single alternative is being promoted, and those who dare think about a different option are labelled as enemies of European integration... There is also a great distance (not only in a geographical sense) between citizens and Union representatives, which is much greater than is the case inside the member countries. This distance is often described as the democratic deficit, the loss of democratic accountability, the decision-making of the unelected – but selected – ones, as bureaucratisation of decision-making etc. The proposals to change the current state of affairs – included in the rejected European Constitution or in the not much different Lisbon Treaty – would make this defect even worse. Since there is no European demos – and no European nation – this defect cannot be solved by strengthening the role of the European Parliament, either.

After this point was made, a number of MEPs walked out of the chamber. Klaus continued:

I fear that the attempts to speed up and deepen integration and to move decisions about the lives of the citizens of the member countries up to the European level can have effects that will endanger all the positive things achieved in Europe in the last half a century... Let us not allow a situation where the citizens of member countries would live their lives with a resigned feeling that the EU project is not their own; that it is developing differently than they would wish, that they are only forced to accept it. We would very easily and very soon slip back to the times that we hoped belonged to history.

====Eurozone====
Klaus was a frequent critic of centrally implemented economic policies in the European Union, and of the adoption of the Euro as the common currency of the eurozone countries. Around the 10th anniversary of the euro in 2008 he wrote in the &quot;Financial Times&quot; that &quot;in practice, the existence of the euro has shown that forcing an economically disparate Europe into a homogeneous entity through a political decision is political engineering par excellence, far from beneficial for all countries concerned&quot;.

====Signing the Lisbon treaty====
Klaus long refused to sign the Treaty of Lisbon, and was the last head of state in the EU to provide a signature. Other European leaders ignored his reluctance, stating that they would not consent to being &quot;held hostage&quot; by the Czech President. The Czech Prime Minister Jan Fischer, however, said that Klaus would eventually sign the treaty, saying: &quot;There is no reason for anxiety in Europe. The question is not Yes or No, it is only when&quot;.

In November 2008 Klaus said in an interview with the Czech Television that if he was the only person standing in the way of a treaty that all others agreed upon, he would not block it. Václav Klaus signed the Treaty of Lisbon on 3 November 2009. However he never signed the addition to the Lisbon Treaty, the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), which was eventually signed by his successor as president, Miloš Zeman.

===Views on Russia===
Klaus has sought cooperation with Russia on issues including energy policy.

In the 1990s, Klaus promoted renewed oil and gas agreements between the Czech Republic and Russia, and opposed Czech attempts to develop other energy sources, including the construction of a pipeline between the Czech Republic and Germany. According to former Czech secret service directors, he was warned by the secret service of Russian organized crime spreading into the Czech economy. In one scheme, oil was imported to the Czech Republic as heating oil and re-sold as diesel, creating huge profits for Russian businessman Semion Mogilevich, alleged to be a key figure in the Russian mafia.

In March 2006, Klaus was described by &quot;The Economist&quot; as one of Russian President Vladimir Putin&#x27;s &quot;warmest admirers abroad&quot;. Klaus was awarded the 2007 Pushkin Medal by Putin for the promotion of Russian culture. It was suggested that this was partly due to his use of the Russian language when speaking to Putin and Russian diplomats. Klaus said that in relations with Russia there have been &quot;challenges and successes, tremendous successes&quot;.

On the other hand, in a May 2009 interview with &quot;Lidové noviny&quot;, Klaus said that Russia was not a threat, but was still a big, strong and ambitious country, of which the Czech authorities should beware more than countries like Estonia and Lithuania should.

===Kosovo===
Klaus criticised NATO bombing of Yugoslavia during the Kosovo War, and was subsequently a frequent critic of the unilateral Kosovo declaration of independence. During a visit to Slovakia in March 2008, Klaus stated his disagreement with the argument that Kosovo was an exceptional case, and suggested that the precedent set by the recognition of Kosovo would open a &quot;Pandora&#x27;s box&quot; in Europe, leading to disastrous consequences. He compared the situation of Serbia to the 1938 Munich Agreement. When Serbia recalled its ambassador in protest at the Czech government&#x27;s recognition of Kosovo, Klaus invited the Serbian ambassador to Prague Castle for a friendly farewell. During a visit to Serbia in January 2011, Klaus stated that as long as he was president the Czech Republic would not appoint an ambassador to Kosovo.

===Re-election===

Unlike previous Czech presidential elections, the election of 2008 was conducted using on the record voting rather than a secret ballot. This change was demanded by several Czech political parties after the previous elections in 2003, but opposed by Klaus&#x27; ODS, which, having strengthened since 2003, had a comfortable majority in the Senate on its own, and only needed to secure a few votes in the House for the third round.

Klaus&#x27; opponent was the former émigré, naturalized United States citizen and University of Michigan economics professor Jan Švejnar. He was nominated by the Green Party as a pro-EU moderate candidate, and also gained the support of the leading opposition Social Democratic Party, a small number of deputies and senators of KDU-ČSL and some independent Senators. The first ballot on 8–9 February 2008 resulted in no winner. Švejnar won the Chamber of Deputies, but Klaus led in the assembly as a whole and only just failed to achieve the required majority.

The second ballot on 15 February 2008 included a new candidate MEP Jana Bobošíková, nominated by the Communist Party. However, without any further support, she withdrew her candidacy before the election, and the second round ended similarly to the previous one, with Klaus remaining on 141 votes. Therefore, in the third round, where only a simple majority of all legislators present from both houses was required, Klaus won by one vote, with Švejnar receiving 111 votes, and the 29 Communists voting for neither.

Klaus&#x27;s first term as president concluded on 7 March 2008, and he took his oath for the second term on the same day so as to avoid an interim without a president and allow Parliament to come to a joint session earlier. He therefore lost the day of overlap, meaning his second term ended on 6 March 2013.

===Resignation as honorary ODS chairman===
Václav Klaus resigned as Honorary Chairman of ODS at the party congress on 6 December 2008. The following day his ally Pavel Bém, the Mayor of Prague, lost a vote for the post of ODS chairman against Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek, by 284 votes to 162.

===Chile pen incident===

In April 2011, Klaus was seen taking a pen during a state visit to Chile. The alleged theft, caught on television cameras, was widely reported around the world. According to Klaus, the incident was exaggerated, as official pens are normally free to be taken by official visitors, including in this case.

A spokeswoman for Chilean President Sebastián Piñera said the Chilean President&#x27;s guests were free to take the pens from meetings.

===Australian Parliament House incident===
In July 2011, President Klaus visited Canberra, Australia. The visit was sponsored by the conservative Australian think tank, the Centre for Independent Studies, and so was not afforded the diplomatic protocol of an official visit. While in Canberra Klaus was invited to an interview with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation in their Parliament House studios. On his arrival Klaus was requested to undergo the standard security clearance procedures required for normal members of the public; ABC staff tried to convince security staff to allow the President to bypass security but they refused, and so Klaus left the building.

Klaus stated that it was not an issue of his passing through the electronic security system, but rather his treatment by the officials, as nobody had been there to meet him when he and his entourage arrived. After waiting for ten minutes in front of the building, a worker of the ABC Television invited him in, where he was left &quot;among perhaps as many as hundred school children&quot;. After another few minutes he found out that the whole group was waiting for a security clearance. Klaus refused to waste more time waiting in line behind the school children and offered ABC Television to conduct the interview in his hotel. This offer was declined by ABC as they were already set up for the interview in the Parliament House studio.

Klaus&#x27; approach was supported by the head of protocol in the Office of the Czech President, Jindřich Forejt, who described the incident as &quot;incredible&quot;. Former spokesman for President Václav Havel, Ladislav Špaček, said that &quot;it is absolutely out of place to check a head of state; it is disrespectful. I am not at all surprised that Klaus turned around and went off. He should not be there trying to argue with some operative that he is not a terrorist&quot;.

===Opposition to 2011 Prague gay pride parade ===
Klaus&#x27; aide said that &quot;The prepared Prague gay carnival is a pressure action and a political demonstration of a world with deformed values,&quot; describing homosexuals as &quot;deviants.&quot; The comments attracted widespread criticism from Czech politicians across the political spectrum, as well as from thirteen ambassadors. Klaus defended his aide&#x27;s comments. Criticizing &quot;homosexualism&quot;, he said that homosexuality is something to be tolerated but not celebrated.

===Airsoft gun assault===
On 28 September 2012, Klaus was attacked during a bridge opening ceremony in Chrastava. While Klaus was walking through a thick crowd, shaking hands and chatting with bystanders, a 26-year-old man, Pavel Vondrouš, approached him and pressed an airsoft gun against the President&#x27;s right arm, pulling the trigger seven times before disappearing into the crowd. Klaus was taken to the Military Hospital in Prague with what was described as &quot;minor bruising&quot; for treatment before being discharged. The attacker, a supporter of the Communist Party, was detained after several minutes, but later released. Before he was taken into custody, he told journalists that he had done it &quot;because politicians were blind and deaf to the people&#x27;s despair&quot;. Vondrouš received a suspended sentence in June 2013.

The lack of action from the President&#x27;s bodyguards was heavily criticised, and the head of the President&#x27;s security resigned after the incident.

===2013 amnesty and accusations of treason===
On 1 January 2013, using his constitutional powers, Klaus announced an amnesty to mark the 20th anniversary of the Czech Republic&#x27;s independence. The amnesty took effect on 2 January and released all prisoners sentenced to one year or less whose sentences had not been served, and all prisoners over 75 years of age sentenced to ten years or less whose sentences had not been served, as well as cancelling all court proceedings which had been ongoing for longer than eight years. By 11 January 6,318 prisoners had been released due to the amnesty, with other cases pending the outcome of court appeals. In addition, dozens of high-profile long-running corruption trials ended due to the amnesty, causing the greatest public anger.

The extent of the amnesty was widely criticized in the Czech Republic, with the opposition demanding a vote of no confidence against Prime Minister Petr Nečas, who countersigned it. Meanwhile, a comparison was drawn with actions taken by Klaus&#x27;s predecessor, Václav Havel, who ordered three amnesties while Czechoslovak and later Czech president (1989–2003). Havel&#x27;s first amnesty of January 1990 was the largest post-war amnesty, freeing around 23,000 people, two-thirds of the total prison population of 31,000, on the grounds that they had been convicted by a communist court system.

The amnesty sparked a public petition to persuade the Senate of the Czech Republic to charge President Klaus with high treason before the Constitutional court, effectively impeaching him. Within 24 hours of its launch, it had accumulated 24,500 signatures, and by the beginning of February 2013, the petition had been signed by more than 64,000 people. On 4 March 2013, the Senate voted to charge Klaus with high treason, based on five cases in which he was alleged to have violated the constitution, including the amnesty, his refusal to sign the European stability mechanism and his alleged procrastination in nominating judges to the Constitutional Court. The following day, on 5 March, the Constitutional Court rejected a previous motion by a smaller group of senators to cancel the New Year amnesty, thereby removing the issue of the amnesty from the constitutional suit. Given that the sanction for treason committed by the Czech President is the loss of office, and Klaus&#x27; term was due to end the following day, the court&#x27;s verdict was a mere formality, but a guilty verdict would make Klaus ineligible for a third term of office in 2018. Klaus described the move as an attempt by his political opponents to tarnish his presidency.

==Post-presidency==
After his presidency ended in 2013, Klaus was named a Distinguished Senior Fellow at the Cato Institute. His fellowship was terminated in September 2014, due to his views on the Revolution of Dignity, his hostility to homosexuality, and support for European far-right parties.

On 9 September 2014, in an interview with Czech radio station Radio Impuls, Klaus said that Ukraine is an artificially created state and that the Russian intervention in the country was part of a civil war. He continued by describing Maidan as an &quot;artificial event created by the West and the United States&quot;, in which Russia was forced to intervene. He added that in his opinion, Ukraine lacks the strong ties to keep the country together.

In the 2018 presidential election, Klaus endorsed his former political opponent Miloš Zeman.

In November 2024, Klaus received media attention after stating on CNN Prima News that female defence ministers are &quot;absurd nonsense&quot;.

===Tricolour===
Klaus&#x27; son Václav Klaus Jr. was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in the 2017 election as a member of the Civic Democratic Party. Klaus Jr. was expelled from the party in 2019 following comments in which he compared EU directives to the Holocaust. He founded a new party, the Tricolour Citizens&#x27; Movement. Václav Klaus joined Tricolour and became the party&#x27;s foreign relations adviser.

===Breach of Covid-19 regulations===
On 28 October 2020, at a celebration of the formation of an independent Czechoslovak state in 1918, Klaus refused to wear a face mask, in breach of COVID-19 restrictions introduced by Andrej Babiš&#x27; government. Klaus described people who wear face masks as supporters of illegal migration, a more powerful European Union and a rapid adoption of the Euro currency. In response, the Prague Public Health Office fined Klaus 10,000 CZK for not wearing a face mask in public. In February 2021 Klaus tested positive for COVID-19. He received treatment at home, and concluded quarantine on 6 March 2021.

==Other activities==
===Economic activities===
In 1995, while prime minister, Klaus was awarded the title of Professor of Finance by his alma mater, the University of Economics, Prague. Since then Klaus has occasionally given economics seminars at the university, focused on his free-market views.

His defining feature as an economist since 1990 has been his enthusiasm for free market economics, as exemplified by Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman. According to Klaus, legislation and institutions cannot be created before economic transformation, they have to go hand in hand.

Since 1990, Václav Klaus has received nearly 50 honorary degrees, including from Universidad Francisco Marroquín, and published more than 20 books on various social, political, and economic topics. Klaus is a member of the Mont Pelerin Society. He has published articles in the libertarian &quot;Cato Journal&quot;. On 28 May 2008, Klaus gave the keynote address at an annual dinner hosted by the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a free market advocacy group in Washington, D.C., and received its Julian L. Simon Memorial Award.

Klaus was elected to become a foreign member of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts in 2009.

===Climate change denial===

Klaus denies that global warming is anthropogenic. He has described the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change as &quot;a group of politicized scientists with one-sided opinions and one-sided assignments&quot;, and has claimed that some other top-level politicians do not publicly express their doubts about global warming being anthropogenic because &quot;a whip of political correctness strangles their voices&quot;.

Addressing the Cato Institute in Washington in March 2007, Klaus expressed the view that &quot;Environmentalism should belong in the social sciences, along with other &quot;isms&quot; such as communism, feminism, and liberalism&quot;, and compared environmentalism to a religion, or a &quot;modern counterpart of communism that seeks to change peoples&#x27; habits and economic systems&quot;.

In a June 2007 article in the &quot;Financial Times&quot;, Klaus described environmentalism as &quot;the biggest threat to freedom, democracy, a market economy and prosperity&quot;. He said that current political and scientific debates on environment issues were designed to suppress freedom and democracy, and asked readers to oppose the term &quot;scientific consensus&quot;, adding that &quot;it is always achieved only by a loud minority, never by a silent majority&quot;. In an online Q&amp;A session following the article he wrote &quot;Environmentalism, not preservation of nature (and of environment), is a leftist ideology... Environmentalism is indeed a vehicle for bringing us socialist government at the global level. Again, my life in communism has made me oversensitive in this respect&quot;. He reiterated these statements at a showing of Martin Durkin&#x27;s &quot;The Great Global Warming Swindle&quot; organised by his think tank CEP in June 2007.

In November 2007, on BBC World&#x27;s &quot;HARDtalk&quot;, Klaus called the interviewer &quot;absolutely arrogant&quot; for saying that a scientific consensus had been reached on climate change that included most of the world. He added that he was &quot;absolutely certain&quot; that in 30 years people would look back and be grateful to him for his stand on the issue.

At the September 2007 United Nations Climate Change Conference, Klaus restated his rejection of global warming, calling for a second IPCC to be established to produce competing reports, and for countries to be left alone to set their priorities and prepare their own plans for the problem.

In 2007, Klaus published a book entitled &quot;Modrá, nikoli zelená planeta&quot; (literally: &quot;Blue planet – not green&quot;), which has been translated into various languages. It was published in English under the title &quot;Blue Planet in Green Shackles&quot;. The book claims that &quot;the theory of global warming and the hypothesis on its causes, which has spread around massively nowadays, may be a bad theory, it may also be a valueless theory, but in any case it is a very dangerous theory&quot;.

At the September 2009 UN Climate Change Conference, Klaus again spoke against the conference, calling the gathering &quot;propagandistic&quot; and &quot;undignified&quot;.

On 26 July 2011, at the National Press Club Address, Klaus described global warming as &quot;a communist conspiracy&quot;. On 21 May 2012, Klaus addressed the climate sceptic Heartland Institute&#x27;s Seventh International Conference on Climate Change (ICCC-7). In August 2012 he delivered the Magistral Lecture to the World Federation of Scientists in Erice, Sicily.

==Personal life==
Václav Klaus is married to Livia Klausová, a Slovak economist. They have two sons, Václav, also a politician, and Jan, an economist, and five grandchildren.

==State awards==
=== National ===
* Grand Cross of the Order of the White Lion (28 October 2019)
* Former &quot;ex-officio&quot; Sovereign of the Order of the White Lion (7 March 20037 March 2013)
* Former &quot;ex-officio&quot; Sovereign of the Order of Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk (7 March 20037 March 2013)

=== Foreign ===
*: Grand Star of the Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria (15 May 2009)
:*: Recipient of the Order of Merit of the Free State of Saxony (17 May 2008)
*: Grand Cross with Chain of the Order of Vytautas the Great (9 April 2009)
*: Knight of the Order of the White Eagle (10 July 2007)
*: Recipient of the Medal of Pushkin (27 December 2007)
*: First Class of the Order of the White Double Cross (6 March 2013)
*: Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic (24 September 2004)
*:Doctor Honoris Causa University of Tirana, For the valuable contribution to the development of the Albanian state, 2010
==See also==
* Politics of global warming
==References==
==External links==
* Personal website
* Official presidential website
* Honorary Doctoral Degrees, Universidad Francisco Marroquín
* Biography and selected speeches at the President&#x27;s office


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57434" start="0" end="12" title="Václav Klaus" label="Václav Klaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819381" start="96" end="127" title="president of the Czech Republic" label="president of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="172" end="201" title="dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="dissolution of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595010" start="236" end="266" title="List of Prime Ministers of the Czech Socialist Republic" label="second and last prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998866" start="327" end="363" title="Czech and Slovak Federative Republic" label="Czech and Slovak Federative Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409229" start="381" end="401" title="Prime Minister of the Czech Republic" label="first prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q853348" start="473" end="486" title="Czechoslovak Socialist Republic" label="Communist era"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="543" end="560" title="Velvet Revolution" label="fall of Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q828099" start="713" end="735" title="Civic Democratic Party (Czech Republic)" label="Civic Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="1320" end="1341" title="global warming denial" label="global warming denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="1345" end="1359" title="Euroscepticism" label="Euroscepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q389423" start="1460" end="1472" title="Senate of the Parliament of the Czech Republic" label="Czech Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="1487" end="1499" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029322" start="1699" end="1707" title="Klausism" label="Klausism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1749" end="1755" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="1767" end="1782" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Nazi occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q662985" start="1845" end="1854" title="Vinohrady" label="Vinohrady"/>
<link wikidata="Q666778" start="1917" end="1932" title="Prague uprising" label="Prague uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063665" start="2016" end="2047" title="University of Economics, Prague" label="University of Economics, Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="2132" end="2150" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q927091" start="2271" end="2303" title="Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences" label="Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q251062" start="2416" end="2439" title="Czech National Bank" label="Czechoslovak State Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="2770" end="2787" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755236" start="2906" end="2917" title="Civic Forum" label="Civic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075806" start="3178" end="3213" title="1990 Civic Forum leadership election" label="elected chairman of the Civic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055980" start="3240" end="3275" title="Interparliamentary Club of the Democratic Right" label="supporters of a free-market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q828099" start="3296" end="3318" title="Civic Democratic Party (Czech Republic)" label="Civic Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270839" start="3428" end="3455" title="1992 Czech legislative election" label="Czech legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409229" start="3585" end="3621" title="Prime Minister of the Czech Republic" label="Prime Minister of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201888" start="3659" end="3706" title="1992 Czechoslovak parliamentary election" label="Czechoslovak federal election held the same day"/>
<link wikidata="Q828392" start="3791" end="3825" title="Movement for a Democratic Slovakia" label="Movement for a Democratic Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q316526" start="3958" end="3973" title="Vladimir Meciar" label="Vladimir Meciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="4229" end="4252" title="dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="dissolve Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24173" start="4363" end="4389" title="1996 Czech legislative election" label="1996 legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="4664" end="4676" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q458332" start="4718" end="4739" title="voucher privatization" label="voucher privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27996027" start="5074" end="5103" title="1997 Civic Democratic Party leadership election" label="re-elected as chairman of ODS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296356" start="5221" end="5234" title="Freedom Union (Czech Republic)" label="Freedom Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q24169" start="5300" end="5323" title="1998 Czech legislative election" label="early elections in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q341148" start="5336" end="5365" title="Social Democracy (Czech Republic)" label="Czech Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845845" start="5478" end="5486" title="Jan Ruml" label="Jan Ruml"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699392" start="5581" end="5601" title="Opposition Agreement" label="Opposition Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q29032" start="5630" end="5641" title="Miloš Zeman" label="Miloš Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="5764" end="5783" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068060" start="5860" end="5896" title="President of the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech Republic" label="President of the Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q341134" start="6024" end="6040" title="Czech Television" label="Czech Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q24176" start="6139" end="6161" title="2002 Czech legislative election" label="elections of June 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q32777" start="6217" end="6232" title="Vladimír Špidla" label="Vladimír Špidla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508495" start="6402" end="6434" title="2002 Czech Senate election" label="Senate elections in October 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q27996028" start="6495" end="6516" title="2002 Civic Democratic Party leadership election" label="December ODS congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q155880" start="6643" end="6658" title="Mirek Topolánek" label="Mirek Topolánek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="6852" end="6864" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819381" start="6966" end="6997" title="President of the Czech Republic" label="President of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153250" start="7026" end="7053" title="2003 Czech presidential election" label="third round of the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="7132" end="7145" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q449769" start="7347" end="7356" title="Jan Sokol (philosopher)" label="Jan Sokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="7542" end="7559" title="Presidential Veto" label="Presidential Veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q221143" start="7837" end="7906" title="Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals" label="Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation, and Restriction of Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="7997" end="8011" title="Euroscepticism" label="Euroscepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="8041" end="8072" title="human impact on the environment" label="human impact on the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="8077" end="8091" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="8175" end="8206" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="accession to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501000" start="8303" end="8328" title="2003 Czech European Union membership referendum" label="2003 accession referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772320" start="8504" end="8520" title="Anthony Coughlan" label="Anthony Coughlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335686" start="8599" end="8614" title="free trade area" label="free trade area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="8993" end="9000" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324916" start="9009" end="9020" title="state visit" label="state visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182053" start="9063" end="9076" title="Declan Ganley" label="Declan Ganley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541464" start="9086" end="9094" title="Libertas Institute (Ireland)" label="Libertas"/>
<link wikidata="Q807824" start="9160" end="9172" title="Twenty-eighth Amendment of the Constitution Bill, 2008 (Ireland)" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="9180" end="9193" title="Lisbon Treaty" label="Lisbon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816811" start="9390" end="9441" title="Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament" label="Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="9454" end="9468" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193369" start="9584" end="9597" title="Prague Castle" label="Prague Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q950179" start="9615" end="9620" title="European Green Party" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q76837" start="9628" end="9646" title="Daniel Cohn-Bendit" label="Daniel Cohn-Bendit"/>
<link wikidata="Q122482" start="9658" end="9671" title="European flag" label="European flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="9971" end="9974" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q651719" start="9975" end="9988" title="Brian Crowley" label="Brian Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182053" start="10128" end="10141" title="Declan Ganley" label="Declan Ganley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541464" start="10146" end="10154" title="Libertas Institute (Ireland)" label="Libertas"/>
<link wikidata="Q807824" start="10258" end="10274" title="Twenty-eighth Amendment of the Constitution Bill, 2008 (Ireland)" label="Irish referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111966" start="10417" end="10435" title="Christopher Booker" label="Christopher Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186066" start="10686" end="10725" title="Democratic deficit in the European Union" label="European Union&amp;#x27;s lack of democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="12795" end="12799" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="12830" end="12838" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="12920" end="12935" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="13265" end="13281" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193675" start="13514" end="13525" title="Jan Fischer (politician)" label="Jan Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q259397" start="14006" end="14043" title="European Financial Stability Facility" label="European Financial Stability Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q29032" start="14111" end="14122" title="Miloš Zeman" label="Miloš Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q471862" start="14751" end="14768" title="Semion Mogilevich" label="Semion Mogilevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="14864" end="14877" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="14912" end="14926" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244633" start="14998" end="15011" title="Pushkin Medal" label="Pushkin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197747" start="15354" end="15367" title="Lidové noviny" label="Lidové noviny"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="15537" end="15544" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="15549" end="15558" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="15598" end="15624" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="15636" end="15646" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q861510" start="15705" end="15739" title="2008 Kosovo declaration of independence" label="Kosovo declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="15836" end="15842" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q937164" start="15953" end="15971" title="Pandora&amp;#x27;s box" label="Pandora&amp;#x27;s box"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="16073" end="16089" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="16096" end="16102" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201794" start="16145" end="16190" title="Czech Republic–Kosovo relations" label="Czech government&amp;#x27;s recognition of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11626449" start="16528" end="16541" title="recorded vote" label="on the record"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="16563" end="16576" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153250" start="16648" end="16674" title="2003 Czech presidential election" label="previous elections in 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q389423" start="16777" end="16787" title="Senate of the Czech Republic" label="the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="16917" end="16928" title="naturalized" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="16955" end="16977" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682473" start="16998" end="17009" title="Jan Švejnar" label="Jan Švejnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q631218" start="17035" end="17046" title="Green Party (Czech Republic)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="17052" end="17058" title="Pro-Europeanism" label="pro-EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q341148" start="17133" end="17156" title="Social Democracy (Czech Republic)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142687" start="17201" end="17208" title="KDU-ČSL" label="KDU-ČSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q320265" start="17317" end="17336" title="Chamber of Deputies of the Czech Republic" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="17498" end="17501" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q469609" start="17502" end="17517" title="Jana Bobošíková" label="Jana Bobošíková"/>
<link wikidata="Q913567" start="17536" end="17551" title="Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q712430" start="18422" end="18431" title="Pavel Bém" label="Pavel Bém"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="18650" end="18655" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q306" start="18924" end="18940" title="Sebastián Piñera" label="Sebastián Piñera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="19106" end="19114" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19116" end="19125" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062466" start="19198" end="19228" title="Centre for Independent Studies" label="Centre for Independent Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="19361" end="19396" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858105" start="19406" end="19422" title="Parliament House, Canberra" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="19980" end="19994" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="20640" end="20652" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20654" end="20669" title="Ladislav Špaček" label="Ladislav Špaček"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013885" start="21573" end="21582" title="Chrastava" label="Chrastava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142497" start="21740" end="21751" title="airsoft gun" label="airsoft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q913567" start="22037" end="22052" title="Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="22593" end="22600" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="23362" end="23383" title="vote of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q35786" start="23407" end="23417" title="Petr Nečas" label="Petr Nečas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="23523" end="23535" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="23971" end="23983" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q32766" start="23995" end="24015" title="Constitutional court" label="Constitutional court"/>
<link wikidata="Q480498" start="24029" end="24036" title="impeach" label="impeach"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817745" start="24231" end="24277" title="Impeachment of Václav Klaus" label="Senate voted to charge Klaus with high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="25216" end="25230" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733401" start="25305" end="25326" title="Revolution of Dignity" label="Revolution of Dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="25332" end="25358" title="homophobia" label="hostility to homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302217" start="25467" end="25479" title="Radio Impuls (Czech Republic)" label="Radio Impuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="25497" end="25504" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="25551" end="25586" title="2014–2015 Russian military intervention in Ukraine" label="Russian intervention in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q15871713" start="25601" end="25610" title="2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224558" start="25639" end="25645" title="Euromaidan" label="Maidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18966813" start="25863" end="25889" title="2018 Czech presidential election" label="2018 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29032" start="25936" end="25947" title="Miloš Zeman" label="Miloš Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q62715025" start="26016" end="26030" title="CNN Prima News" label="CNN Prima News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434601" start="26127" end="26143" title="Václav Klaus Jr." label="Václav Klaus Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q17016895" start="26190" end="26203" title="2017 Czech legislative election" label="2017 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q828099" start="26223" end="26245" title="Civic Democratic Party (Czech Republic)" label="Civic Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="26354" end="26363" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q64521954" start="26393" end="26426" title="Tricolour Citizens&amp;#x27; Movement" label="Tricolour Citizens&amp;#x27; Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q90416196" start="26657" end="26684" title="Mask refusal" label="refused to wear a face mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q55224909" start="26735" end="26764" title="Andrej Babiš&amp;#x27; Second Cabinet" label="Andrej Babiš&amp;#x27; government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063665" start="27306" end="27337" title="University of Economics, Prague" label="University of Economics, Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="27528" end="27549" title="free market" label="free market economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="27569" end="27584" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="27589" end="27604" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q747786" start="27817" end="27848" title="Universidad Francisco Marroquín" label="Universidad Francisco Marroquín"/>
<link wikidata="Q688638" start="27959" end="27979" title="Mont Pelerin Society" label="Mont Pelerin Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="28014" end="28025" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053597" start="28032" end="28044" title="Cato Journal" label="Cato Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156345" start="28133" end="28165" title="Competitive Enterprise Institute" label="Competitive Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712024" start="28234" end="28249" title="Julian L. Simon" label="Julian L. Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132636" start="28319" end="28355" title="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="28413" end="28427" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="28467" end="28508" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="28765" end="28786" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="28833" end="28847" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="29248" end="29263" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="29335" end="29342" title="freedom (political)" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="29357" end="29371" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760011" start="29376" end="29386" title="prosperity" label="prosperity"/>
<link wikidata="Q316748" start="29562" end="29582" title="scientific consensus" label="scientific consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10326911" start="30066" end="30079" title="Martin Durkin (television director)" label="Martin Durkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536666" start="30093" end="30125" title="The Great Global Warming Swindle" label="The Great Global Warming Swindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208491" start="30200" end="30209" title="BBC World" label="BBC World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236590" start="30223" end="30231" title="HARDtalk" label="HARDtalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633080" start="30558" end="30613" title="2007 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="September 2007 United Nations Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q244444" start="31362" end="31405" title="2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="September 2009 UN Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="31633" end="31643" title="global warming conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151745" start="31703" end="31722" title="Heartland Institute" label="Heartland Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q192917" start="31882" end="31887" title="Erice" label="Erice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497271" start="31943" end="31957" title="Livia Klausová" label="Livia Klausová"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="31961" end="31967" title="Slovakia" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434601" start="31999" end="32005" title="Václav Klaus Jr." label="Václav"/>
<link wikidata="Q93728" start="32129" end="32152" title="Order of the White Lion" label="Order of the White Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q93728" start="32220" end="32243" title="Order of the White Lion" label="Order of the White Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548060" start="32320" end="32351" title="Order of Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk" label="Order of Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q94044" start="32417" end="32467" title="Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria" label="Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q320674" start="32503" end="32545" title="Order of Merit of the Free State of Saxony" label="Order of Merit of the Free State of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q768999" start="32593" end="32620" title="Order of Vytautas the Great" label="Order of Vytautas the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q84020" start="32653" end="32677" title="Order of the White Eagle (Poland)" label="Order of the White Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244633" start="32713" end="32729" title="Medal of Pushkin" label="Medal of Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93724" start="32771" end="32802" title="Order of the White Double Cross" label="Order of the White Double Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="32835" end="32865" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q428520" start="32909" end="32929" title="University of Tirana" label="University of Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774427" start="33023" end="33049" title="Politics of global warming" label="Politics of global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q747786" start="33164" end="33195" title="Universidad Francisco Marroquín" label="Universidad Francisco Marroquín"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303223" wikidata="Q1942450" url="?curid=303223" title="Astacus">
<text>Astacus (from the Greek , &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;lobster&quot; or &quot;crayfish&quot;) is a genus of crayfish found in Europe, comprising three extant (living) species and three extinct fossil species.

Due to the crayfish plague, crayfish of this genus have declined in many European regions, being replaced by the invasive North American signal crayfish, which carries the plague but is unaffected by it.

==Classification==

&quot;Astacus&quot; belongs to the family Astacidae, one of the three families of Northern Hemisphere freshwater crayfish within the superfamily Astacoidea. The internal phylogeny of Astacidae can be shown in the cladogram below:
===Extant species===
*&quot;Astacus astacus&quot; - known as the &quot;European crayfish&quot;, &quot;noble crayfish&quot; or &quot;broad-fingered crayfish&quot; - it is distributed across Europe, in France throughout Central Europe, to the Balkan Peninsula, and north as far as parts of the British Isles, Scandinavia, and the western parts of the former Soviet Union. It is the species of crayfish with the largest natural distribution in Europe, and a traditional foodstuff. Like other crayfish, &quot;A. astacus&quot; is restricted to fresh water, living only in unpolluted streams, rivers, and lakes. Males may grow up to 16 cm long, and females up to 12 cm.
*&quot;Astacus balcanicus&quot; - found in the Vardar river basin, Lake Pamvotida (Greece) and Lake Ohrid (North Macedonia/eastern Albania)
*&quot;Astacus colchicus&quot; - can be found in Rioni river basin (Georgia)

===Fossil species===
*?&quot;Astacus edwardsii&quot; - France - proposed to new genus &quot;Emplastron&quot; in 2021 study
*&quot;Astacus laevissimus&quot; - Czech Republic
*&quot;Astacus multicavatus&quot; - United Kingdom

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="18" end="23" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="98" end="103" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211742" start="107" end="115" title="crayfish" label="crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="150" end="156" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="166" end="173" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="184" end="191" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="192" end="198" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q602370" start="220" end="235" title="crayfish plague" label="crayfish plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="322" end="330" title="invasive species" label="invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q693000" start="346" end="361" title="signal crayfish" label="signal crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="469" end="475" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q943248" start="476" end="485" title="Astacidae" label="Astacidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="516" end="535" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="567" end="578" title="superfamily (biology)" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130063" start="579" end="589" title="Astacoidea" label="Astacoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="604" end="613" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="647" end="656" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q210959" start="692" end="707" title="Astacus astacus" label="Astacus astacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="864" end="870" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="882" end="896" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="905" end="921" title="Balkans" label="Balkan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="956" end="969" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="971" end="982" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1020" end="1032" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1044" end="1051" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211742" start="1055" end="1063" title="crayfish" label="crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="1203" end="1214" title="freshwater" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="1231" end="1241" title="pollution" label="unpolluted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1335" end="1353" title="Astacus balcanicus" label="Astacus balcanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189596" start="1375" end="1381" title="Vardar" label="Vardar"/>
<link wikidata="Q776956" start="1395" end="1409" title="Lake Pamvotida" label="Lake Pamvotida"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1411" end="1417" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q156258" start="1423" end="1433" title="Lake Ohrid" label="Lake Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="1435" end="1450" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="1459" end="1466" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1475" end="1492" title="Astacus colchicus" label="Astacus colchicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203409" start="1517" end="1522" title="Rioni" label="Rioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="1536" end="1543" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1575" end="1592" title="Astacus edwardsii" label="Astacus edwardsii"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1601" end="1607" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1638" end="1648" title="Emplastron" label="Emplastron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1676" end="1695" title="Astacus laevissimus" label="Astacus laevissimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1704" end="1718" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1726" end="1746" title="Astacus multicavatus" label="Astacus multicavatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1755" end="1769" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303225" wikidata="Q44567" url="?curid=303225" title="Triple H">
<text>Paul Michael Levesque (; born July 27, 1969), better known by the ring name Triple H, is an American business executive and former professional wrestler. He is signed to WWE where he works as Chief Content Officer.

Levesque began his wrestling career in 1992 under the ring name Terra Ryzing, gaining his first mainstream exposure in World Championship Wrestling (WCW) in 1994. In 1995, he signed with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now WWE) and became known as Hunter Hearst Helmsley, which was later shortened to Triple H. In WWF, he gained fame during the Attitude Era as a member of The Kliq and of . He is a world champion in WWE, having won the WWF/WWE Championship nine times and the World Heavyweight Championship five times. He is also a Intercontinental Champion, WWE Tag Team Champion (with Shawn Michaels), and World Tag Team Champion (once each with Michaels and &quot;Stone Cold&quot; Steve Austin), as well as the 1997 King of the Ring winner, 2002 and 2016 Royal Rumble winner, seventh Triple Crown winner, and second Grand Slam winner. He has headlined multiple WWE events, including its flagship annual event WrestleMania seven times (16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 25, and 32). In 2022, he retired from working as an in-ring performer due to health concerns but remains active in an executive role.

Through his marriage to Stephanie McMahon, he is a member of the McMahon family, which held a controlling interest over WWE until its sale to Endeavor in 2023. Levesque has garnered praise for his work within the promotion, which includes creating the acclaimed developmental branch NXT, elevating female wrestlers to the level of their male counterparts, and spearheading WWE&#x27;s international expansion with concepts such as Clash at the Castle and NXT UK. He was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame&#x27;s 2019 class as part of and is due to be inducted for his individual career in the class of 2025. Outside of wrestling, he has dabbled in acting with roles in &quot;&quot; (2004) and &quot;The Chaperone&quot; (2011).

== Early life ==

Paul Michael Levesque was born in Nashua, New Hampshire, on July 27, 1969. He has a sister named Lynn. His first experience of watching professional wrestling was seeing a match involving Chief Jay Strongbow as a young child, and he took up bodybuilding at the age of 14 because he wanted to look like the professional wrestlers he saw. He graduated in 1987 from Nashua High School, where he played baseball and basketball. He continued to enter bodybuilding competitions and won the 1988 Mr. Teenage New Hampshire competition at the age of 19. While working as the manager of a gym in Nashua, he was introduced to champion powerlifter and professional wrestler Ted Arcidi, who was signed to WWE at the time. After numerous attempts, he persuaded Arcidi to introduce him to professional wrestler Killer Kowalski, who ran a professional wrestling school in Malden, Massachusetts.

== Professional wrestling career ==
=== Training and early career (1990–1993) ===
In early 1990, Levesque began to train as a professional wrestler at Killer Kowalski&#x27;s school in Malden. His classmates included fellow future WWF wrestlers Chyna, whom he would later date, and Perry Saturn. He made his professional debut under the ring name Terra Ryzing (a play on &quot;terrorizing&quot;) in Kowalski&#x27;s International Wrestling Federation (IWF) on March 24, 1992, defeating Tony Roy. In July 1992, he defeated Mad Dog Richard to win the IWF Heavyweight Championship. Managed by John Rodeo, he wrestled for various promotions on the East Coast independent circuit until 1993.

=== World Championship Wrestling (1994–1995) ===
In early 1994, Levesque signed a one-year contract with World Championship Wrestling (WCW). In his first televised match, he debuted as a villain named Terror Risin″, defeating Keith Cole. His ring name was soon modified to Terra Ryzing, which he used until he was renamed Jean-Paul Lévesque in mid-1994. This gimmick referred to his real surname&#x27;s French origins, and he was asked to speak with a French accent as he could not speak French. He began using what would become his popular finishing maneuver, the &quot;Pedigree&quot;, during this time.

Lévesque had a brief feud with Alex Wright that ended on December 27 at Starrcade with Wright pinning him. Between late 1994 and early 1995, Lévesque briefly teamed with English wrestler Lord Steven Regal, whose upper class British gimmick was similar to Lévesque&#x27;s character; in real life, they became close friends, and Regal would serve as his right-hand man behind the scenes in WWE decades later. The tag team was short-lived as Lévesque left for WWE (then WWF) in January 1995 after he and WCW could not come to terms on a new contract.

=== World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE (1995–present) ===
==== Intercontinental Champion (1995–1997) ====

In a modified version of his gimmick in WCW, Levesque started his WWF career as a &quot;Connecticut Blueblood&quot;. According to Levesque, J. J. Dillon originally gave him the name of Reginald DuPont Helmsley, but Levesque asked for a name to play with the first letters and management ultimately agreed to his suggestion of Hunter Hearst Helmsley. He appeared in taped vignettes, in which he talked about how to use proper etiquette, up until his wrestling debut on the April 30, 1995, episode of &quot;Wrestling Challenge&quot; defeating Buck Zumhofe. Helmsley made his WWF pay-per-view debut on August 27 at SummerSlam, defeating Bob Holly. Helmsley remained undefeated during the early months of his career, suffering his first pinfall at the hands of The Undertaker in a Survivor Series match at the namesake event. In the fall of 1995, Helmsley began a feud with hog farmer Henry O. Godwinn, whom he defeated in the infamous Hog Pen match on December 17 at In Your House 5: Seasons Beatings.
After being highly promoted in the first few months after his debut, his career stalled during 1996, starting off with a feud with Duke &quot;The Dumpster&quot; Droese following a loss during the &quot;Free for All&quot; at 1996 Royal Rumble. Up until that event, his angle included appearing on television each week with a different female valet (which included Playboy Playmates Shae Marks and Tylyn John). It was during this time that Helmsley suffered his first loss in singles competition in WWF, against Bret Hart on the March 4 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. Sable would become Helmsley&#x27;s valet at WrestleMania XII on March 31 and after his loss to The Ultimate Warrior, as part of the storyline, he took his aggressions out on her. The debuting Marc Mero (her real-life husband) came to her rescue, starting a feud between the two wrestlers.

On June 1, 1996, Hunter appeared on an episode of &quot;Superstars&quot; in a match against Marty Garner. When he attempted to perform the &quot;Pedigree&quot;, Garner mistook the maneuver for a double underhook suplex and tried to jump up with the move, causing him to land squarely on top of his head and suffer neck damage. Garner reportedly sued the WWF, eventually settling out of court. However, in 2020, Garner affirmed there was no lawsuit.

He was known backstage as a member of The Kliq (alongside Shawn Michaels, Kevin Nash, Sean Waltman, and Scott Hall), a group known for influencing Vince McMahon and the WWF creative team. It is widely believed that he was scheduled to win the 1996 King of the Ring tournament, but the victory was instead awarded to &quot;Stone Cold&quot; Steve Austin after the &quot;Curtain Call&quot; incident at Madison Square Garden, in which the Kliq members openly broke character in front of fans after a match to say goodbye to the departing Nash and Hall. Despite the punishment, Helmsley did have success following the incident. Mr. Perfect became his manager and he won the Intercontinental Championship for the first time on October 21 by defeating Marc Mero. When Mr. Perfect left the WWF, his departure was explained to be a result of Helmsley turning his back on his manager as soon as he won the Intercontinental Championship. Helmsley held the title for nearly four months before dropping it to Rocky Maivia on &quot;Thursday Raw Thursday&quot;, a special episode of &quot;Raw&quot; that aired on February 13, 1997. For a very brief time, Helmsley was accompanied by Mr. Hughes, who was his storyline bodyguard reminiscent of Ted DiBiase and Virgil. After losing the title, he feuded with Goldust, defeating him on March 23 at WrestleMania 13. During their feud, Chyna debuted as his new bodyguard.

==== D-Generation X (1997–1999) ====

Helmsley was being highlighted again in 1997, winning the 1997 King of the Ring tournament by defeating Mankind in the finals. Later that year, Shawn Michaels, Helmsley, Chyna and Rick Rude formed D-Generation X (DX). This stable became known for , as Michaels and Helmsley made risqué promos—using the catchphrase &quot;Suck It&quot; and a &quot;crotch chop&quot; hand motion—and sarcastically derided Bret Hart and Canada. By that point, Helmsley had all but dropped the &quot;blueblood snob&quot; gimmick, appearing in T-shirts and leather jackets. During this period, his ring name was shortened to simply Triple H, though he was still called Helmsley from time to time and Hunter for the rest of his career. Even after DX&#x27;s feud with Hart Foundation storyline ended, he continued to feud with the sole remaining Hart family member Owen over the European Championship, which Helmsley won by &quot;defeating&quot; Michaels after Michaels laid down for him on December 11, which aired on the December 22 episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;. Triple H lost the title to Hart after The Artist Formerly Known as Goldust competed against Hart in drag as Triple H on the January 22 episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;. Triple H defeated Hart to win his second European Championship on the March 16 episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;. At WrestleMania XIV on March 29, Triple H defended the title against Hart in a rematch, with the stipulation that Chyna had to be handcuffed to then-Commissioner Sgt. Slaughter. Triple H won after Chyna threw powder into Slaughter&#x27;s eyes, momentarily &quot;blinding&quot; him and allowing her to interfere in the match.

After WrestleMania, Shawn Michaels was forced into temporary retirement due to a legitimate back injury sustained in January at the Royal Rumble, with Triple H taking over the leadership position in DX, claiming that his now-former associate had &quot;dropped the ball&quot;. He introduced the returning X-Pac the night after WrestleMania and joined forces with The New Age Outlaws. As 1998 went along, DX became more popular, turning the group from villains to fan favorites. During this time, he adopted an entrance gimmick of asking the crowd &quot;Are you ready? I said, are you ready?&quot;, followed by a parody of rival promotion WCW&#x27;s ring announcer Michael Buffer&#x27;s famous catch-phrase, &quot;Let&#x27;s get ready to rumble&quot;, substituting the word &quot;rumble&quot; with the DX slogan, &quot;suck it&quot;. Also during this time, Triple H began a feud with the leader of the Nation of Domination and rising WWF villain, The Rock. This storyline rivalry eventually led to a feud over the Intercontinental Championship. As part of the feud, Triple H lost the European Championship to Rock&#x27;s Nation teammate D-Lo Brown on the July 20 episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;. Triple H eventually defeated Rock in a ladder match to win his second Intercontinental Championship on August 30 at SummerSlam. He did not hold the title long, as he was sidelined with a legitimate knee injury. When The Rock won the WWF Championship on November 15 at Survivor Series, the rivalry between the two continued, as DX fought The Corporation stable of which The Rock was the main star and Triple H received a shot at the WWF Championship on the January 25, 1999 &quot;Raw is War&quot; in an &quot;I Quit&quot; match, but the match ended when Triple H was forced to quit or see his aide Chyna chokeslammed by Kane. This began a new angle for Triple H, as Chyna betrayed him by attacking him after the match and joining The Corporation.

On March 28 at WrestleMania XV, Triple H lost to Kane after Chyna interfered on his behalf and she was thought to have rejoined DX. Later on in the night, he betrayed his long-time friend and fellow DX member X-Pac by helping Shane McMahon retain the European Championship and joined The Corporation, turning heel in the process. In April, he started to move away from his DX look, taping his fists for matches, sporting shorter wrestling trunks, and adopting a shorter hairstyle. His gimmick changed as he fought to earn a WWF Championship opportunity. After failed attempts at winning the championship, Triple H and Mankind challenged then WWF Champion Stone Cold Steve Austin to a triple threat match on August 22 at SummerSlam, which featured Jesse &quot;The Body&quot; Ventura as the special guest referee. Mankind won the match by pinning Austin.

The following night on &quot;Raw Is War&quot;, Triple H defeated Mankind to win his first WWF Championship. He dropped the WWF Championship to Mr. McMahon on the September 16, 1999, episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot; before regaining it on September 26 at Unforgiven in a Six-Pack Challenge that included Davey Boy Smith, Big Show, Kane, The Rock and Mankind. He defeated Stone Cold Steve Austin on October 17 at No Mercy before dropping the title to Big Show on November 14 at Survivor Series. Triple H then continued his feud with Mr. McMahon by marrying his daughter Stephanie McMahon and defeating McMahon on December 12 at Armageddon. As a result of the feud, an angle with Triple H and Stephanie began which carried the WWF throughout the next seventeen months; together they were known as The McMahon-Helmsley Faction.

==== McMahon–Helmsley Era (2000–2001) ====

By January 2000, Triple H had nicknamed himself &quot;The Game&quot; after stating he was above the top of the wrestling world (as in not merely the &quot;best in the game&quot; but in fact &quot;the game&quot; itself) and was nicknamed &quot;The Cerebral Assassin&quot; by Jim Ross. On the January 3 episode of &quot;Raw Is War&quot;, Triple H defeated Big Show to win his third WWF Championship.

Triple H feuded with Mick Foley in early 2000. On January 23 at the Royal Rumble, he retained the WWF Championship in a Street Fight after performing two &quot;Pedigree&quot;s on Foley. The feud ended on February 27 at No Way Out inside Hell in a Cell, where Triple H retained the title and forced Foley to retire. Triple H pinned The Rock at WrestleMania 2000 on April 2 to retain the title, but lost it on April 30 at Backlash to The Rock, ending his reign at 118 days. He regained it three weeks later, in an Iron Man match on May 21 at Judgment Day, only to lose it back to The Rock on June 25 at King of the Ring. Triple H then entered a storyline with Chris Jericho, who upset Triple H by defeating him for the WWF Championship on the April 17 episode of &quot;Raw Is War&quot; before the title was returned to Triple H because of a fast count made by referee Earl Hebner, and Jericho&#x27;s reign is not recognized. Their feud culminated in a Last Man Standing match at Fully Loaded on July 23 which Triple H won. He feuded with Kurt Angle, initially over the WWF Championship, but then as a love triangle between himself, Angle, and Stephanie. Both Triple H and Angle wrestled for the WWF Championship against The Rock on August 27 at SummerSlam, but The Rock retained the title after Angle received a legit concussion during a botched &quot;Pedigree&quot; on a commentary table by Triple H. The feud culminated at Unforgiven on September 24, where Triple H defeated Angle with a &quot;Pedigree&quot; after a low blow from McMahon.

After a brief run as a face that saw him defeat Chris Benoit on October 22 at No Mercy, Triple H reverted to his heel persona and restarted his feud with Stone Cold Steve Austin when it emerged that Triple H had paid off Rikishi to run down Austin at Survivor Series, causing him to take a year off. While Triple H said he had done it in order to shield Austin from the WWF Championship and end his career in storyline, Austin&#x27;s previous neck injuries started bothering him again in reality, forcing him to have surgery. At Survivor Series on November 19, Triple H and Austin had a match that ended when Triple H tried to trick Austin into coming into the parking lot to run him over again, only to have Austin lift his car up with a forklift and flip the car onto its roof 10 feet high. A brutal Three Stages of Hell match between the two at No Way Out on February 25, 2001, saw Triple H defeat Austin 2–1, thus ending their feud. The Three Stages of Hell match received universal acclaim and is widely regarded as one of the most brutal and one of the best professional wrestling match of all times. Triple H also feuded with The Undertaker, who defeated him on April 1 at WrestleMania X-Seven. The night after WrestleMania, Triple H interfered in a steel cage match between Austin (who had just won the WWF Championship) and The Rock where he joined forces with Austin and double teamed on The Rock, forming a tag team called The Two-Man Power Trip. Triple H then defeated Chris Jericho for his third Intercontinental Championship on the April 5 &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, and won it for a fourth time two weeks later by defeating Jeff Hardy. Triple H then became a world tag team champion by winning the WWF Tag Team Championship for the first time at Backlash on April 29 when he and Austin defeated Kane and The Undertaker in a &quot;Winner Take All&quot; tag team match. As Triple H was still Intercontinental Champion, the win made him a double champion. In doing so, Triple H became the seventh Triple Crown winner and second Grand Slam winner in WWE history.

During the main event of the May 21, 2001 episode of &quot;Raw Is War&quot;, he suffered a legitimate and career-threatening injury. He and Austin were defending the WWF Tag Team Championship against Chris Jericho and Chris Benoit. At one point, Jericho had Austin trapped in the &quot;Walls of Jericho&quot; and Triple H ran in to break it up, but just as he did, he suffered a tear in his left quadriceps muscle, causing it to come completely off the bone. Despite his inability to place any weight on his leg, Triple H was able to complete the match. He even allowed Jericho to put him in the &quot;Walls of Jericho&quot;, a move that places considerable stress on the quadriceps. The tear required an operation, which was performed by orthopedic surgeon Dr. James Andrews. This injury brought an abrupt end to the McMahon-Helmsley Era, as the rigorous rehabilitation process kept Triple H out of action for over eight months, completely missing The Invasion storyline.

==== World Heavyweight Champion and Evolution (2002–2005) ====
Triple H returned to &quot;Raw&quot; as a face on January 7, 2002, at Madison Square Garden. He won the Royal Rumble on January 20, receiving an Undisputed WWF Championship match on March 17 at WrestleMania X8, where Triple H defeated Chris Jericho for the Undisputed WWF Championship. After holding the title for a month, Triple H lost it to Hollywood Hulk Hogan on April 21 at Backlash. Triple H then became exclusive to the SmackDown! roster due to the WWF draft lottery and continued to feud with Jericho, culminating in a Hell in a Cell match on May 19 at Judgment Day, which Triple H won. On the June 6 episode of &quot;SmackDown!&quot;, Triple H defeated Hogan in a #1 contender match for the WWE Undisputed Championship at King of the Ring against The Undertaker, but was unsuccessful at King of the Ring on June 23.

In the interim, between the Royal Rumble and WrestleMania, the McMahon-Helmsley Faction was brought to an official on-screen conclusion. By the time he returned, Triple H&#x27;s on-screen marriage to Stephanie McMahon was faltering, so Stephanie faked a pregnancy in order to get him back on her side. When he learned that it was fake, he dumped her publicly on &quot;Raw&quot; when they were supposed to renew their wedding vows. Stephanie aligned with Jericho afterward, but she was forced to leave after losing a triple threat match on the March 25 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; when she was pinned by Triple H. The divorce, and thus the storyline, was finalized on July 21 at Vengeance.

Meanwhile, Shawn Michaels had made his return to WWE and joined the New World Order (nWo). Michaels and Kevin Nash planned to bring Triple H over to &quot;Raw&quot; in order to put him into the group. Mr. McMahon disbanded the nWo following several backstage complications and brought in Eric Bischoff as the &quot;Raw&quot; general manager. One of Bischoff&#x27;s first intentions was to follow up on the nWo&#x27;s plan and bring Triple H over to the Raw roster. Triple H moved to the Raw brand at Vengeance, reuniting with Michaels, but he turned on Michaels by performing a &quot;Pedigree&quot; on him during what was supposed to be a DX reunion, turning heel once again. The following week, Triple H smashed Michaels&#x27; face into a car window to prove that Michaels was weak. These events led to the beginning of a long storyline rivalry between the former partners and an eventual &quot;Unsanctioned Street Fight&quot; on August 25 at SummerSlam, in which Michaels came out of retirement to win. Triple H then attacked him with a sledgehammer and he was carried from the ring on a stretcher.

Before September 2, 2002, WWE recognized only one world champion, the WWE Undisputed Champion, for both the Raw and SmackDown! brands. After SummerSlam, then WWE Undisputed Champion Brock Lesnar became exclusive to the SmackDown! brand, leaving the Raw brand without a world champion. Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff then awarded Triple H the World Heavyweight Championship, represented by the Big Gold Belt (which previously had been used to represent the NWA World Heavyweight Championship and WCW World Heavyweight Championship), making him the first World Heavyweight Champion. Triple H retained his title against Rob Van Dam on September 22 at Unforgiven when Ric Flair hit Van Dam with a sledgehammer.

In October, Triple H began a controversial feud with Kane, leading to a match at No Mercy in which both Kane&#x27;s Intercontinental Championship and Triple H&#x27;s World Heavyweight Championship were at stake. In the weeks preceding the match, Triple H claimed that, several years earlier, Kane had an unrequited relationship with a woman named Katie Vick. He went on to claim that, after Vick was killed in a car crash, Kane (the driver) raped her corpse. Triple H later threatened to show video footage of Kane committing the act in question; the footage that finally aired showed Triple H (dressed as Kane) simulating necrophilia with a mannequin in a casket; Kane&#x27;s tag team partner The Hurricane responded the following week by showing a video of Triple H (rather, someone wearing a Triple H series of masks) getting an enema. The angle was very unpopular with fans, and was de-emphasized before the title match. Triple H went on to defeat Kane at No Mercy on October 20, unifying the two titles.

Triple H eventually lost the World Heavyweight Championship to Shawn Michaels in the first Elimination Chamber match on November 17 at Survivor Series. He defeated Van Dam on the December 2 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; to earn a title shot at Armageddon with Michaels as the special guest referee. He regained the title from Michaels in a Three Stages of Hell match at Armageddon on December 15, winning 2–1.

In February 2003, Triple H formed a stable known as Evolution with Ric Flair, Randy Orton, and Batista. The group was heavily pushed on &quot;Raw&quot; and the height of their dominance occurred after Armageddon, where every member of Evolution left the event holding a title. Triple H held the World Heavyweight Championship for most of 2003, successfully defending against Booker T on March 30 at WrestleMania XIX in an angle with racist undertones. He lost the title after 280 days on September 21 at Unforgiven to Goldberg, in a match with the stipulation that had Goldberg lost, he would have to retire. After failing to win back the title from Goldberg in a rematch on November 16 at Survivor Series, he finally regained the championship from Goldberg in a triple threat match at Armageddon on December 14, which also involved Kane. Triple H fought Shawn Michaels in a Last Man Standing match on January 25, 2004, at the Royal Rumble to a double countout, so he retained the title as a result. Triple H lost the championship to Chris Benoit on March 14 at WrestleMania XX in a triple threat match also involving Michaels. Triple H was drafted to the SmackDown! brand on the March 22 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; and failed to capture the WWE Championship from Eddie Guerrero. Triple H was traded back to &quot;Raw&quot; without competing on &quot;SmackDown!&quot; and tried to reclaim the World Heavyweight title from Benoit in a WrestleMania rematch against Benoit and Michaels on April 18 at Backlash, but was unsuccessful.

At Bad Blood on June 13, Triple H defeated Michaels in the longest Hell in a Cell match in history, ending their feud. He failed to win the title from Benoit on July 11 at Vengeance and on the July 26 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; in a 60-Minute Iron Man match after interference from Eugene, whom he defeated on August 15 at SummerSlam. The following night on &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H turned on his protège Randy Orton (who became the youngest world champion in WWE history at SummerSlam), expressing jealousy over Orton&#x27;s title victory. He regained the championship from Orton on September 12 at Unforgiven. Following a triple threat World Heavyweight title defense against Benoit and Edge on the November 29 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, the World Heavyweight Championship became vacant for the first time. At New Year&#x27;s Revolution on January 9, 2005, Triple H won an Elimination Chamber match to regain the World Heavyweight Championship after last eliminating Orton, then retained the title against him on January 30 at the Royal Rumble to end their feud. That same night, his stablemate Batista won the Royal Rumble match, earning a world title match at WrestleMania 21. Tension between the two began in the weeks leading up to the event as Triple H convinced Batista to challenge for the WWE Championship instead of his World Heavyweight Championship. On the February 21 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Batista turned on Triple H and signed a contract to face him for the World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania. At WrestleMania on April 3, Triple H lost the championship to Batista, and subsequently lost two rematches on May 1 at Backlash and on June 26 at Vengeance, where Batista became the first man to pin Triple H inside Hell in a Cell. After Vengeance, Triple H took a hiatus from WWE due to suffering from minor neck problems.

After a four-month hiatus, Triple H returned to &quot;Raw&quot; on October 3, where he and Flair defeated Chris Masters and Carlito. After the match, Triple H turned on Flair by attacking him with a sledgehammer, sparking a feud between the duo. Flair defeated Triple H in a steel cage match on November 1 at Taboo Tuesday for Flair&#x27;s Intercontinental Championship. Subsequently, Triple H defeated Flair in a non-title Last Man Standing match on November 27 at Survivor Series to end their feud.

==== D-Generation X reunion (2006–2007) ====
Triple H failed to win the Royal Rumble match on January 29, 2006, at the Royal Rumble, but another championship opportunity arose for him in the Road to WrestleMania Tournament, which he won, granting him a match for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 22 on April 2, where he lost to champion John Cena via submission. On April 30 at Backlash, Triple H was involved in another WWE Championship match, fighting Edge and Cena in a triple threat match, where he lost again. Angered at his loss, a bloodied Triple H used his sledgehammer to attack both Edge and Cena and then performed a number of DX crotch chops. Triple H unsuccessfully attempted to win the WWE title from Cena on numerous occasions, blaming his shortcomings on Vince McMahon, which eventually led to a feud between the McMahons and Triple H.

Shawn Michaels returned on the June 12 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; and reunited with Triple H to re-form D-Generation X, turning Triple H face for the first time since 2002. DX defeated The Spirit Squad on June 25 at Vengeance in a 5-on-2 handicap match. They continued their feud with Mr. McMahon, Shane McMahon and The Spirit Squad for several weeks. They then defeated The Spirit Squad again on the July 15, 2006, episode of &quot;Saturday Night&#x27;s Main Event XXXIII&quot; in a 5-on-2 elimination match. They then again defeated the McMahons on August 20 at SummerSlam, withstanding the attack of several wrestlers who assaulted them before the match as directed by Mr. McMahon. At Unforgiven on September 17, DX defeated the McMahons and ECW World Champion Big Show in a 3-on-2 handicap Hell in a Cell match. During the match, DX embarrassed Vince by shoving his face in between Big Show&#x27;s buttocks, and DX won when Triple H broke a sledgehammer over the shoulders of Mr. McMahon after Michaels performed &quot;Sweet Chin Music&quot; on him.

At Cyber Sunday on November 5, during DX&#x27;s feud with Rated-RKO (Edge and Randy Orton), special guest referee Eric Bischoff allowed the illegal use of a weapon to give Rated-RKO the win. On November 26 at Survivor Series, DX got their revenge when their team defeated Edge and Orton&#x27;s team in a clean sweep during their five-on-five elimination match. At New Year&#x27;s Revolution on January 7, 2007, DX and Rated-RKO fought to a no contest after Triple H suffered a legitimate torn right quadriceps (similar to the one he suffered in 2001 in his other leg) 15 minutes into the match. Surgery was successfully performed two days later by Dr. James Andrews.

==== Multiple WWE Championship reigns (2007–2009) ====
At SummerSlam on August 26, he defeated King Booker in his return match. On October 7 at No Mercy, Triple H was originally scheduled to face Umaga in a singles match. At the start of the night, Triple H challenged newly named WWE Champion Randy Orton, reigniting their feud that had been interrupted following his injury. Triple H won the match, winning his eleventh world championship and sixth WWE Championship, then defended his title against Umaga in his regularly scheduled match after Mr. McMahon declared the match to be for the WWE title. After that, McMahon gave Orton a rematch against Triple H in a Last Man Standing match in the main event, and Triple H lost after an &quot;RKO&quot; on a broadcast table. Triple H&#x27;s title reign at No Mercy is the fifth shortest reign in WWE history, only lasting through the duration of the event. After winning the &quot;Raw&quot; Elimination Chamber match on February 17, 2008, at No Way Out, Triple H gained a WWE Championship match by outlasting five other men, last eliminating Jeff Hardy after a &quot;Pedigree&quot; on a steel chair. At WrestleMania XXIV on March 30, Orton retained the title in a triple threat match after punting Triple H and pinning John Cena following Triple H&#x27;s &quot;Pedigree&quot; on Cena. On April 27 at Backlash, Triple H won the title in a fatal four-way elimination match against Orton, Cena, and John &quot;Bradshaw&quot; Layfield, tying the record for most WWE Championship reigns with The Rock. Triple H retained the title against Orton on May 18 at Judgment Day in a steel cage match and again on June 1 at One Night Stand in a Last Man Standing match. Orton suffered a legitimate collarbone injury during the match, prematurely ending the feud.On the June 23 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H was drafted to the SmackDown brand as a part of the 2008 WWE draft, in the process making the WWE Championship exclusive to &quot;SmackDown&quot;. Triple H then went on to defeat John Cena cleanly to retain the WWE Championship on June 29 at Night of Champions. He defended the championship over the summer by defeating the likes of Edge on July 20 at The Great American Bash and The Great Khali on August 17 at SummerSlam, and was the only champion to retain his title at Unforgiven&#x27;s Championship Scramble matches on September 7. He successfully defended it against Jeff Hardy both on October 5 at No Mercy and Cyber Sunday on October 26.

At Survivor Series on November 23, Triple H was scheduled to defend the title against Vladimir Kozlov and Jeff Hardy, but Hardy was kept out of the match after a scripted attack and injury. During the match, &quot;SmackDown&quot; general manager Vickie Guerrero announced that Edge had returned and introduced him into the contest. Hardy interfered and hit Triple H with a steel chair meant for Edge, costing him the title after a 210-day reign. After failing to regain the title on December 14 at Armageddon, Triple H entered seventh in the Royal Rumble on January 25, 2009, but was last eliminated by Randy Orton. At No Way Out on February 15, Triple H won the WWE Championship in the &quot;SmackDown&quot; Elimination Chamber match, setting the record for most reigns at eight. That record stood until 2011 when John Cena won his ninth WWE Championship.

On the February 16 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H made an appearance aiding Stephanie and Shane McMahon, after they were attacked by Randy Orton. On the February 20 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, Triple H was interviewed by Jim Ross; in the interview, footage was shown highlighting the events that occurred on the February 16 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. Ross asked Triple H how he felt seeing that footage, in response, he broke character (after 5 years of marriage) by admitting that Vince McMahon is his father-in-law, that Shane is his brother-in-law, and that Stephanie is his wife, creating a rivalry between Triple H and Orton. On the February 23 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H confronted Orton, before attacking him, Ted DiBiase, and Cody Rhodes (a group known as The Legacy) with a sledgehammer and chasing them from the arena. At WrestleMania 25 on April 5, Triple H defeated Orton to retain the title. On the April 13 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H was drafted back to the Raw brand as part of the 2009 WWE draft. He teamed with Shane McMahon and Batista against Orton and The Legacy in a six-man tag match for the WWE Championship on April 26 at Backlash, which they lost after Orton pinned Triple H. He lost a Three Stages of Hell title match to Orton on June 28 at The Bash. At Night of Champions on July 26, he again lost a title match to Orton in a triple threat match involving John Cena.

==== Third run with D-Generation X (2009–2010) ====
On the August 10 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H met with Michaels at an office cafeteria in Texas where Michaels was working as a chef; throughout the show, Triple H tried to convince Michaels to return to WWE from hiatus. After several incidents (including grease grill burgers on fire and Michaels shouting at a little girl), Michaels agreed to team with Triple H to face The Legacy at SummerSlam, superkicked the girl, and quit his chef job. On the August 17 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H and Michaels officially reunited as DX, but as they were in the process of their in-ring promo, The Legacy attacked them both. Their first match after reuniting was against The Legacy at SummerSlam on August 23, which they won. On September 13 at Breaking Point, they lost to The Legacy in the first ever Submissions Count Anywhere match in WWE history.

At Hell in a Cell on October 4, DX defeated The Legacy in a Hell in a Cell match. DX unsuccessfully challenged John Cena for the WWE Championship in a triple threat match on November 22 at Survivor Series, after which they remained friends and partners. On December 13 at , DX defeated Jeri-Show (Chris Jericho and Big Show) to win the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship in a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match.

On December 21, Triple H announced that Hornswoggle was the new DX mascot. This came about after Hornswoggle sued DX for emotional and physical distress due to them not allowing him to join DX. After being taken to court where they were ruled guilty by a jury and judge consisting of dwarves, Michaels told Triple H that Hornswoggle could be the mascot. Triple H agreed to it only if the charges were dropped, which Hornswoggle agreed to. On the January 11, 2010, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Mike Tyson, who was the &quot;Raw&quot; guest host for the night, teamed with Jericho to face DX; at the end of the bout, Tyson turned on Jericho and aligned himself with Triple H and Michaels. On the February 8 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, DX lost the Unified Tag Team Championship to ShoMiz (The Miz and Big Show) in a triple threat elimination tag match, also involving The Straight Edge Society (CM Punk and Luke Gallows). On the March 1 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, they lost a rematch for the titles in their last televised match before Michaels retired.

On February 21, Triple H eliminated then WWE Champion Sheamus from the Elimination Chamber match, though he did not win the title. Sheamus attacked him weeks later, setting up a match at WrestleMania XXVI on March 28, which Triple H won. Also at WrestleMania, Michaels lost to The Undertaker and was forced to retire. While giving a farewell speech the next night, Sheamus attacked him and set up a rematch at Extreme Rules on April 25. Sheamus attacked Triple H at the start of the show, before later winning the match, after which Triple H took a long hiatus from the WWE. Triple H made an untelevised appearance on October 30 at the WWE Fan Appreciation Event and also at the 2010 Tribute to the Troops.

==== Chief Operating Officer (2011–2013) ====
On the February 21, 2011, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H returned, interrupting the return of The Undertaker and challenging him to a match at WrestleMania XXVII, which later became a No Holds Barred match. A week later, he attacked Sheamus with a Pedigree through a broadcast table in retaliation for Sheamus giving him a ten-month injury. At WrestleMania XXVII on April 3, Triple H lost, which extended The Undertaker&#x27;s undefeated streak to 19–0; The Undertaker was carried from the ring on a stretcher whereas Triple H left on his own accord.

At the end of the July 18 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H returned on behalf of WWE&#x27;s board of directors to relieve his father-in-law Vince McMahon of his duties. This was followed by the announcement that he had been assigned to take over as Chief Operating Officer (COO) of the WWE. This was during a storyline where CM Punk had won the WWE Championship and left the company. Though a new champion was crowned, Triple H helped re-sign Punk and upheld both championship reigns. He announced he would referee a match to unify both WWE Championships on August 14 at SummerSlam. Although he counted a pinfall for CM Punk to win, John Cena&#x27;s leg was on the ropes, which would break the pin. Regardless, Triple H&#x27;s longtime friend Kevin Nash attacked Punk immediately after the match to allow Alberto Del Rio to become the new champion. Though Nash and Punk demanded a match against each other, Triple H fired Nash for insubordination and booked himself in a No Disqualification match on September 18 at Night of Champions with his position of COO on the line. Triple H defeated Punk at Night of Champions despite interference from John Laurinaitis, Nash, The Miz and R-Truth. After repeated attacks from these wrestlers in various matches, the majority of WWE&#x27;s on-screen staff gave Triple H a vote of no confidence. Mr. McMahon returned to relieve him of his duties on the October 10 episode of &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;, though he remained the COO. Laurinaitis was named interim general manager of &quot;Raw&quot;, and booked him and Punk in a tag team match against The Miz and R-Truth on October 23 at Vengeance. During the match, Nash once again attacked him (costing Triple H and Punk the match) and did so the following night on the October 24 episode of &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;, hospitalizing him (kayfabe). WWE later announced that Triple H had sustained a fractured vertebra, and would be out of action. He returned on December 12, as part of the Slammy Awards. On December 18, he defeated Nash at in sledgehammer ladder match, after attacking him with a sledgehammer.Triple H returned on the January 30, 2012 episode of &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot; to evaluate Laurinaitis&#x27; performance as general manager. Before he could announce the decision, he was interrupted by the returning Undertaker. After initially refusing the rematch as he did not want to tarnish The Undertaker&#x27;s legacy, Triple H accepted the challenge after being called a coward who lives in Shawn Michaels&#x27; shadow, on the condition their rematch be contested inside Hell in a Cell. Triple H went on to lose this match on April 1 at WrestleMania XXVIII.

Triple H returned on the April 30 episode of &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;, when he refused to give in to Brock Lesnar&#x27;s unreasonable contract demands, resulting in Lesnar attacking him and storyline breaking his arm. Upon his return two weeks later, Triple H was confronted by Lesnar&#x27;s legal representative, Paul Heyman, who announced Lesnar was filing a lawsuit against WWE for breach of contract. After he accosted Heyman, Heyman threatened another lawsuit against Triple H for assault and battery. At No Way Out on June 17, Triple H challenged a non-present Lesnar to a match at SummerSlam, which Heyman refused on Lesnar&#x27;s behalf the following night on &quot;Raw SuperShow&quot;. At &quot;Raw 1000&quot;, Stephanie McMahon goaded Heyman into Triple H&#x27;s challenge against Lesnar. To anger Triple H, Lesnar broke Michaels&#x27;s arm on the August 13 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. Six days later at SummerSlam, Triple H lost to Lesnar after submitting to the Kimura Lock, breaking his arm again in storyline.

Triple H returned on the February 25, 2013, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, brawling with Brock Lesnar after he attempted to attack Mr. McMahon. The brawl resulted in Lesnar having his head split open and requiring 18 stitches. The following week, Triple H issued a challenge to Lesnar, requesting a rematch with him at WrestleMania 29 on April 7, which Lesnar accepted on the condition that he could choose the stipulation. The following week, after Triple H signed the contract and assaulted Heyman, the stipulation was revealed as No Holds Barred with Triple H&#x27;s career on the line. Triple H defeated Lesnar after a &quot;Pedigree&quot; onto the steel steps. On May 19 at Extreme Rules, Triple H lost to Lesnar in a steel cage match after interference from Heyman, and also injured his jaw.

The next night on &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H wrestled Heyman&#x27;s newest client, Curtis Axel. He suffered a storyline concussion and was deemed to have forfeited. Despite being medically cleared to wrestle before the June 3 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Vince and Stephanie McMahon did not allow Triple H to wrestle Axel, citing concerns for his well-being and the safety of his children. In response, Triple H stormed out the arena and vowed to return to the ring the next week on &quot;Raw&quot;.

==== The Authority (2013–2016) ====
On August 18 at SummerSlam, Triple H served as the special guest referee for the WWE Championship match between champion John Cena and Daniel Bryan. After Bryan won the match, Triple H attacked him, allowing Randy Orton to cash in his Money in the Bank contract and win the title, turning heel for the first time since 2006. Along with his wife Stephanie, they subsequently created The Authority, with The Shield (Seth Rollins, Roman Reigns and Dean Ambrose) as his enforcers, Kane as the Director of Operations and Orton as their hand-picked WWE Champion.
At WrestleMania XXX on April 6, 2014, Triple H lost to Bryan, thereby granting Bryan a part in the subsequent WWE World Heavyweight Championship match against Batista and Orton, which Bryan ultimately won. In order to end Bryan&#x27;s title reign, Triple H re-formed Evolution with Orton and Batista on the April 18 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, but Bryan remained champion due to The Shield turning on The Authority. Evolution subsequently lost back-to-back matches with The Shield on May 4 at Extreme Rules and on June 1 at Payback. Batista quit WWE on the &quot;Raw&quot; after Payback after Triple H refused to grant him his shot at the WWE World Heavyweight Championship. Triple H then went to &quot;Plan B&quot;, Seth Rollins, who turned on The Shield and rejoined The Authority.
The Authority were briefly removed from power after losing a five-on-five tag team elimination match on November 23 at Survivor Series after Sting made his WWE debut to assist their opponents. However, The Authority were reinstated on the December 29 episode of &quot;Raw&quot; after Rollins coaxed Cena into reinstating them by holding Edge hostage. Back in power, Triple H began feuding with Sting, whom he defeated in a no disqualification match on March 29 at WrestleMania 31 after interference from D-Generation X. After his match with Sting, he and Stephanie McMahon were later confronted by The Rock and Ronda Rousey during a promo regarding the record crowd at the event.

The WWE World Heavyweight Championship was vacated after Rollins suffered a legitimate severe knee injury in November 2015 and a tournament to determine a new champion was held at Survivor Series on November 22, which was won by Roman Reigns. Throughout the remainder of 2015, The Authority aligned with Sheamus, who successfully cashed in his Money in the Bank contact immediately after Reigns&#x27; victory. After Sheamus defeated Reigns at on December 13, Reigns viciously attacked Triple H, which resulted in a storyline injury that took him off television. During this hiatus, Reigns regained the championship from Sheamus on the following episode of &quot;Raw&quot;.

On January 24, 2016, Triple H made his return during the Royal Rumble match for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship as the unannounced 30th entrant. After eliminating Reigns, he then eliminated Dean Ambrose to secure his second Royal Rumble win and 14th (and final) world championship. He successfully defended the championship against Ambrose on March 12 at Roadblock, and defeated Dolph Ziggler in non-title match two days later on &quot;Raw&quot;, but lost the championship to Reigns in the main event of WrestleMania 32 on April 3, ending his last world championship reign at 70 days. After WrestleMania 32, with The Authority now disbanded, Triple H competed in the WWE Live tour of the United Kingdom in late April before taking a hiatus from WWE television. However, he continued making occasional appearances in an executive role for NXT.

==== Final feuds and retirement (2016–2022) ====
On the August 29 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Triple H made his return by interfering in the main event for the recently vacated and established WWE Universal Championship. Firstly, he attacked rival Roman Reigns with a &quot;Pedigree&quot;, allowing former Authority stable member Seth Rollins to eliminate him, before attacking Rollins with a &quot;Pedigree&quot;, allowing Kevin Owens to win the title. This began a feud with Rollins, which culminated in a &quot;non-sanctioned match&quot; at WrestleMania 33 on April 2, 2017, where Rollins defeated Triple H.
Despite being part of Kurt Angle&#x27;s Team Raw on November 19 at Survivor Series, Triple H attacked him and caused him to be eliminated in their match against Team SmackDown, and he ultimately got credit for winning the match after he pinned Shane McMahon of Team SmackDown. Angle subsequently joined forces with the debuting Ronda Rousey, and the two defeated Triple H and Stephanie McMahon in a mixed tag match at WrestleMania 34 on April 8, 2018, after Stephanie submitted to Rousey&#x27;s armbar.

Triple H turned face again for the first time since 2013 and his final feuds were high-profile rematches with wrestlers that he had previously worked with. On April 27 at the Greatest Royal Rumble in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, John Cena defeated Triple H in the first match ever featured on a Saudi pay-per-view event. He subsequently defeated The Undertaker on October 6 at Super Show-Down in a match that was billed as the &quot;Last Time Ever&quot;. His feud with The Undertaker continued into Crown Jewel on November 2, where Shawn Michaels came out of retirement to reform DX with him, in a winning effort against The Brothers of Destruction (The Undertaker and Kane). At WrestleMania 35 on April 7, 2019, Triple H defeated Batista with assistance from Ric Flair in what was Batista&#x27;s retirement match. His final match on pay-per-view was a loss to Randy Orton at Super ShowDown on June 7. Triple H&#x27;s final house show match took place on June 29 in Tokyo, Japan, where he and Shinsuke Nakamura defeated Robert Roode and Samoa Joe in a tag team match after Nakamura pinned Roode.

Triple H&#x27;s appearances became increasingly sporadic and 2020 became the first year in which he did not wrestle a match since the start of his career. However, he continued to make occasional on-screen appearances in non-wrestling roles, including on the April 24 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;, which was dedicated to his 25th anniversary in WWE. The final match of his career took place on the January 11, 2021, episode of &quot;Raw&quot; when he faced Randy Orton in an &quot;unsanctioned fight&quot;, but after Alexa Bliss and &quot;The Fiend&quot; Bray Wyatt got involved, Alexa Bliss attacked Orton with a fireball causing the match to end in no-contest.

In September 2021, Triple H suffered from heart failure and an ICD was installed in his chest. Due to his newly discovered heart condition, Triple H announced his retirement from wrestling during an appearance on &quot;First Take&quot; on March 25, 2022. On April 3, he introduced the second night of WrestleMania 38 as the COO of WWE, subsequently leaving a microphone and his wrestling boots in the ring to signify his official in-ring retirement. He later expressed a sense of being at peace with his forced retirement, stating that he &quot;did everything [he] wanted to do and then some&quot;.

==== Post-retirement and corporate roles (2022–present) ====
On September 6, 2022, WWE announced that Levesque had been promoted to chief content officer of the company. Levesque maintained this role after WWE was acquired by Endeavor the following year. Since his retirement, he has continued to make sporadic appearances in storylines, typically acting as an on-screen authority figure.

==Legacy in wrestling==

Considered by &quot;Men&#x27;s Journal&quot; and news.com.au as one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time, Triple H received most of his acclaim for his work as a villain throughout his career. In 2011, the &quot;Pro Wrestling Torch&quot; stated that he was &quot;widely regarded as the best wrestler in North America&quot; by 2000. His WrestleMania matches against Chris Benoit and Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XX, John Cena at WrestleMania 22, Cena and Randy Orton at WrestleMania XXIV, The Undertaker at both WrestleMania XXVII and WrestleMania XXVIII, and Daniel Bryan at WrestleMania XXX have been considered among Triple H&#x27;s best WrestleMania matches and some of the best matches in WrestleMania history.

Triple H&#x27;s later career, especially after 2014 during which he was a part-time performer, has been sometimes criticized. Bret Hart commented on Triple H winning the 2016 Royal Rumble match for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship while not wrestling full-time, saying: &quot;I didn&#x27;t like the decision that Triple H, surprise, put the belt on himself again ... it just showed a real lack of imagination if you ask me.&quot; Triple H using his relationship with the McMahon family to continually dominate the spotlight and book himself in high-profile matches has been a subject of criticism since his full-time career ended. After his tag team match along with Michaels against Undertaker and Kane at Crown Jewel in 2018, Wade Keller from &quot;Pro Wrestling Torch&quot; wrote that Triple H &quot;moves like the trees in &quot;Wizard of Oz&quot;&quot;. Jason Powell from &quot;Pro Wrestling Dot Net&quot; stated that wrestlers like Triple H, alongside Michaels, Undertaker, and Kane, &quot;need to accept their limitations, stop pretending they belong in main events, and stop acting like being in these main events isn&#x27;t stealing the spotlight (from newer talent)&quot;. Triple H has also been criticized for allegedly abusing his influence within WWE from the early to mid-2000s to have himself inserted into high-profile angles, or to have match or feud finishes changed in his favor.

As the founder and executive producer of NXT since its inception in 2010, Levesque has been widely praised for helping cultivate the brand, recruiting fresh new talent, and helping guide the brand to various levels of success including sold-out shows, increased respect for women&#x27;s professional wrestling, international expansion, and critically acclaimed matches.

== Business career ==
In 2010, Levesque&#x27;s role in WWE as an Executive Senior Advisor was officially formalized as he was given an office at the company&#x27;s headquarters in Stamford, Connecticut. He was named Executive Vice-President of Talent and Live Events in 2011. In 2013, his title was elevated to Executive Vice-President of Talent, Live Events, and Creative, which led him to work on storylines with WWE&#x27;s creative team. That year, he earned a combined salary of approximately $1.5 million from his front office job and as a wrestler. He also owned just over $1.5 million in WWE stock at the time.

In 2020, Levesque was named WWE&#x27;s Executive Vice-President of Global Talent Strategy and Development. In this role, he oversaw the company&#x27;s Talent Development department and served as a senior advisor to the CEO for talent strategy. He also founded and executive produced WWE&#x27;s NXT brand since 2014, though he has not been involved with the brand&#x27;s &quot;NXT 2.0&quot; overhaul from September 2021 onwards.

On July 22, 2022, WWE promoted Levesque to Executive Vice-President of Talent Relations. Three days later, following the retirement of his father-in-law and WWE CEO Vince McMahon, he was also named Head of WWE Creative. On September 2, he was named chief content officer. This role entails overseeing the company&#x27;s creative writing, talent relations, live events, talent development, and creative services departments.

On October 15, 2023, it was announced that Endeavor CEO Ari Emanuel had removed McMahon from WWE creative power and tasked Levesque with leading &quot;99.9% of the creative&quot; moving forward.

== Philanthropy ==
In 2014, Levesque and his wife Stephanie created the Connor&#x27;s Cure cancer fund in honor of Connor &quot;The Crusher&quot; Michalek, a WWE fan who died of cancer at the age of eight, which has now raised nearly $4.5 million to fund research grants and provide family assistance in battling pediatric cancer.

== Personal life ==
From 1996 to 2000, Levesque was in a relationship with fellow wrestler Joan &quot;Chyna&quot; Laurer. What began as an on-screen storyline marriage in 2000 became a real-life romance when Levesque began dating Stephanie McMahon. They were married in Sleepy Hollow, New York, on October 25, 2003. They have three children, born in 2006, 2008, and 2010.

Levesque is an avid fan of Motörhead, who performed three original entrance themes for him over the course of his career, and was good friends with the band&#x27;s frontman Lemmy until Lemmy&#x27;s death in December 2015. He sported Lemmy-inspired facial hair during a portion of his career and spoke at Lemmy&#x27;s funeral on January 9, 2016. He is also a supporter of English football team West Ham United FC.

In September 2021, WWE reported that Levesque underwent a procedure at Yale New Haven Hospital following a &quot;cardiac event&quot; caused by a genetic heart issue. During an appearance on &quot;First Take&quot; on March 25, 2022, Levesque gave his first interview since being hospitalized. He revealed that he had viral pneumonia and inflamed lungs, which worsened over time. He said that Stephanie noticed he was coughing up blood, and doctors subsequently discovered fluid in his lungs and around his heart; they informed him that his heart was working at a fraction of its full strength and that he was in a &quot;bad&quot; state of heart failure. He also said there were moments where he thought he would die and confirmed that the event forced his retirement: &quot;I was nose-diving and sort of at the one-yard line of where you don&#x27;t want to be really, for your family and your future. [...] I will never wrestle again. First of all, I have a defibrillator in my chest, which, you know, probably not a good idea for me to get zapped on live TV.&quot;

== Other media ==
According to the Wrestling Figure Checklist, Levesque had 412 action figures produced of his likeness between the 1990s and 2010s. The majority of these were produced by Jakks Pacific and Mattel, making Levesque one of the most produced wrestlers in history.

In 2004, Levesque released the book &quot;Making the Game: Triple H&#x27;s Approach to a Better Body&quot;. It is mostly devoted to bodybuilding advice with some autobiographical information, memoirs, and opinions.

Levesque wrote his own chapter giving advice in entrepreneur Tim Ferriss&#x27; 2016 book &quot;Tools of Titans&quot;.

== Filmography ==
===Film===
===Television===
=== Video games ===
== Bibliography ==
* &quot;Making the Game: Triple H&#x27;s Approach to a Better Body&quot;. Paul Levesque; Robert Caprio (2006). WWE Books.
* &quot;The Unauthorized History of DX&quot;. Triple H; Shawn Michaels; Aaron Williams (2009). WWE Books.

== Championships and accomplishments ==
* The Baltimore Sun
** Wrestler of the Decade (2010)
* CBS Sports
** Worst Angle of the Year (2018) 
* International Wrestling Federation
** IWF Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
** IWF Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Perry Saturn
* Pro Wrestling Illustrated
** Feud of the Year (2000) 
** Feud of the Year (2004) 
** Feud of the Year (2009) 
** Feud of the Year (2013) 
** Match of the Year (2004) 
** Match of the Year (2012) 
** Most Hated Wrestler of the Decade (2000–2009)
** Most Hated Wrestler of the Year (2003–2005)
** Most Hated Wrestler of the Year (2013) – 
** Most Hated Wrestler of the Year (2014) – 
** Wrestler of the Decade (2000–2009)
** Wrestler of the Year (2008)
** Ranked No. 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the &quot;PWI 500&quot; in 2000 and 2009
** Ranked No. 139 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; in 2003
*Sports Illustrated
**Ranked No. 7 of the 20 Greatest WWE Wrestlers Of All Time 
* World Wrestling Federation/Entertainment/WWE
** WWF/WWE Championship (9 times)
** World Heavyweight Championship (5 times)
** WWF/WWE Intercontinental Championship (5 times)
** WWF European Championship (2 times)
** WWE Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Shawn Michaels
** WWF World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Stone Cold Steve Austin (1) and Shawn Michaels (1)
** King of the Ring (1997)
** Royal Rumble (2002, 2016)
** Road to WrestleMania Tournament (2006)
** Seventh Triple Crown Champion
** Second Grand Slam Champion
** Slammy Award (3 times)
*** Best Hair (1997)
*** OMG Moment of the Year (2011) – 
*** Match of the Year (2012) – 
** WWE Hall of Fame (2 times)
*** Class of 2019 – as a member of D-Generation X
*** Class of 2025 - individually
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter
** Best Booker (2015) 
** Best Booker (2023, 2024)
** Feud of the Year (2000) 
** Feud of the Year (2004) 
** Feud of the Year (2005) 
** Wrestler of the Year (2000)
** Most Disgusting Promotional Tactic (2002) 
** Most Overrated (2002–2004, 2009)
** Readers&#x27; Least Favorite Wrestler (2002, 2003)
** Worst Feud of the Year (2002) 
** Worst Feud of the Year (2006) 
** Worst Feud of the Year (2011) 
** Worst Feud of the Year (2013) – 
** Worst Worked Match of the Year (2003) 
** Worst Worked Match of the Year (2008) 
** Worst Match of the Year (2018) 
** Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 2005)

=== &quot;Luchas de Apuestas&quot; record ===

== Other awards and honors ==
* Boys &amp; Girls Clubs of America
** Hall of Fame (2017)
* International Sports Hall of Fame
** Class of 2015
* &quot;Metal Hammer&quot; magazine
** Metal Hammer&#x27;s Spirit of Lemmy Award (2016)

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 


== External links ==
* 
* Paul Levesque&#x27;s executive profile at WWE.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="0" end="21" title="Triple H" label="Paul Michael Levesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132964" start="66" end="75" title="ring name" label="ring name"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="76" end="84" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="131" end="152" title="professional wrestler" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="170" end="173" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096974" start="192" end="213" title="Chief content officer" label="Chief Content Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="280" end="292" title="Triple H" label="Terra Ryzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="335" end="363" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="469" end="491" title="Triple H" label="Hunter Hearst Helmsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35560" start="566" end="578" title="Attitude Era" label="Attitude Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536699" start="594" end="602" title="The Kliq" label="The Kliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="658" end="678" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF/WWE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="698" end="728" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="754" end="779" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="781" end="802" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWE Tag Team Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="809" end="823" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="830" end="853" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="World Tag Team Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="883" end="918" title="&amp;quot;Stone Cold&amp;quot; Steve Austin" label="&amp;quot;Stone Cold&amp;quot; Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017520" start="936" end="957" title="King of the Ring (1997)" label="1997 King of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q36726" start="966" end="970" title="Royal Rumble (2002)" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845407" start="975" end="992" title="Royal Rumble (2016)" label="2016 Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317031" start="1009" end="1021" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191410" start="1041" end="1051" title="Grand Slam (professional wrestling)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35516" start="1134" end="1146" title="WrestleMania" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q50881" start="1160" end="1162" title="WrestleMania 2000" label="16"/>
<link wikidata="Q50898" start="1164" end="1166" title="WrestleMania X8" label="18"/>
<link wikidata="Q50904" start="1168" end="1170" title="WrestleMania XX" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q50915" start="1172" end="1174" title="WrestleMania 21" label="21"/>
<link wikidata="Q50916" start="1176" end="1178" title="WrestleMania 22" label="22"/>
<link wikidata="Q50988" start="1180" end="1182" title="WrestleMania 25" label="25"/>
<link wikidata="Q18820013" start="1188" end="1190" title="WrestleMania 32" label="32"/>
<link wikidata="Q842633" start="1339" end="1356" title="Stephanie McMahon" label="Stephanie McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095430" start="1380" end="1394" title="McMahon family" label="McMahon family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515039" start="1457" end="1465" title="Endeavor (company)" label="Endeavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35903" start="1598" end="1601" title="NXT (WWE brand)" label="NXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205260" start="1613" end="1629" title="Women in WWE" label="female wrestlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125265011" start="1745" end="1764" title="Clash at the Castle" label="Clash at the Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55095897" start="1769" end="1775" title="NXT UK" label="NXT UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="1802" end="1818" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090777" start="1826" end="1836" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2019)" label="2019 class"/>
<link wikidata="Q132156437" start="1907" end="1920" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2025)" label="class of 2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520246" start="2013" end="2026" title="The Chaperone (2011 film)" label="The Chaperone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48274" start="2094" end="2115" title="Nashua, New Hampshire" label="Nashua, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187922" start="2248" end="2267" title="Chief Jay Strongbow" label="Chief Jay Strongbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966908" start="2423" end="2441" title="Nashua High School South" label="Nashua High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692966" start="2722" end="2732" title="Ted Arcidi" label="Ted Arcidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="2752" end="2755" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q939657" start="2856" end="2871" title="Killer Kowalski" label="Killer Kowalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q54149" start="2916" end="2937" title="Malden, Massachusetts" label="Malden, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q466683" start="3184" end="3189" title="Chyna" label="Chyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q978662" start="3221" end="3233" title="Perry Saturn" label="Perry Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132964" start="3276" end="3285" title="ring name" label="ring name"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588350" start="3354" end="3388" title="International Wrestling Federation" label="International Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062492" start="3593" end="3612" title="independent circuit" label="independent circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="3731" end="3759" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="3813" end="3820" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142690" start="3852" end="3862" title="Cole Twins" label="Keith Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q461070" start="3985" end="3992" title="Gimmick (professional wrestling)" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400216" start="4078" end="4091" title="Standard French" label="French accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4114" end="4120" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q771365" start="4197" end="4205" title="The Pedigree" label="Pedigree"/>
<link wikidata="Q847506" start="4253" end="4257" title="Feud (professional wrestling)" label="feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q68719" start="4263" end="4274" title="Alex Wright" label="Alex Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133804" start="4304" end="4313" title="Starrcade (1994)" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q721547" start="4326" end="4333" title="Pin (professional wrestling)" label="pinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q316938" start="4419" end="4436" title="William Regal" label="Lord Steven Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="4444" end="4455" title="upper class" label="upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="4620" end="4623" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="4990" end="5001" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="5002" end="5011" title="Nobility" label="Blueblood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136663" start="5042" end="5054" title="J. J. Dillon" label="J. J. Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="5273" end="5282" title="Vignette (wrestling)" label="vignettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957256" start="5407" end="5426" title="WWF Wrestling Challenge" label="Wrestling Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982969" start="5443" end="5455" title="Buck Zumhofe" label="Buck Zumhofe"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="5479" end="5491" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q59298" start="5514" end="5524" title="SummerSlam (1995)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44866" start="5536" end="5545" title="Hardcore Holly" label="Bob Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="5659" end="5673" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804337" start="5679" end="5700" title="Survivor Series match" label="Survivor Series match"/>
<link wikidata="Q80667" start="5704" end="5722" title="Survivor Series (1995)" label="the namesake event"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849455" start="5783" end="5799" title="Henry O. Godwinn" label="Henry O. Godwinn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5834" end="5847" title="Professional wrestling match types#Container-based variations" label="Hog Pen match"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5866" end="5899" title="In Your House 5: Seasons Beatings" label="In Your House 5: Seasons Beatings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093750" start="6032" end="6068" title="Duke Droese" label="Duke &amp;quot;The Dumpster&amp;quot; Droese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053303" start="6103" end="6115" title="WWE Free for All" label="Free for All"/>
<link wikidata="Q36597" start="6125" end="6142" title="Royal Rumble (1996)" label="1996 Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="6169" end="6174" title="Angle (professional wrestling)" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q728711" start="6264" end="6281" title="Playboy Playmates" label="Playboy Playmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958984" start="6282" end="6292" title="Shae Marks" label="Shae Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4423970" start="6297" end="6307" title="Tylyn John" label="Tylyn John"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="6411" end="6420" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="6453" end="6456" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q270576" start="6464" end="6469" title="Sable (wrestler)" label="Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q50865" start="6508" end="6524" title="WrestleMania XII" label="WrestleMania XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="6559" end="6579" title="The Ultimate Warrior" label="The Ultimate Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389602" start="6656" end="6665" title="Marc Mero" label="Marc Mero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017559" start="6810" end="6820" title="WWF Superstars of Wrestling" label="Superstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850333" start="6846" end="6858" title="Marty Garner" label="Marty Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293072" start="6949" end="6972" title="double underhook suplex" label="double underhook suplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536699" start="7242" end="7250" title="The Kliq" label="The Kliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="7262" end="7276" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="7278" end="7288" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q178796" start="7290" end="7302" title="Sean Waltman" label="Sean Waltman"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="7308" end="7318" title="Scott Hall" label="Scott Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q83519" start="7447" end="7479" title="King of the Ring (1996)" label="1996 King of the Ring tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="7520" end="7555" title="&amp;quot;Stone Cold&amp;quot; Steve Austin" label="&amp;quot;Stone Cold&amp;quot; Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7566" end="7599" title="The Kliq#The MSG &amp;quot;Curtain Call&amp;quot;" label="&amp;quot;Curtain Call&amp;quot; incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="7603" end="7624" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q282078" start="7827" end="7838" title="Curt Hennig" label="Mr. Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="7873" end="7902" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8185" end="8193" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Drop" label="dropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="8200" end="8212" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="Rocky Maivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017656" start="8222" end="8243" title="List of WWE Raw special episodes" label="Thursday Raw Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195775" start="8372" end="8382" title="Curtis Hughes" label="Mr. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q344997" start="8431" end="8442" title="Ted DiBiase" label="Ted DiBiase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864770" start="8447" end="8453" title="Virgil (wrestler)" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q314657" start="8494" end="8501" title="Goldust" label="Goldust"/>
<link wikidata="Q50870" start="8532" end="8547" title="WrestleMania 13" label="WrestleMania 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q466683" start="8568" end="8573" title="Chyna" label="Chyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017520" start="8701" end="8722" title="King of the Ring (1997)" label="1997 King of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="8747" end="8754" title="Mick Foley" label="Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q732642" start="8823" end="8832" title="Rick Rude" label="Rick Rude"/>
<link wikidata="Q512696" start="9387" end="9402" title="The Hart Foundation" label="Hart Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q317365" start="9484" end="9488" title="Owen Hart" label="Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q542333" start="9498" end="9519" title="WWE European Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q314657" start="9727" end="9763" title="Goldust" label="The Artist Formerly Known as Goldust"/>
<link wikidata="Q50874" start="9976" end="9992" title="WrestleMania XIV" label="WrestleMania XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q452590" start="10135" end="10149" title="Sgt. Slaughter" label="Sgt. Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="10380" end="10390" title="Legit (professional wrestling)" label="legitimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36654" start="10431" end="10443" title="Royal Rumble (1998)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q178796" start="10603" end="10608" title="Sean Waltman" label="X-Pac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246591" start="10661" end="10680" title="The New Age Outlaws" label="The New Age Outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="10749" end="10757" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="10761" end="10774" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="fan favorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q28783" start="10962" end="10976" title="Michael Buffer" label="Michael Buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914250" start="11199" end="11219" title="Nation of Domination" label="Nation of Domination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="11235" end="11242" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="11244" end="11252" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320998" start="11434" end="11444" title="D-Lo Brown" label="D-Lo Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178703" start="11534" end="11546" title="ladder match" label="ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q59303" start="11611" end="11621" title="SummerSlam (1998)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="11728" end="11744" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q80324" start="11763" end="11778" title="Survivor Series (1998)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q721130" start="11832" end="11847" title="The Corporation (professional wrestling)" label="The Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317101" start="11997" end="12021" title="&amp;quot;I Quit&amp;quot; match" label="&amp;quot;I Quit&amp;quot; match"/>
<link wikidata="Q284536" start="12098" end="12107" title="chokeslam" label="chokeslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="12114" end="12118" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q50876" start="12257" end="12272" title="WrestleMania XV" label="WrestleMania XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q861110" start="12468" end="12481" title="Shane McMahon" label="Shane McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="12551" end="12555" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="12897" end="12920" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="12926" end="12945" title="3-Way Dance" label="triple threat match"/>
<link wikidata="Q59305" start="12962" end="12972" title="SummerSlam (1999)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q311161" start="12989" end="13023" title="Jesse Ventura" label="Jesse &amp;quot;The Body&amp;quot; Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="13295" end="13305" title="WWE SmackDown" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884400" start="13351" end="13361" title="Unforgiven (1999)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="13367" end="13385" title="3-Way Dance" label="Six-Pack Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="13417" end="13425" title="Big Show" label="Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044475" start="13508" end="13516" title="No Mercy (1999)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80384" start="13573" end="13588" title="Survivor Series (1999)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q842633" start="13665" end="13682" title="Stephanie McMahon" label="Stephanie McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345821" start="13723" end="13733" title="Armageddon (1999)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q317724" start="14240" end="14248" title="Jim Ross" label="Jim Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="14386" end="14396" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q36683" start="14433" end="14445" title="Royal Rumble (2000)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806218" start="14584" end="14594" title="No Way Out (2000)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089968" start="14602" end="14616" title="Hell in a Cell" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q50881" start="14708" end="14725" title="WrestleMania 2000" label="WrestleMania 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046251" start="14785" end="14793" title="Backlash (2000)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744109" start="14877" end="14891" title="Iron Man match" label="Iron Man match"/>
<link wikidata="Q80520" start="14905" end="14917" title="Judgment Day (2000)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q83506" start="14966" end="14982" title="King of the Ring (2000)" label="King of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="15023" end="15036" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531270" start="15231" end="15242" title="Earl Hebner" label="Earl Hebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="15315" end="15338" title="Last Man Standing match" label="Last Man Standing match"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508335" start="15342" end="15354" title="Fully Loaded (2000)" label="Fully Loaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="15401" end="15411" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q59307" start="15608" end="15618" title="SummerSlam (2000)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15675" end="15680" title="Glossary of professional wrestling#Legit" label="legit"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="15681" end="15691" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948541" start="15701" end="15708" title="Botch (professional wrestling)" label="botched"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884401" start="15788" end="15798" title="Unforgiven (2000)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15882" end="15890" title="Professional wrestling attacks#Low blow" label="low blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="15929" end="15933" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="15954" end="15966" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10337128" start="15984" end="15992" title="No Mercy (2000)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q360518" start="16127" end="16134" title="Rikishi (wrestler)" label="Rikishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80384" start="16157" end="16172" title="Survivor Series (1999)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16708" end="16734" title="Professional wrestling match types#Three Stages of Hell match" label="Three Stages of Hell match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679353" start="16754" end="16764" title="No Way Out (2001)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="17039" end="17053" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029026" start="17059" end="17071" title="The Streak (wrestling)" label="defeated him"/>
<link wikidata="Q50892" start="17086" end="17106" title="WrestleMania X-Seven" label="WrestleMania X-Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="17324" end="17332" title="tag team" label="tag team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195928" start="17340" end="17362" title="The Power Trip" label="The Two-Man Power Trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="17542" end="17552" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721063" start="17577" end="17600" title="World tag team championship" label="world tag team champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="17616" end="17641" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWF Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950197" start="17664" end="17672" title="Backlash (2001)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q893281" start="17713" end="17736" title="The Brothers of Destruction" label="Kane and The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="18196" end="18208" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911630" start="18264" end="18280" title="Elevated Boston crab" label="Walls of Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q504536" start="18374" end="18391" title="Quadriceps femoris muscle" label="quadriceps muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="18717" end="18735" title="Orthopedic surgery" label="orthopedic surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128746" start="18736" end="18753" title="James Andrews (physician)" label="Dr. James Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="18834" end="18848" title="Physical therapy" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35574" start="18927" end="18939" title="The Invasion (professional wrestling)" label="The Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="19085" end="19106" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q36726" start="19119" end="19131" title="Royal Rumble (2002)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="19160" end="19187" title="WWE Championship" label="Undisputed WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q50898" start="19209" end="19224" title="WrestleMania X8" label="WrestleMania X8"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="19358" end="19378" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hollywood Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045379" start="19394" end="19402" title="Backlash (2002)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797348" start="19442" end="19452" title="SmackDown (WWE brand)" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q35587" start="19471" end="19488" title="WWE Brand Extension" label="WWF draft lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q80377" start="19576" end="19588" title="Judgment Day (2002)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017450" start="19746" end="19762" title="King of the Ring (2002)" label="King of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229915" start="20518" end="20527" title="Vengeance (2002)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="20598" end="20613" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="20818" end="20831" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20855" end="20870" title="Professional wrestling authority figures#Raw brand authorities" label="general manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797029" start="20983" end="20986" title="Raw (WWE brand)" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="21189" end="21193" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707048" start="21426" end="21451" title="Hardcore wrestling" label="Unsanctioned Street Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q59310" start="21474" end="21484" title="SummerSlam (2002)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981947" start="21569" end="21581" title="sledgehammer" label="sledgehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q721063" start="21682" end="21696" title="Professional wrestling world championship" label="world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="21814" end="21826" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="21977" end="22007" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140936" start="22028" end="22041" title="Big Gold Belt" label="Big Gold Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="22091" end="22125" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="22130" end="22164" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q44628" start="22252" end="22263" title="Rob Van Dam" label="Rob Van Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353458" start="22283" end="22293" title="Unforgiven (2002)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="22299" end="22308" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353456" start="22424" end="22432" title="No Mercy (2002)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003212" start="22647" end="22657" title="Unrequited love" label="unrequited"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="22755" end="22764" title="Car accident" label="car crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="22784" end="22788" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q181843" start="22966" end="22977" title="necrophilia" label="necrophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q855680" start="22985" end="22994" title="mannequin" label="mannequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184418" start="23000" end="23006" title="Coffin" label="casket"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="23175" end="23180" title="enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23186" end="23191" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070155" start="23327" end="23335" title="Championship unification" label="unifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921364" start="23444" end="23463" title="Elimination Chamber" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q80361" start="23488" end="23503" title="Survivor Series (2002)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085936" start="23594" end="23604" title="Armageddon (2002)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q721051" start="23626" end="23647" title="special guest referee" label="special guest referee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23690" end="23716" title="Professional wrestling match types#Three Stages of Hell match" label="Three Stages of Hell match"/>
<link wikidata="Q721113" start="23813" end="23822" title="Evolution (professional wrestling)" label="Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="23839" end="23850" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="23856" end="23863" title="Dave Batista" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912825" start="23962" end="23972" title="Armageddon (2003)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="24136" end="24144" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q50902" start="24160" end="24176" title="WrestleMania XIX" label="WrestleMania XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884404" start="24265" end="24275" title="Unforgiven (2003)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="24279" end="24287" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80396" start="24451" end="24466" title="Survivor Series (2003)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912825" start="24547" end="24557" title="Armageddon (2003)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36744" start="24688" end="24700" title="Royal Rumble (2004)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="24713" end="24721" title="countout" label="countout"/>
<link wikidata="Q50904" start="24823" end="24838" title="WrestleMania XX" label="WrestleMania XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="25003" end="25019" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q44374" start="25025" end="25039" title="Eddie Guerrero" label="Eddie Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240712" start="25259" end="25267" title="Backlash (2004)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275392" start="25295" end="25304" title="WWE Bad Blood (2004)" label="Bad Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231123" start="25464" end="25473" title="Vengeance (2004)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744109" start="25525" end="25549" title="Iron Man match" label="60-Minute Iron Man match"/>
<link wikidata="Q951033" start="25574" end="25580" title="Nick Dinsmore" label="Eugene"/>
<link wikidata="Q59375" start="25615" end="25625" title="SummerSlam (2004)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353325" start="25893" end="25903" title="Unforgiven (2004)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="25982" end="25986" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26076" end="26082" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Vacant" label="vacant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052777" start="26106" end="26132" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution (2005)" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q36758" start="26327" end="26339" title="Royal Rumble (2005)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26407" end="26425" title="Royal Rumble#Match" label="Royal Rumble match"/>
<link wikidata="Q50915" start="26458" end="26473" title="WrestleMania 21" label="WrestleMania 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="26593" end="26609" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579128" start="26940" end="26948" title="Backlash (2005)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231195" start="26967" end="26976" title="Vengeance (2005)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q314837" start="27251" end="27264" title="Chris Masters" label="Chris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q296511" start="27269" end="27276" title="Carly Colón" label="Carlito"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27420" end="27436" title="Professional wrestling match types#Steel Cages" label="steel cage match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326581" start="27454" end="27467" title="Taboo Tuesday (2005)" label="Taboo Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="27485" end="27514" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q80391" start="27611" end="27626" title="Survivor Series (2005)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27719" end="27737" title="Royal Rumble#Match" label="Royal Rumble match"/>
<link wikidata="Q36772" start="27766" end="27778" title="Royal Rumble (2006)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27838" end="27869" title="WWE tournaments#Road to WrestleMania Tournament" label="Road to WrestleMania Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="27914" end="27930" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q50916" start="27934" end="27949" title="WrestleMania 22" label="WrestleMania 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="27988" end="27997" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="28002" end="28012" title="Submission (professional wrestling)" label="submission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000047" start="28029" end="28037" title="Backlash (2006)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="28641" end="28645" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089296" start="28689" end="28705" title="The Spirit Squad" label="The Spirit Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231276" start="28720" end="28729" title="Vengeance (2006)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783207" start="28937" end="28976" title="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXIII" label="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event XXXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q59389" start="29068" end="29078" title="SummerSlam (2006)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296821" start="29192" end="29202" title="Unforgiven (2006)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q666074" start="29249" end="29267" title="ECW World Heavyweight Championship" label="ECW World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="29268" end="29276" title="Big Show" label="Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q111097998" start="29527" end="29543" title="Superkick" label="Sweet Chin Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q937627" start="29562" end="29574" title="Cyber Sunday (2006)" label="Cyber Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076463" start="29617" end="29626" title="Rated-RKO" label="Rated-RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="29628" end="29632" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="29637" end="29648" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q80528" start="29768" end="29783" title="Survivor Series (2006)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11316150" start="29888" end="29918" title="Elimination tag team match" label="five-on-five elimination match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279990" start="29923" end="29949" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution (2007)" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q59397" start="30285" end="30295" title="SummerSlam (2007)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="30322" end="30333" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="King Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246847" start="30371" end="30379" title="No Mercy (2007)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298315" start="30423" end="30428" title="Umaga (wrestler)" label="Umaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q774469" start="30968" end="30971" title="The RKO" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312750" start="31217" end="31227" title="No Way Out (2008)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="31317" end="31327" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50985" start="31378" end="31395" title="WrestleMania XXIV" label="WrestleMania XXIV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31465" end="31472" title="Professional wrestling attacks#Punt" label="punting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920440" start="31575" end="31583" title="Backlash (2008)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q44692" start="31671" end="31705" title="John Layfield" label="John &amp;quot;Bradshaw&amp;quot; Layfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256630" start="31827" end="31839" title="Judgment Day (2008)" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856193" start="31885" end="31900" title="One Night Stand (2008)" label="One Night Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="31959" end="31969" title="Clavicle" label="collarbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661583" start="32127" end="32141" title="2008 WWE draft" label="2008 WWE draft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32264" end="32271" title="Glossary of professional wrestling#Clean finish" label="cleanly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231381" start="32317" end="32335" title="Night of Champions (2008)" label="Night of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="32408" end="32412" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430825" start="32427" end="32450" title="The Great American Bash (2008)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q44482" start="32455" end="32470" title="The Great Khali" label="The Great Khali"/>
<link wikidata="Q59404" start="32487" end="32497" title="SummerSlam (2008)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244149" start="32548" end="32558" title="Unforgiven (2008)" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32566" end="32595" title="Professional wrestling match types#Championship Scramble" label="Championship Scramble matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="32648" end="32658" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479800" start="32680" end="32688" title="No Mercy (2008)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407119" start="32693" end="32705" title="Cyber Sunday (2008)" label="Cyber Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q80682" start="32725" end="32740" title="Survivor Series (2008)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q336143" start="32808" end="32823" title="Vladimir Kozlov" label="Vladimir Kozlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q231501" start="32968" end="32983" title="Vickie Guerrero" label="Vickie Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023930" start="33220" end="33230" title="Armageddon (2008)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36852" start="33264" end="33276" title="Royal Rumble (2009)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241378" start="33341" end="33351" title="No Way Out (2009)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q842633" start="33662" end="33671" title="Stephanie McMahon" label="Stephanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q861110" start="33676" end="33689" title="Shane McMahon" label="Shane McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q317724" start="33813" end="33821" title="Jim Ross" label="Jim Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="34075" end="34088" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42598" start="34320" end="34331" title="Ted DiBiase, Jr." label="Ted DiBiase"/>
<link wikidata="Q299222" start="34337" end="34348" title="Cody Rhodes" label="Cody Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q721427" start="34367" end="34377" title="The Legacy (professional wrestling)" label="The Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50988" start="34435" end="34450" title="WrestleMania 25" label="WrestleMania 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983930" start="34610" end="34624" title="2009 WWE draft" label="2009 WWE draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555369" start="34759" end="34767" title="Backlash (2009)" label="Backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585754" start="34880" end="34888" title="WWE The Bash" label="The Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231425" start="34893" end="34911" title="Night of Champions (2009)" label="Night of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q59409" start="35454" end="35464" title="SummerSlam (2009)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35466" end="35477" title="Professional wrestling attacks#Superkick" label="superkicked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058847" start="35812" end="35826" title="WWE Breaking Point" label="Breaking Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="35870" end="35902" title="Falls count anywhere match" label="Submissions Count Anywhere match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201348" start="35923" end="35937" title="Hell in a Cell (2009)" label="Hell in a Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076763" start="36109" end="36124" title="Survivor Series (2009)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070409" start="36206" end="36215" title="Jeri-Show" label="Jeri-Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="36264" end="36289" title="WWE Raw Tag Team Championship" label="WWE Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q60617" start="36295" end="36328" title="Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match" label="Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match"/>
<link wikidata="Q260056" start="36371" end="36382" title="Hornswoggle" label="Hornswoggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="36615" end="36622" title="Dwarfism" label="dwarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q44379" start="37116" end="37123" title="The Miz" label="The Miz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428781" start="37195" end="37220" title="The Straight Edge Society" label="The Straight Edge Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="37222" end="37229" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q946637" start="37234" end="37246" title="Doc Gallows" label="Luke Gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q222039" start="37437" end="37444" title="Sheamus" label="Sheamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q50785" start="37454" end="37473" title="Elimination Chamber (2010)" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q50990" start="37570" end="37587" title="WrestleMania XXVI" label="WrestleMania XXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q52733" start="37793" end="37806" title="Extreme Rules (2010)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q36031" start="38067" end="38088" title="WWE Tribute to the Troops" label="Tribute to the Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="38237" end="38251" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51025" start="38286" end="38304" title="WrestleMania XXVII" label="WrestleMania XXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029026" start="38539" end="38595" title="The Streak (wrestling)" label="extended The Undertaker&amp;#x27;s undefeated streak to 19–0"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="38839" end="38852" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q59422" start="39270" end="39280" title="SummerSlam (2011)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="39442" end="39452" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q79231" start="39504" end="39519" title="Alberto Del Rio" label="Alberto Del Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231763" start="39715" end="39733" title="Night of Champions (2011)" label="Night of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q357032" start="39843" end="39859" title="John Laurinaitis" label="John Laurinaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44379" start="39867" end="39874" title="The Miz" label="The Miz"/>
<link wikidata="Q310690" start="39879" end="39886" title="Ron Killings" label="R-Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232231" start="40323" end="40332" title="Vengeance (2011)" label="Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40676" end="40689" title="Slammy Awards#2011" label="Slammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178703" start="40730" end="40755" title="Ladder match" label="sledgehammer ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q51026" start="41341" end="41360" title="WrestleMania XXVIII" label="WrestleMania XXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="41465" end="41477" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q382188" start="41678" end="41689" title="Paul Heyman" label="Paul Heyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192247" start="41874" end="41884" title="No Way Out (2012)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q59439" start="41952" end="41962" title="SummerSlam (2012)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q568252" start="42068" end="42076" title="WWE Raw 1000" label="Raw 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q51027" start="42705" end="42720" title="WrestleMania 29" label="WrestleMania 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017445" start="43065" end="43078" title="Extreme Rules (2013)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q438400" start="43267" end="43278" title="Curtis Axel" label="Curtis Axel"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="43304" end="43314" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643684" start="43736" end="43746" title="SummerSlam (2013)" label="SummerSlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="43841" end="43850" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q299355" start="43855" end="43867" title="Bryan Danielson" label="Daniel Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8947374" start="43955" end="43981" title="Money in the Bank ladder match" label="Money in the Bank contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q15691681" start="44102" end="44115" title="The Authority (professional wrestling)" label="The Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q247125" start="44122" end="44132" title="The Shield (professional wrestling)" label="The Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="44134" end="44146" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q275971" start="44148" end="44160" title="Roman Reigns" label="Roman Reigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q113384" start="44165" end="44177" title="Dean Ambrose" label="Dean Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879177" start="44280" end="44296" title="WrestleMania XXX" label="WrestleMania XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15689097" start="44776" end="44789" title="Extreme Rules (2014)" label="Extreme Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q15689096" start="44807" end="44814" title="Payback (2014)" label="Payback"/>
<link wikidata="Q17562073" start="45186" end="45201" title="Survivor Series (2014)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="45208" end="45213" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="45404" end="45408" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320207" start="45531" end="45546" title="WrestleMania 31" label="WrestleMania 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q242201" start="45678" end="45690" title="Ronda Rousey" label="Ronda Rousey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18915219" start="45928" end="45943" title="Survivor Series (2015)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845407" start="46479" end="46491" title="Royal Rumble (2016)" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084397" start="46784" end="46793" title="Roadblock (March 2016)" label="Roadblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q310683" start="46808" end="46821" title="Dolph Ziggler" label="Dolph Ziggler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18820013" start="46933" end="46948" title="WrestleMania 32" label="WrestleMania 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q16324425" start="47267" end="47270" title="WWE NXT (TV series)" label="NXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q26085000" start="47466" end="47492" title="WWE Universal Championship" label="WWE Universal Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q609472" start="47697" end="47708" title="Kevin Owens" label="Kevin Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015782" start="47817" end="47832" title="WrestleMania 33" label="WrestleMania 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q30919025" start="47951" end="47966" title="Survivor Series (2017)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183374" start="48302" end="48317" title="WrestleMania 34" label="WrestleMania 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q50635273" start="48563" end="48584" title="WWE Greatest Royal Rumble" label="Greatest Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="48588" end="48594" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="48596" end="48608" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63372334" start="48676" end="48694" title="WWE in Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q55105180" start="48758" end="48773" title="Super Show-Down (2018)" label="Super Show-Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q56650649" start="48880" end="48891" title="Crown Jewel (2018)" label="Crown Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q893281" start="49002" end="49029" title="The Brothers of Destruction" label="The Brothers of Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q50753512" start="49060" end="49075" title="WrestleMania 35" label="WrestleMania 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q63805824" start="49257" end="49271" title="Super ShowDown (2019)" label="Super ShowDown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140048" start="49305" end="49315" title="house show" label="house show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171177" start="49374" end="49391" title="Shinsuke Nakamura" label="Shinsuke Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q322969" start="49401" end="49413" title="Bobby Roode" label="Robert Roode"/>
<link wikidata="Q381825" start="49418" end="49427" title="Samoa Joe" label="Samoa Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16525974" start="49999" end="50010" title="Alexa Bliss" label="Alexa Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139993" start="50015" end="50047" title="Bray Wyatt" label="&amp;quot;The Fiend&amp;quot; Bray Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="50188" end="50201" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q594446" start="50209" end="50212" title="Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator" label="ICD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324240" start="50365" end="50375" title="First Take (talk show)" label="First Take"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859117" start="50447" end="50462" title="WrestleMania 38" label="WrestleMania 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096974" start="50878" end="50899" title="chief content officer" label="chief content officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120435068" start="50960" end="50968" title="TKO Group Holdings" label="acquired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515039" start="50972" end="50980" title="Endeavor (company)" label="Endeavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988900" start="51107" end="51133" title="Professional wrestling authority figures" label="on-screen authority figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816008" start="51181" end="51199" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903296" start="51210" end="51221" title="news.com.au" label="news.com.au"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959076" start="51387" end="51406" title="Pro Wrestling Torch" label="Pro Wrestling Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="51540" end="51552" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="51557" end="51571" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q50904" start="51575" end="51590" title="WrestleMania XX" label="WrestleMania XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="51592" end="51601" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q50916" start="51605" end="51620" title="WrestleMania 22" label="WrestleMania 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="51631" end="51642" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q50985" start="51646" end="51663" title="WrestleMania XXIV" label="WrestleMania XXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="51665" end="51679" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51025" start="51688" end="51706" title="WrestleMania XXVII" label="WrestleMania XXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q51026" start="51711" end="51730" title="WrestleMania XXVIII" label="WrestleMania XXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q299355" start="51736" end="51748" title="Bryan Danielson" label="Daniel Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879177" start="51752" end="51768" title="WrestleMania XXX" label="WrestleMania XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="52019" end="52028" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845407" start="52063" end="52080" title="2016 Royal Rumble" label="2016 Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="52095" end="52129" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095430" start="52370" end="52384" title="McMahon family" label="McMahon family"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="52598" end="52602" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q56650649" start="52606" end="52617" title="Crown Jewel (2018)" label="Crown Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959076" start="52627" end="52638" title="Wade Keller" label="Wade Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="52732" end="52744" title="The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)" label="Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q35903" start="53340" end="53343" title="NXT (WWE brand)" label="NXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446353" start="53573" end="53608" title="women&amp;#x27;s professional wrestling" label="women&amp;#x27;s professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q49169" start="53850" end="53871" title="Stamford, Connecticut" label="Stamford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="54269" end="54274" title="stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q35903" start="54583" end="54586" title="NXT (WWE brand)" label="NXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="54883" end="54896" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096974" start="54967" end="54988" title="chief content officer" label="chief content officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861138" start="55199" end="55210" title="Ari Emanuel" label="Ari Emanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578040" start="55454" end="55493" title="Connor Michalek" label="Connor &amp;quot;The Crusher&amp;quot; Michalek"/>
<link wikidata="Q466683" start="55762" end="55791" title="Chyna" label="Joan &amp;quot;Chyna&amp;quot; Laurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q842633" start="55901" end="55918" title="Stephanie McMahon" label="Stephanie McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025065" start="55941" end="55964" title="Sleepy Hollow, New York" label="Sleepy Hollow, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="56071" end="56080" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="56217" end="56222" title="Lemmy" label="Lemmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="56437" end="56455" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12073283" start="56529" end="56552" title="Yale New Haven Hospital" label="Yale New Haven Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324240" start="56654" end="56664" title="First Take (talk show)" label="First Take"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="56780" end="56789" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="57096" end="57109" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="57415" end="57428" title="defibrillator" label="defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4474231" start="57712" end="57725" title="Jakks Pacific" label="Jakks Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="57730" end="57736" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q563672" start="58079" end="58090" title="Tim Ferriss" label="Tim Ferriss"/>
<link wikidata="Q105477428" start="58113" end="58128" title="Tools of Titans" label="Tools of Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="58493" end="58510" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="The Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931052" start="58546" end="58556" title="CBS Sports" label="CBS Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588350" start="58673" end="58698" title="IWF Tag Team Championship" label="IWF Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q978662" start="58715" end="58727" title="Perry Saturn" label="Perry Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="58730" end="58755" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="58759" end="58775" title="PWI Feud of the Year" label="Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="58871" end="58888" title="PWI Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="58978" end="59009" title="PWI Most Hated Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Hated Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="59153" end="59173" title="PWI Wrestler of the Year" label="Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="59243" end="59250" title="PWI 500" label="PWI 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="59363" end="59381" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="59445" end="59489" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation/Entertainment/WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="59493" end="59513" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF/WWE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331393" start="59515" end="59522" title="List of WWE Champions" label="9 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017500" start="59527" end="59557" title="World Heavyweight Championship (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339517" start="59559" end="59566" title="List of World Heavyweight Champions (WWE, 2002–2013)" label="5 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="59571" end="59608" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="WWF/WWE Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600413" start="59610" end="59617" title="List of WWE Intercontinental Champions" label="5 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q542333" start="59622" end="59647" title="WWE European Championship" label="WWF European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245537" start="59649" end="59656" title="List of WWE European Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059464" start="59661" end="59686" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE)" label="WWE Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981031" start="59688" end="59694" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE)" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="59703" end="59717" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="59721" end="59752" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823152" start="59754" end="59761" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="59770" end="59793" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="59802" end="59816" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q85774515" start="59824" end="59840" title="King of the Ring tournament" label="King of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017520" start="59842" end="59846" title="King of the Ring (1997)" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q36103" start="59851" end="59863" title="Royal Rumble" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q36726" start="59865" end="59869" title="Royal Rumble (2002)" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845407" start="59871" end="59875" title="Royal Rumble (2016)" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59880" end="59918" title="List of WWE tournaments#Road to WrestleMania Tournament" label="Road to WrestleMania Tournament (2006)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317031" start="59922" end="59929" title="List of wwe triple crown champions" label="Seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317031" start="59930" end="59951" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)" label="Triple Crown Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59955" end="59961" title="Grand Slam (professional wrestling)#Original format (established 1997)" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191410" start="59962" end="59981" title="Grand Slam (professional wrestling)" label="Grand Slam Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="59985" end="59997" title="Slammy Award" label="Slammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="60023" end="60027" title="1997 Slammy Awards" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="60057" end="60061" title="2011 Slammy Awards" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="60089" end="60093" title="2012 Slammy Awards" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="60101" end="60117" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090777" start="60132" end="60145" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2019)" label="Class of 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="60163" end="60177" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q132156437" start="60182" end="60195" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2025)" label="Class of 2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="60213" end="60242" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60246" end="60257" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Best Booker" label="Best Booker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60297" end="60313" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Feud of the Year" label="Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60381" end="60401" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Lou Thesz/Ric Flair Award (Wrestler of the Year)" label="Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60412" end="60446" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Most Disgusting Promotional Tactic" label="Most Disgusting Promotional Tactic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60458" end="60472" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Most Overrated" label="Most Overrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60494" end="60531" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Readers&amp;#x27; Least Favorite Wrestler" label="Readers&amp;#x27; Least Favorite Wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253451" start="60548" end="60570" title="Worst Feud Award" label="Worst Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253451" start="60650" end="60672" title="Worst Feud Award" label="Worst Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60686" end="60716" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Match of the Year" label="Worst Worked Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q373374" start="60805" end="60847" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60849" end="60862" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame#Inductees" label="Class of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923055" start="60944" end="60977" title="Boys &amp;amp; Girls Clubs of America" label="Boys &amp;amp; Girls Clubs of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064012" start="61003" end="61036" title="International Sports Hall of Fame" label="International Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="61056" end="61089" title="Metal Hammer" label="&amp;quot;Metal Hammer&amp;quot; magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303226" wikidata="Q6223241" url="?curid=303226" title="John Britten">
<text>John Kenton Britten (1 August 1950 – 5 September 1995) was a New Zealand mechanical engineer who designed a world-record-setting motorcycle with innovative features and materials.

==Biography==
John Britten was born to Bruce and Ruvae Britten in Christchurch at 10 minutes to midnight. His twin sister Marguerite was born just after midnight, so although they were twins they celebrated their birthdays on different dates. Being dyslexic, he needed to have exam questions read to him at school and during his tertiary education, and his answers recorded by a writer, but that didn&#x27;t stop him from developing into a remarkable engineer and architectural designer.

His childhood heroes were notable fellow New Zealanders, Richard Pearse (pioneer aviator), Bill Hamilton (father of the jet boat), Bruce McLaren (champion driver and founder of the McLaren Formula One Team), and Burt Munro (world record motorcycle speedster and subject of the film &quot;The World&#x27;s Fastest Indian&quot;). In his own short lifetime, Britten was regularly and favourably compared with all of his heroes.

Britten completed a four-year mechanical engineering course at night school before joining ICI as a cadet draughtsman, giving him a wide range of work experience including mould design, pattern design, metal spinning and various mechanical engineering designs.

Britten travelled to England where he worked for four months with Sir Alexander Gibb &amp; Partners on a highway design linking the M1 motorway to the M4 motorway.

Back in New Zealand he was design engineer for Rowe Engineering, designing off-road equipment and heavy machinery. In 1976, he built glass kilns and went into business as a fine artist designing and making hand-made glass lighting, later joining the family property management and development business. In 1978, Britten and his wife bought a historic residence in Matai Street, Riccarton, that they spent the next six years renovating. As of 2018, one of their daughters lived in the house with her family.

In February 1995 John Britten was elected to the Institution of Professional Engineers New Zealand (now Engineering New Zealand) as an Honorary Fellow, &quot;in recognition of his outstanding contribution to the advancement of the science and profession of engineering&quot;.

==Britten designed==
Britten worked on motorcycle design for some years, developing innovative methods using composite materials and performance engine designs. He created the Britten Motorcycle Company in 1992 to produce machines to his own design made of light materials and using engines that he had built himself, which became famous around the world.

His Britten motorcycles won races and set numerous speed records on the international circuits, and astounded the motorcycle world in 1991 when they finished second and third against the factory machines in the Battle of the Twins at Daytona, United States of America.

One of Britten&#x27;s motorcycles is on permanent display at the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa in Wellington, New Zealand.

==Death==
Diagnosed with an inoperable skin cancer related illness, he died on 5 September 1995 just over a month after his forty-fifth birthday. His funeral at Christchurch Cathedral was attended by over one thousand mourners and he was widely mourned throughout New Zealand.

==Motorcycle==


Only 10 Britten V1000 and Britten V1100 motorcycles, not including 1 prototype, were ever constructed.
Britten&#x27;s designs included:
*Carbon fibre body work including wheels, front suspension fork, and swingarm
*Hand cast, 4 valves per cylinder alloy engine
*Frame-less chassis with engine acting as a stressed member 
*Radiator located under the rider&#x27;s seat
*Carbon fibre fasteners (joining bodywork together)
*Rear suspension shock located in front of engine
*Engine data logging.
Non-Britten Components:
*Tyres 
*Brakes
*Steel cylinder liners
*Gearbox (sourced from a Suzuki)
*Suspension shocks
*Various electrical components.
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

*Britten Motorcycle Company
*Britten – Backyard Visionary a full-length documentary from 1993 on NZ On Screen
*Biography of John Britten from the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa
*John Britten and the Superbike from Christchurch City Library
*NZ Edge – John Britten Maverick genius of motorcycle design</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6223241" start="0" end="19" title="John Britten" label="John Kenton Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="84" end="92" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="247" end="259" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="430" end="438" title="dyslexic" label="dyslexic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969133" start="727" end="741" title="Richard Pearse" label="Richard Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909285" start="761" end="774" title="Bill Hamilton (engineer)" label="Bill Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q173081" start="801" end="814" title="Bruce McLaren" label="Bruce McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="851" end="875" title="Team McLaren" label="McLaren Formula One Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q443607" start="882" end="892" title="Burt Munro" label="Burt Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q128924" start="958" end="989" title="The World&amp;#x27;s Fastest Indian" label="The World&amp;#x27;s Fastest Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="1187" end="1190" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="ICI"/>
<link wikidata="Q192521" start="1202" end="1213" title="technical drawing" label="draughtsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1379" end="1386" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525938" start="1424" end="1457" title="Sir Alexander Gibb &amp;amp; Partners" label="Sir Alexander Gibb &amp;amp; Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875" start="1490" end="1501" title="M1 motorway" label="M1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638174" start="1509" end="1520" title="M4 motorway" label="M4 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322943" start="1901" end="1910" title="Riccarton, New Zealand" label="Riccarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995189" start="2135" end="2158" title="Engineering New Zealand" label="Engineering New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="2347" end="2357" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="2417" end="2435" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816376" start="2484" end="2510" title="Britten Motorcycle Company" label="Britten Motorcycle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561733" start="2669" end="2688" title="Britten V1000" label="Britten motorcycles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2876" end="2895" title="Battle of the Twins" label="Battle of the Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="2899" end="2906" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q915603" start="3000" end="3039" title="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa" label="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="3043" end="3053" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="3108" end="3119" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077977" start="3230" end="3252" title="ChristChurch Cathedral, Christchurch" label="Christchurch Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956283" start="4159" end="4171" title="NZ On Screen" label="NZ On Screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q915603" start="4208" end="4247" title="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa" label="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303235" wikidata="Q924988" url="?curid=303235" title="Nils Arne Eggen">
<text>Nils Arne Eggen (17 September 1941 – 19 January 2022) was a Norwegian footballer, manager and teacher from Orkdal Municipality. Eggen was closely tied to Rosenborg, the club he managed for 23 years between 1970 and 2010. He is Norway&#x27;s most successful club manager throughout history, having won the Norwegian top division fifteen times and the Norwegian Football Cup six times as a manager. Eggen&#x27;s tactical emphasis was on playing 4-3-3 and attacking football and his way of playing football has frequently been cited as an inspiration among players, coaches and clubs alike, both domestically and abroad. In his native Trøndelag, Eggen is revered and widely regarded as the greatest and most influential sports person in the region, even eclipsing Olympic champions such as Hjalmar Andersen and Petter Northug.

His playing career started with Orkdal; he then played for Rosenborg from 1960 to 1963 and 1966 to 1969, and for Vålerengen between 1964 and 1966. He was capped 29 times for Norway between 1963 and 1969. He won the Norwegian top division once with Vålerengen and twice with Rosenborg, and the Norwegian Football Cup once with Rosenborg.

In 1971, Eggen became manager of Rosenborg, winning the league in his inaugural season. He left to take over Norway U21 in 1973. He then became national team manager for Norway jointly with Kjell Schou-Andreassen until 1977. He then returned to Rosenborg where he remained until 1982. He then coached Orkdal until 1985. In 1986, he was hired as manager for Moss, where he won the Second Division in the first season and then the top league the following. During this period he was also manager of Norway U23. He started managing Rosenborg in 1988, where he remained until 2002, except for a sabbatical in 1998. This was the team&#x27;s golden age, resulting in 11 consecutive league titles and the participation in eight consecutive seasons in Champions League. Eggen returned as manager for the single 2010 season, again winning the league.

==Playing career==
Eggen began his active football career when he was 15 years old as a defender at Orkdal&#x27;s senior team. Later on he moved to Trondheim to study, and joined Rosenborg. He played with them in winning the Norwegian Football Cup in 1960.

In 1963 he moved to Oslo where he joined Vålerenga. They won the Norwegian top division in 1965, before he moved back to Trondheim where he played an important role for Rosenborg when they won the league twice – and he himself won the &quot;Player of the Year&quot; in 1968 – before retiring as a player.

==Coaching career==
Eggen was appointed Rosenborg&#x27;s coach, together with Tor Røste Fossen, and in his first season (1971) they won &quot;the double&quot; for the first time ever in the club&#x27;s history. In middle of the 1970s he was the coach for the Norwegian U21 national team, and later for the senior national team. In the 1978 World Cup qualifiers, home wins over Sweden and Switzerland put Norway in contention for qualification. A loss in their final game in Switzerland meant they missed out, and it was not until 1994 that they again came close to qualification.

In 1978, he returned as coach in Rosenborg – the team struggling in Norway&#x27;s second division at that time. Two years later the team once again was among the top teams in the first division. He returned to Rosenborg after being the coach of Moss in 1986–87. In his two years at Moss he first achieved promotion to the first division in 1986, and followed up by leading the club to their first and only league championship in 1987.

Eggen resigned as manager for Rosenborg in 2002. Two of Eggen&#x27;s last achievements were winning the Norwegian top division (11th time in a row), and qualifying for the European UEFA Champions League (8th time in a row). During his spell as manager Rosenborg also won the Norwegian football cup a number of times.

He was again appointed by the club in November 2004 – this time as assistant manager/counsellor, a position he later stepped down from in 2005, when he admitted that his role hadn&#x27;t worked as planned. In May 2010 he again took over as manager of Rosenborg after Erik Hamrén took over as manager of Sweden men&#x27;s national football team. As a caretaker manager until Jan Jönsson was available to take over, Eggen led Rosenborg to their 22nd Norwegian top flight victory.

On 1 November 2011, he once again returned to coaching, this time for Orkla (former Orkdal) at the fifth level of Norwegian football. In only his first season as a coach, he had Orkla promoted to fourth tier, Third Division.

In 2003, he was awarded the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav for his contributions to Norwegian football.

==Football philosophy==
Eggen mentioned the inspiration of Dutch total football and Rinus Michels for his own work. A fundamental point was the subordination of individuals (the parts) to the whole, so that the whole could outperform the sum of talents of all its players. Often he used the metaphor of the Rosenborg rhythm to get his message across. He had a focus on quick and massive counter-attacks and the building of an offensive attitude in the team. The 4–3–3 system played vital parts in Eggen&#x27;s philosophy as a coach.

==Personal life==
He was the father of Norway international footballer and manager Knut Torbjørn Eggen, who committed suicide in 2012. His grandson Christian Eggen Rismark played professionally for Brann Bergen.

===Death===
Eggen died on 19 January 2022, at the age of 80.

==Quotes==
* &quot;It&#x27;s hope in the hanging snore&quot; – having trouble translating a Norwegian proverb on an international press conference.
* &quot;We play with two stoppers and three spisses&quot; – speaking about Rosenborg&#x27;s tactics at a press conference before a Champions League game (stoppers meaning centre backs and spisses means forwards).
* &quot;Congratulations, arse-football!&quot; – (&quot;Gratulerer, rævva-fotball!&quot;), coining a new Norwegian term that&#x27;s been popular ever since. Told Molde coach Åge Hareide after Rosenborg lost the semi-final of the 1994 Norwegian Football Cup.

==Honours==
===Player===
Vålerengen
* Norwegian top division: 1965

Rosenborg
* Norwegian top division: 1967, 1969
* Norwegian Cup: 1960

Individual
* Norwegian top division Player of the Year: 1967

===Manager===
Rosenborg
* Norwegian top division (14): 1971, 1988, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2010
* Norwegian Cup (6): 1971, 1988, 1990, 1992, 1995, 1999

Moss
* Norwegian top division: 1987

Individual
* Kniksen Award Coach of the Year (6): 1990, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1999
* Kniksen&#x27;s honour award: 2002

==References==

* &quot;Godfoten&quot; (2000) – 
* &quot;Dikt i garderoben&quot; (2001) – 
* &quot;Godfot-arven&quot; (2005) – </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q924988" start="0" end="15" title="Nils Arne Eggen" label="Nils Arne Eggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="70" end="80" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q500284" start="107" end="126" title="Orkdal Municipality" label="Orkdal Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q186785" start="154" end="163" title="Rosenborg BK" label="Rosenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q201671" start="305" end="327" title="Norwegian top division" label="Norwegian top division"/>
<link wikidata="Q617335" start="350" end="372" title="Norwegian Football Cup" label="Norwegian Football Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q127676" start="632" end="641" title="Trøndelag" label="Trøndelag"/>
<link wikidata="Q464753" start="787" end="803" title="Hjalmar Andersen" label="Hjalmar Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180749" start="808" end="822" title="Petter Northug" label="Petter Northug"/>
<link wikidata="Q19384703" start="857" end="863" title="Orkdal IL" label="Orkdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186785" start="884" end="893" title="Rosenborg BK" label="Rosenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212819" start="938" end="948" title="Vålerenga Fotball" label="Vålerengen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="999" end="1005" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446294" start="1272" end="1282" title="Norway national under-21 football team" label="Norway U21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815756" start="1353" end="1375" title="Kjell Schou-Andreassen" label="Kjell Schou-Andreassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q291163" start="1520" end="1524" title="Moss FK" label="Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1907" end="1923" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="2094" end="2102" title="Defender (association football)" label="defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q19384703" start="2106" end="2112" title="Orkdal IL" label="Orkdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="2154" end="2163" title="Trondheim (city)" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q186785" start="2185" end="2194" title="Rosenborg BK" label="Rosenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="2284" end="2288" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212819" start="2305" end="2314" title="Vålerenga Fotball" label="Vålerenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q162060" start="2355" end="2359" title="1965 1. divisjon" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q186785" start="2433" end="2442" title="Rosenborg BK" label="Rosenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q186785" start="2610" end="2619" title="Rosenborg BK" label="Rosenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769552" start="2648" end="2664" title="Tor Røste Fossen" label="Tor Røste Fossen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46943" start="2905" end="2919" title="1978 World Cup" label="1978 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="2947" end="2953" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="2958" end="2969" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186785" start="3184" end="3193" title="Rosenborg BK" label="Rosenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q291163" start="3396" end="3400" title="Moss FK" label="Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q201671" start="3691" end="3713" title="Eliteserien" label="Norwegian top division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="3768" end="3789" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q617335" start="3862" end="3884" title="Norwegian football cup" label="Norwegian football cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q357870" start="4172" end="4183" title="Erik Hamrén" label="Erik Hamrén"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="4208" end="4248" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q167787" start="4279" end="4290" title="Jan Jönsson" label="Jan Jönsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q201671" start="4353" end="4373" title="Norwegian top flight" label="Norwegian top flight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4454" end="4459" title="Orkla FK" label="Orkla"/>
<link wikidata="Q94345" start="4638" end="4671" title="Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav" label="Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q738761" start="4783" end="4797" title="total football" label="total football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154479" start="4802" end="4815" title="Rinus Michels" label="Rinus Michels"/>
<link wikidata="Q871403" start="5180" end="5185" title="4–3–3" label="4–3–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465104" start="5335" end="5354" title="Knut Torbjørn Eggen" label="Knut Torbjørn Eggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33383274" start="5400" end="5423" title="Christian Eggen Rismark" label="Christian Eggen Rismark"/>
<link wikidata="Q205685" start="5450" end="5462" title="SK Brann" label="Brann Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="5629" end="5636" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="5992" end="6001" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208552" start="6049" end="6054" title="Molde FK" label="Molde"/>
<link wikidata="Q270832" start="6061" end="6072" title="Åge Hareide" label="Åge Hareide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693094" start="6116" end="6143" title="Norwegian Football Cup 1994" label="1994 Norwegian Football Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q201671" start="6184" end="6206" title="Norwegian top division" label="Norwegian top division"/>
<link wikidata="Q162060" start="6208" end="6212" title="1965 1. divisjon" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q162074" start="6250" end="6254" title="1967 1. divisjon" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q162086" start="6256" end="6260" title="1969 1. divisjon" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q617335" start="6263" end="6276" title="Norwegian Football Cup" label="Norwegian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693038" start="6278" end="6282" title="1960 Norwegian Football Cup" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q201671" start="6372" end="6394" title="Norwegian top division" label="Norwegian top division"/>
<link wikidata="Q162101" start="6401" end="6405" title="1971 1. divisjon" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q162173" start="6407" end="6411" title="1988 1. divisjon" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q162180" start="6413" end="6417" title="1990 Tippeligaen" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q206605" start="6419" end="6423" title="1992 Tippeligaen" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q727415" start="6425" end="6429" title="1993 Tippeligaen" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298947" start="6431" end="6435" title="1994 Tippeligaen" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q277659" start="6437" end="6441" title="1995 Tippeligaen" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q766725" start="6443" end="6447" title="1996 Tippeligaen" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299499" start="6449" end="6453" title="1997 Tippeligaen" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q919276" start="6455" end="6459" title="1999 Tippeligaen" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298756" start="6461" end="6465" title="2000 Tippeligaen" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q729030" start="6467" end="6471" title="2001 Tippeligaen" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299438" start="6473" end="6477" title="2002 Tippeligaen" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069569" start="6479" end="6483" title="2010 Tippeligaen" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q617335" start="6486" end="6499" title="Norwegian Football Cup" label="Norwegian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693057" start="6505" end="6509" title="1971 Norwegian Football Cup" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693085" start="6511" end="6515" title="1988 Norwegian Football Cup" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693087" start="6517" end="6521" title="1990 Norwegian Football Cup" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693090" start="6523" end="6527" title="1992 Norwegian Football Cup" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693096" start="6529" end="6533" title="1995 Norwegian Football Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693104" start="6535" end="6539" title="1999 Norwegian Football Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q162169" start="6572" end="6576" title="1987 1. divisjon" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777186" start="6591" end="6622" title="Kniksen Award" label="Kniksen Award Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6628" end="6632" title="Kniksen Award#1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6634" end="6638" title="Kniksen Award#1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6640" end="6644" title="Kniksen Award#1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6646" end="6650" title="Kniksen Award#1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6652" end="6656" title="Kniksen Award#1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6658" end="6662" title="Kniksen Award#1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777186" start="6665" end="6692" title="Kniksen Award" label="Kniksen&amp;#x27;s honour award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6694" end="6698" title="Kniksen Award#2002" label="2002"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303241" wikidata="Q2569703" url="?curid=303241" title="Strong Guy">
<text>Strong Guy (Guido Carosella) is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He was created by Chris Claremont and Bill Sienkiewicz and first appeared in &quot;The New Mutants&quot; #29 (July 1985).

==Publication history==
Strong Guy first appeared in &quot;The New Mutants&quot; #29 (July 1985) as Lila Cheney&#x27;s bodyguard known only as Guido. He joined X-Factor in &quot;X-Factor&quot; #71, and was first called Strong Guy in &quot;X-Factor&quot; #72. Guido&#x27;s struggles with picking a codename are used for comic effect in the story, and &quot;X-Factor&quot; writer Peter David admitted that in real life he had difficulty coming up with a decent codename for the character.

==Fictional character biography==
===Early life===
Born in Rhinebeck, New York to working class Italian parents, Guido Carosella gained a fortune in a settlement when his parents were killed by falling space debris, and was subsequently taken in by his aunt and uncle. His mutant powers were triggered in childhood during a battle with schoolyard bullies, causing him to become overly muscular and isolate further from his peers. Guido coped with his pain by developing an outgoing &quot;public face&quot;, rarely letting even those close to him see him in discomfort.

During the incident with the bus, another boy, Charlie Ronalds, was hurt by Guido&#x27;s flailing. Due to luck, Charlie survived with only a slight limp. He would later become the villain Charon.

===Lila Cheney and Muir Island===
After losing much of his fortune, Guido becomes a roadie and bouncer for Lila Cheney. He later works with several Muir Island mutants to defeat the Shadow King, after which they form a new incarnation of X-Factor.

===X-Factor===
Guido&#x27;s teammates are Havok, Polaris, Wolfsbane and Quicksilver. Required to come up with a codename, Guido announces himself as &quot;Strong Guy&quot; at an X-Factor press conference after hearing a reporter say, &quot;He must be the strong guy! Every super-group has a strong guy!&quot;.

Mister Sinister manipulates Strong Guy into destroying the Washington Monument while fighting Slab. With X-Factor, he aids the American-supported Trans-Sabal government in a war against rebels, and fights the Hulk, then battles the Mutant Liberation Front. He also fights the Brotherhood of Mutants.

Strong Guy later enters a relationship with Genoshan mutant and political dissident Jo Beth. He later suffers a deep depression after Cyber, the leader of the mercenary group Hell&#x27;s Belles, poisons him.

In &quot;The Infinity War&quot;, Strong Guy is among the superheroes who travel across the multiverse to battle Adam Warlock&#x27;s alter-egos, the Magus and the Goddess. Lila Cheney later attempts to have him return to her, but he refuses.

Strong Guy also develops a deep friendship with Wolfsbane. At one point, he personally brings her to Muir Island to get her medical attention. His other best friend on the team, Multiple Man, is seemingly killed attempting to remove the Legacy Virus from his body.

Strong Guy remains a member of X-Factor until an incident in Madripoor. While battling the K&#x27;Lanti, he absorbs the energy of one of their bombs and suffers a severe heart attack. Afterwards, he is put in suspended animation to recover until Forge heals him. Afterwards, he chooses to accompany Lila and her band in their travels instead of rejoining the increasingly fractious X-Factor.

Strong Guy was later seen in Tokyo as a member of a mutant fighting club called the Arena, in which the mutant fighters were being secretly enslaved by other mutants. He helped Storm and Callisto in taking down the enslavers.

===X-Factor Investigations===
In Peter David&#x27;s run on &quot;X-Factor&quot;, in the aftermath of Marvel&#x27;s &quot;Decimation&quot; storyline, Strong Guy moves to New York City to become an for Jamie Madrox&#x27;s detective agency, X-Factor Investigations. In the process, he rejoins many of his former teammates from the previous incarnation of X-Factor.

Strong Guy later considers becoming the sheriff of Mutant Town, but changes his mind when Arcade destroys the town. He is later killed protecting J. Jonah Jameson from super-powered assassins before being resurrected by Layla Miller. However, he no longer has a soul, which leads him to become more aggressive and eventually kill Wolfsbane&#x27;s son Tier to become the Supreme Hell Lord. Red Hulk eventually convinces Strong Guy to abandon the position of Hell Lord, but he remains in Hell to regain his soul.

===Return to Earth===
Strong Guy returns in &quot;Death of X&quot;, along with other mutants, helping the X-Men.

In &quot;Secret Empire&quot;, Strong Guy is seen among the inhabitants of the mutant nation of New Tian following Hydra&#x27;s takeover of the United States.

===New Mutants: Dead Souls===
At some point, Strong Guy regains his soul with help from Magik and joins her team of New Mutants. While fighting his teammates, who have been infected with the Transmode virus, he suffers from a heart attack, but Danielle Moonstar saves him by infecting him with a techno-organic virus.

===Last X-Men and Death===
A still techno-organic Strong Guy is held captive by O*N*E and placed inside a Sentinel. He is rescued by Cyclops and Wolverine before sacrificing himself to save the others by absorbing massive amounts of energy.

===Revived on Krakoa===
Strong Guy is later seen on Krakoa, having been revived by the Krakoan council like many other previously dead mutants.

==Powers and abilities==
Strong Guy possesses superhuman strength which he can increase by absorbing kinetic energy and use it to enhance his physical strength to an unmeasured limit. He cannot store the energy he absorbs for very long; as a rule he must physically expend the energy within 90 seconds to prevent it from permanently distorting his body. He possesses superhuman stamina and durability.

An unusual percentage of his body mass is stored in the upper half of his body, causing him to appear top-heavy and thus very imposing. Strong Guy&#x27;s powers first appeared after being beaten by bullies and hit by a bus; unable to expel the energy, his body was permanently warped. Strong Guy&#x27;s maximum strength level is such that he has sufficient power to move the Blob, or briefly stand toe to toe with the Hulk, although the latter&#x27;s rage-enhanced strength was so powerful that the energy of channeling merely one blow put Strong Guy in danger of a heart attack afterwards. Guido is formidable at hand-to-hand combat in the style of street fighting.

Guido has a gifted intellect and is a talented actor and comedian. He earned a Bachelor of Arts in drama from New York University.

Strong Guy is nearsighted and wears corrective &quot;bottlecap&quot; lenses.

==Reception==
* In 2014, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; ranked Strong Guy 94th in their &quot;Let&#x27;s rank every X-Man ever&quot; list.
* In 2018, Comic Book Resources (CBR) ranked Strong Guy 8th in their &quot;Age Of Apocalypse: The 30 Strongest Characters In Marvel&#x27;s Coolest Alternate World&quot; list.

==Other versions==
An alternate universe variant of Strong Guy from Earth-295 appears in &quot;Age of Apocalypse&quot;.

==In other media==
===Television===
* Strong Guy makes non-speaking appearances in &quot;X-Men: The Animated Series&quot; as a member of X-Factor.
* Strong Guy appears in the &quot;X-Men &#x27;97&quot; episode &quot;Bright Eyes&quot;, voiced by Adrian Hough.

===Merchandise===
* In 1993, Toy Biz released an action figure of Strong Guy sporting his X-Factor uniform as part of their X-Men series. The figure featured &quot;Power Punch&quot; action.
* Marvel and Planet Studios released a 1.25 inch/3.175 cm Full Figure pin of Strong Guy, 1994.
* Bowen Designs produced a Strong Guy Mini-Bust, sculpted by Jeremy Pelletier, July 2012. It was released in Phase 5, Bust # 288. It measures approx. 9.5 inches tall.
* Hasbro released a 6&quot; scale action figure of Strong Guy as the Build-A-Figure for a wave of Deadpool and X-Men characters in their Marvel Legends line in 2020.

==References==
==External links==
* Strong Guy at Marvel.com
* Strong Guy at Marvel Wiki
* Strong Guy at Comic Vine
* Strong Guy at UncannyXmen.net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2569703" start="0" end="10" title="Strong Guy" label="Strong Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569703" start="12" end="27" title="Strong Guy" label="Guido Carosella"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="44" end="53" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114502" start="67" end="86" title="American comic book" label="American comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="101" end="114" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q631369" start="134" end="149" title="Chris Claremont" label="Chris Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q862461" start="154" end="170" title="Bill Sienkiewicz" label="Bill Sienkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q122182084" start="199" end="214" title="The New Mutants (comic book)" label="The New Mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211423" start="399" end="407" title="X-Factor (comics)" label="X-Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q122955846" start="417" end="425" title="X-Factor (comic book)" label="X-Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351554" start="617" end="628" title="Peter David" label="Peter David"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241019" start="786" end="805" title="Rhinebeck, New York" label="Rhinebeck, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="809" end="822" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="823" end="830" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086613" start="1485" end="1491" title="Charon (Marvel Comics)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430248" start="1578" end="1584" title="roadie" label="roadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860242" start="1589" end="1596" title="bouncer (doorman)" label="bouncer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589349" start="1601" end="1612" title="Lila Cheney" label="Lila Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439694" start="1642" end="1653" title="Muir Island" label="Muir Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585469" start="1676" end="1687" title="Shadow King" label="Shadow King"/>
<link wikidata="Q122955846" start="1732" end="1740" title="X-Factor (comic book)" label="X-Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q849486" start="1785" end="1790" title="Havok (character)" label="Havok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071256" start="1792" end="1799" title="Polaris (Marvel Comics)" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q996154" start="1801" end="1810" title="Wolfsbane (character)" label="Wolfsbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q929273" start="1815" end="1826" title="Quicksilver (Marvel Comics)" label="Quicksilver"/>
<link wikidata="Q272281" start="1930" end="1946" title="press conference" label="press conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q302534" start="2054" end="2069" title="Mister Sinister" label="Mister Sinister"/>
<link wikidata="Q178114" start="2113" end="2132" title="Washington Monument" label="Washington Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202575" start="2148" end="2152" title="Slab (comics)" label="Slab"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="2263" end="2267" title="Hulk" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777295" start="2286" end="2309" title="Mutant Liberation Front" label="Mutant Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q514974" start="2330" end="2352" title="Brotherhood of Mutants" label="Brotherhood of Mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q898025" start="2399" end="2406" title="Genosha" label="Genosha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008124" start="2489" end="2494" title="Cyber (Marvel Comics)" label="Cyber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777295" start="2530" end="2548" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Belles" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Belles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041386" start="2573" end="2589" title="The Infinity War" label="The Infinity War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735229" start="2676" end="2688" title="Adam Warlock" label="Adam Warlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735229" start="2712" end="2717" title="Magus (comics)" label="Magus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2726" end="2733" title="Adam Warlock#The Goddess" label="Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456058" start="2984" end="2996" title="Multiple Man" label="Multiple Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893188" start="3043" end="3055" title="Legacy Virus" label="Legacy Virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161521" start="3133" end="3142" title="Madripoor" label="Madripoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605558" start="3163" end="3175" title="K&amp;#x27;Lanti" label="K&amp;#x27;Lanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="3242" end="3254" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043043" start="3281" end="3300" title="suspended animation" label="suspended animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002884" start="3318" end="3323" title="Forge (character)" label="Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="3494" end="3499" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="3642" end="3647" title="Storm (Marvel Comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q857541" start="3652" end="3660" title="Callisto (comics)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351554" start="3725" end="3736" title="Peter David" label="Peter David"/>
<link wikidata="Q721927" start="3813" end="3823" title="Decimation (comics)" label="Decimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3861" end="3874" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041445" start="3930" end="3953" title="X-Factor Investigations" label="X-Factor Investigations"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="4095" end="4102" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q931048" start="4145" end="4151" title="Arcade (Marvel Comics)" label="Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992523" start="4201" end="4217" title="J. Jonah Jameson" label="J. Jonah Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q744170" start="4275" end="4287" title="Layla Miller" label="Layla Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841525" start="4444" end="4452" title="Thunderbolt Ross" label="Red Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q29831946" start="4617" end="4627" title="Death of X" label="Death of X"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602169" start="4690" end="4703" title="Secret Empire (2017 comic)" label="Secret Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052324" start="4795" end="4800" title="Hydra (comics)" label="Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651308" start="4928" end="4933" title="Magik" label="Magik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692414" start="5031" end="5046" title="Transmode virus" label="Transmode virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q767790" start="5084" end="5101" title="Danielle Moonstar" label="Danielle Moonstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692414" start="5136" end="5156" title="techno-organic virus" label="techno-organic virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q782181" start="5265" end="5273" title="Sentinel (comics)" label="Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q857921" start="5292" end="5299" title="Cyclops (Marvel Comics)" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q186422" start="5304" end="5313" title="Wolverine (character)" label="Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q897782" start="5453" end="5459" title="Krakoa" label="Krakoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="5647" end="5661" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q371692" start="6324" end="6328" title="Blob (Marvel Comics)" label="Blob"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="6367" end="6371" title="Hulk" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="6763" end="6774" title="nearsighted" label="nearsighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="6858" end="6878" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="6979" end="6999" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274103" start="7239" end="7256" title="Age of Apocalypse" label="Age of Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7354" end="7380" title="X-Men: The Animated Series" label="X-Men: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211423" start="7402" end="7410" title="X-Factor (comics)" label="X-Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q109558622" start="7446" end="7460" title="X-Men &amp;#x27;97" label="X-Men &amp;#x27;97"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303243" wikidata="Q1383168" url="?curid=303243" title="Jan Skácel">
<text>Jan Skácel (7 February 1922 – 7 November 1989) was a Czech poet of Moravian origin, widely acclaimed as one of the best poets who had been writing in Czech.

==Biography==
Skácel was born in Vnorovy in 1922.

He often juxtaposed the fear stoked by the communist regime in Czechoslovakia and the highly free syntax of Czech language. His poems are closely connected to the traditions and the nature of the region he lived in, Southern Moravia.

His poems were mentioned in the book Ignorance written by Milan Kundera.

Skácel was the editor of &quot;Host do domu&quot;, an important literary magazine between 1963 and 1969. He was awarded the German international literary Petrarca-Preis and Slovenian international Vilenica prize in 1989.

When in 1996 she won the Georg-Büchner Prize for literature, the German poet Sarah Kirsch named Skácel as a major influence.

Skácel died in Brno in 1989.

==Works==

===Poetry===
*&quot;Kolik příležitostí má růže&quot; Prague, 1957 (How many chances the rose has)
*&quot;Co zbylo z anděla&quot; Prague, 1960 (What remained of angel)
*&quot;Hodina mezi psem a vlkem&quot; Prague, 1962 (An hour between dog and wolf)
*&quot;Smuténka&quot; Prague, 1965 (title is neologism with root &quot;smutný&quot; = sad, it associates botanic name)
*&quot;Vítr jménem Jaromír&quot; Prague, 1966 (Wind called Jaromír)
*&quot;Metličky&quot; Prague, 1968 (Little whisks)
*&quot;Tratidla&quot; Brno, 1974 (neologism with root &quot;tratit&quot; = to lose, it associates toponyme)
*&quot;Dávné proso&quot; Brno, 1981 (Ancient Millet)
*&quot;Naděje s bukovými křídly&quot; Prague, 1983 (Hope with Wings of Beech)
*&quot;Odlévání do ztraceného vosku&quot; Brno, 1984 (Lost-wax casting)
*&quot;Kdo pije potmě víno&quot; Brno, 1988 (Drinker of wine in the dark)
*&quot;A znovu láska&quot; Brno, 1991 (Love again)

===Prose===
*&quot;Jedenáctý bílý kůň&quot; Brno 1966 (The eleventh white horse)
*&quot;Třináctý černý kůň&quot; Brno 1993 (The thirteenth black horse)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1383168" start="0" end="10" title="Jan Skácel" label="Jan Skácel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="53" end="58" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="59" end="63" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q756716" start="67" end="75" title="Moravians (ethnic group)" label="Moravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="150" end="155" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q605873" start="191" end="198" title="Vnorovy" label="Vnorovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="252" end="261" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="272" end="286" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192697" start="425" end="441" title="South Moravia Region" label="Southern Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048945" start="481" end="490" title="Ignorance (novel)" label="Ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q93166" start="502" end="515" title="Milan Kundera" label="Milan Kundera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="582" end="599" title="literary magazine" label="literary magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q451159" start="672" end="686" title="Petrarca-Preis" label="Petrarca-Preis"/>
<link wikidata="Q630376" start="733" end="737" title="1989 in literature" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="881" end="885" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q765814" start="1687" end="1703" title="Lost-wax casting" label="Lost-wax casting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303245" wikidata="Q111784" url="?curid=303245" title="Secretary of State for Scotland">
<text>The secretary of state for Scotland (; ), also referred to as the Scottish secretary, is a secretary of state in the Government of the United Kingdom, with responsibility for the Scotland Office. The incumbent is a member of the Cabinet of the United Kingdom. The Secretary of State for Scotland serves as the custodian of the Scottish devolution settlement as outlined in the Scotland Act 1998, and represent Scottish interests within the UK Government as well as advocate for UK Government policies in Scotland. The secretary of state for Scotland is additionally responsible for partnership between the UK Government and the Scottish Government, as well as relations between the Parliament of the United Kingdom and the Scottish Parliament.

Much of the secretary of state for Scotland&#x27;s responsibility transferred to the office of the first minister of Scotland upon the establishment of a new Scottish Executive, since renamed the Scottish Government, and a new devolved Scottish Parliament in 1999 following the Scotland Act 1998. 

The office holder works alongside the other Scotland Office ministers. The secretary of state for Scotland is supported by their deputy, the parliamentary under-secretary of state for Scotland. The incumbent is Ian Murray, following his appointment by Prime Minister Keir Starmer in July 2024. The corresponding shadow minister is the shadow secretary of state for Scotland. 

==Overview==
===History of office===
====Acts of Union, 1707====

The post was first created after the Acts of Union 1707 created the Kingdom of Great Britain from the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland. It was abolished in 1746, following the Jacobite rising of 1745. Scottish affairs thereafter were managed by the lord advocate until 1827, when responsibility passed to the Home Office. In 1885 the post of secretary for Scotland was re-created, with the incumbent usually a member of the Cabinet. In 1926 this post was upgraded to a full secretary of state appointment.

====Devolution, 1999====

After the 1999 Scottish devolution, the powers of the Scottish Office were divided, with most transferred to the Scottish Government or to other British government departments, leaving only a limited role for the Scotland Office. From June 2003 to October 2008, the holder of the office of secretary of state for Scotland also held another Cabinet post concurrently, leading to claims that the Scottish role was seen as a part-time ministry.

===Functions===
====Reduced responsibility====
With the advent of legislative devolution for Scotland in 1999, the role of secretary of state for Scotland was diminished. Most of the functions vested in the office since administrative devolution in the 19th century were transferred to the newly established Scottish Ministers upon the opening of the Scottish Parliament, or to other UK government ministers. Most of the functions and powers of the secretary of state for Scotland transferred to the first minister of Scotland as the head of the Scottish Government. Donald Dewar served as the first first minister of Scotland between 1999–2000, having previously served as the secretary of state for Scotland between 1997–1999. 

However, the secretary of state does represent Scotland in the Cabinet of the United Kingdom on matters that are not devolved to the Scottish Parliament, and also holds Scotland Questions on the first Wednesday of every month between 11:30 am and 12 noon, when any member of Parliament can ask a question on any matter relating to Scotland. However, devolved issues are not usually raised by MPs, as these are decided solely by Scottish Government policy, and influenced, discussed and voted on by members of the Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh. Moreover, the secretary of state for Scotland cannot introduce any bill or legislation in the UK Parliament relating to a devolved matter under the convention that the UK Government will not introduce legislation on devolved areas without the agreement of the Scottish Parliament. The secretary of state is also the group leader of the Scottish MPs from the government party.

====Scottish Government collaboration====
The office mainly acts as a go-between for the UK and Scottish Governments and Parliaments. However, due to the secretary&#x27;s position as a minister in the British government, the convention of Cabinet collective responsibility applies, and as such the post is usually viewed as being a partisan one to promote the UK government&#x27;s decision-making in Scotland, as adherence to the convention precludes doing anything else.

With the rise of the Scottish National Party (SNP) in both the Scottish Parliament and the British Parliament and the resultant interest in Scottish Independence, the secretary of state&#x27;s role has also subsequently increased in prominence. The Scotland Office itself has received a cumulative increase in budget of 20% from 2013 to 2017, with a 14.4% increase in 2015/16 alone.

====Responsibilities====

The UK government&#x27;s website lists the secretary of state for Scotland&#x27;s responsibilities as being:

* The secretary of state for Scotland is the UK Government Cabinet Minister representing Scotland.
* They act as the custodian of the Scottish devolution settlement. 
* They represent Scottish interests within the UK Government
* They advocate for the UK Government’s policies in Scotland.
* They also promote partnership between the UK Government and the Scottish Government, as well as relations between the UK and Scottish Parliaments.

This seeming lack of responsibility has in recent years seen calls from opposition MPs for the scrapping of the role and the Scotland Office. Robert Hazell has suggested merging the offices of secretary of state for Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales into one secretary of state for the Union, in a department into which Rodney Brazier has suggested adding a minister of state for England with responsibility for English local government.

More broadly, the UK Government advocates that all UK Government cabinet ministers with responsibility for a territorial secretary of state position are responsible for: 

* the smooth running of the devolution settlements and act as the lynchpin of the relationship between the devolved government and HM Government
* handling legislation as it affects the territory
* representing the territory’s interests in cabinet and cabinet committees
* responding to parliamentary interests in territorial affairs
* transmitting the block grant to the devolved administration
* supporting collaboration between HM Government and the devolved administration
* promoting the interests of the territory

==List of Scottish secretaries==

===Secretaries of state for Scotland (1707–1746)===

:&quot;John Erskine, Earl of Mar had served as Secretary of State of the independent Scotland from 1705. Following the Acts of Union 1707, he remained in office.&quot;

The post of secretary of state for Scotland existed after the Union of the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England in 1707 till the Jacobite rising of 1745. After the rising, responsibility for Scotland lay primarily with the office of the home secretary, usually exercised by the lord advocate.
Office thereafter vacant.

=== Secretaries for Scotland (1885–1926) ===
{{Infobox UK legislation
| short_title = Secretary for Scotland Act 1885
| type = Act
| parliament = Parliament of the United Kingdom
| long_title = An Act for appointing a Secretary for Scotland and Vice-President of the Scotch Education Department.
| year = 1885
| citation = 48 &amp; 49 Vict. c. 61
| introduced_commons = 
| introduced_lords = 
| territorial_extent = 
| royal_assent = 14 August 1885
| commencement = 
| expiry_date = 
| repeal_date = 
| amends = 
| replaces = 
| amendments = 
| repealing_legislation = 
| related_legislation = 
| status = amended
| legislation_history = 
| theyworkforyou = 
| millbankhansard = 
| original_text = https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Vict/48-49/61/contents/enacted
| revised_text = 
| use_new_UK-LEG = 
| UK-LEG_title = Secretary for Scotland Act 1885
| collapsed = yes
The secretary for Scotland was chief minister in charge of the Scottish Office in the United Kingdom government. The Scottish Office was created with the post of secretary for Scotland by the {{visible anchor|Secretary for Scotland Act 1885}}. From 1892 the secretary for Scotland sat in cabinet. The post was upgraded to full secretary of state rank as the secretary of state for Scotland in 1926.

From 1885 to 1999, secretaries for Scotland and secretaries of state for Scotland also &quot;ex officio&quot; held the post of Keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland. From 1999, the position of keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland has been held by the first minister of Scotland.

===Secretaries of state for Scotland (1926–)===

== Timeline ==
{{#tag:timeline|ImageSize=width:1100 height:auto barincrement:13
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
AlignBars = late
PlotArea = width:90% left:10 top:10 bottom:80
Legend = columns:1 left:120 top:50 columnwidth:175

Define $today = {{#time:d/m/Y}}

DateFormat = dd/mm/yyyy
Period = from:01/01/1885 till:31/12/{{#time:Y|+1 year}}
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal

Colors =
 id:conservative value:rgb(0,0.53,0.86) legend: Conservative_and_Unionist_Party
 id:liberal value:rgb(1,0.84,0) legend: Liberal_Party
 id:labour value:rgb(0.86,0.08,0.18) legend: Labour_Party
 id:unionist value:rgb(0.333,0.333,1) legend: Unionist_Party
 id:natliberal value:rgb(0,0.83,0.90) legend: National_Liberal_Party
 id:libdem value:rgb(0.98,0.651,0.102) legend: Liberal_Democrats
 id:independent value:rgb(0.8,0.8,0.8) legend: Independent_or_no_party
 id:liteline value:rgb(0.9,0.9,0.9)
 id:line value:rgb(0.8,0.8,0.8)

ScaleMajor = gridcolor:line unit:year increment:10 start:1890
ScaleMinor = gridcolor:liteline unit:year increment:5 start:1885

TextData =
 pos:(20,55) textcolor:black fontsize:M
 text:&quot;Political parties:&quot;

BarData = 
 bar:Gordon-Lennox
 bar:Trevelyan
 bar:Ramsay 
 bar:Balfour
 bar:Kerr
 bar:Bruce
 bar:Murray 
 bar:Hope 
 bar:JSinclair
 bar:McKinnon_Wood
 bar:Tennant
 bar:Munro 
 bar:Munro_Ferguson
 bar:Adamson 
 bar:Gilmour 
 bar:ASinclair
 bar:Collins
 bar:Elliot
 bar:Colville
 bar:Brown
 bar:Johnston 
 bar:Primrose
 bar:Westwood
 bar:Woodburn
 bar:McNeil 
 bar:Stuart
 bar:Maclay 
 bar:Noble
 bar:Ross
 bar:Campbell
 bar:Millan 
 bar:Younger
 bar:Rifkind
 bar:Lang
 bar:Forsyth
 bar:Dewar
 bar:Reid
 bar:Liddell 
 bar:Darling
 bar:Alexander
 bar:Browne
 bar:Murphy
 bar:DAlexander
 bar:Moore
 bar:Carmichael 
 bar:Mundell
 bar:Jack
 bar:Murray1

PlotData=
 width:5 align:left fontsize:S shift:(5,-4) anchor:till
 bar:Gordon-Lennox
 from: 17/08/1885 till: 28/01/1886 color:Conservative text:&quot;Charles Gordon-Lennox&quot;
 bar:Trevelyan
 from: 08/02/1886 till: 01/03/1886 color:Liberal
 from: 18/08/1892 till: 21/06/1895 color:Liberal text:&quot;George Trevelyan&quot;
 bar:Ramsay 
 from: 05/04/1886 till: 20/07/1886 color:Liberal text:&quot;John Ramsay&quot;
 bar:Balfour
 from: 05/08/1886 till: 11/03/1887 color:Conservative text:&quot;Arthur Balfour&quot;
 bar:Kerr
 from: 11/03/1887 till: 11/08/1892 color:Conservative text:&quot;Schomberg Kerr&quot;
 bar:Bruce
 from: 29/06/1895 till: 09/10/1903 color:Conservative text:&quot;Alexander Bruce&quot;
 bar:Murray 
 from: 09/10/1903 till: 02/02/1905 color:Conservative text:&quot;Andrew Murray&quot;
 bar:Hope 
 from: 02/02/1905 till: 04/12/1905 color:Conservative text:&quot;John Hope&quot;
 bar:JSinclair
 from: 10/12/1905 till: 13/02/1912 color:Liberal text:&quot;John Sinclair&quot;
 bar:McKinnon_Wood
 from: 13/02/1912 till: 09/07/1916 color:Liberal text:&quot;Thomas McKinnon Wood&quot;
 bar:Tennant
 from: 09/07/1916 till: 05/12/1916 color:Liberal text:&quot;Harold Tennant&quot;
 bar:Munro 
 from: 10/12/1916 till: 19/10/1922 color:Liberal text:&quot;Robert Munro&quot;
 bar:Munro_Ferguson
 from: 24/10/1922 till: 22/01/1924 color:Independent text:&quot;Ronald Munro Ferguson
 bar:Adamson 
 from: 22/01/1924 till: 03/11/1924 color:Labour
 from: 07/06/1929 till: 24/08/1931 color:Labour text:&quot;William Adamson&quot;
 bar:Gilmour 
 from: 06/11/1924 till: 04/06/1929 color:Unionist text:&quot;John Gilmour&quot;
 bar:ASinclair
 from: 25/08/1931 till: 28/09/1932 color:Liberal text:&quot;Archibald Sinclair&quot;
 bar:Collins
 from: 28/09/1932 till: 29/10/1936 color:NatLiberal text:&quot;Godfrey Collins&quot;
 bar:Elliot
 from: 29/10/1936 till: 06/05/1938 color:Unionist text:&quot;Walter Elliot&quot;
 bar:Colville
 from: 06/05/1938 till: 10/05/1940 color:Unionist text:&quot;John Colville&quot;
 bar:Brown
 from: 14/05/1940 till: 08/02/1941 color:NatLiberal text:&quot;Ernest Brown&quot;
 bar:Johnston 
 from: 08/02/1941 till: 23/05/1945 color:Labour text:&quot;Thomas Johnston&quot;
 bar:Primrose
 from: 25/05/1945 till: 26/07/1945 color:NatLiberal text:&quot;Harry Primrose&quot;
 bar:Westwood
 from: 03/08/1945 till: 07/10/1947 color:Labour text:&quot;Joseph Westwood&quot;
 bar:Woodburn
 from: 07/10/1947 till: 28/02/1950 color:Labour text:&quot;Arthur Woodburn&quot;
 bar:McNeil 
 from: 28/02/1950 till: 26/10/1951 color:Labour text:&quot;Hector McNeil&quot;
 bar:Stuart
 from: 30/10/1951 till: 13/01/1957 color:Unionist text:&quot;James Stuart&quot;
 bar:Maclay 
 from: 13/01/1957 till: 13/07/1962 color:Unionist text:&quot;John Maclay&quot;
 bar:Noble
 from: 13/07/1962 till: 16/10/1964 color:Unionist text:&quot;Michael Noble&quot;
 bar:Ross
 from: 18/10/1964 till: 19/06/1970 color:Labour
 from: 05/03/1974 till: 08/04/1976 color:Labour text:&quot;Willie Ross&quot;
 bar:Campbell
 from: 19/06/1970 till: 04/03/1974 color:Conservative text:&quot;Gordon Campbell&quot;
 bar:Millan
 from: 08/04/1976 till: 04/05/1979 color:Labour text:&quot;Bruce Millan&quot;
 bar:Younger
 from: 05/05/1979 till: 11/01/1986 color:Conservative text:&quot;George Younger&quot;
 bar:Rifkind
 from: 11/01/1986 till: 28/11/1990 color:Conservative text:&quot;Malcom Rifkind&quot;
 bar:Lang
 from: 28/11/1990 till: 05/07/1995 color:Conservative text:&quot;Ian Lang&quot;
 bar:Forsyth
 from: 05/07/1995 till: 02/05/1997 color:Conservative text:&quot;Michael Forsyth&quot;
 bar:Dewar
 from: 02/05/1997 till: 17/05/1999 color:Labour text:&quot;Donald Dewar&quot;
 bar:Reid
 from: 17/05/1999 till: 25/01/2001 color:Labour text:&quot;John Reid&quot;
 bar:Liddell 
 from: 25/01/2001 till: 13/06/2003 color:Labour text:&quot;Helen Liddell&quot;
 bar:Darling
 from: 13/06/2003 till: 05/05/2006 color:Labour text:&quot;Alistair Darling&quot;
 bar:Alexander
 from: 05/05/2006 till: 28/06/2007 color:Labour text:&quot;Douglas Alexander&quot;
 bar:Browne
 from: 28/06/2007 till: 03/10/2008 color:Labour text:&quot;Des Browne&quot;
 bar:Murphy
 from: 03/10/2008 till: 11/05/2010 color:Labour text:&quot;Jim Murphy&quot;
 bar:DAlexander
 from: 12/05/2010 till: 29/05/2010 color:LibDem text:&quot;Danny Alexander&quot;
 bar:Moore
 from: 29/05/2010 till: 07/10/2013 color:LibDem text:&quot;Michael Moore&quot;
 bar:Carmichael 
 from: 07/10/2013 till: 08/05/2015 color:LibDem text:&quot;Alistair Carmichael&quot;
 bar:Mundell
 from: 08/05/2015 till: 24/07/2019 color:Conservative text:&quot;David Mundell&quot;
 bar:Jack
 from: 24/07/2019 till: 04/07/2024 color:Conservative text:&quot;Alister Jack&quot;
 bar:Murray1
 from: 05/07/2024 till: $today color:Labour text:&quot;Ian Murray&quot;

==Notes==
{{Notelist}}

==See also==
* First Minister of Scotland
* Secretary of State, a senior post in the pre-Union government of the Kingdom of Scotland
* Under-Secretary of State for Scotland, junior minister supporting the Secretary of State for Scotland
* Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland
* Secretary of State (Jacobite)
* Secretary of State for Northern Ireland
* Secretary of State for Wales

== Notes ==
{{reflist|group=nb}}

==References==
{{reflist}}

==External links==
* Official website of the Scotland Office

{{Cabinet positions in the United Kingdom}}
{{Scotland Office}}
{{Scotland topics}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Secretary Of State For Scotland}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="4" end="35" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="secretary of state for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="66" end="84" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Scottish secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214" start="91" end="109" title="Secretary of State (United Kingdom)" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="117" end="149" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q277020" start="179" end="194" title="Scotland Office" label="Scotland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="229" end="258" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866421" start="327" end="346" title="Scottish devolution" label="Scottish devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="377" end="394" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="628" end="647" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="682" end="714" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="723" end="742" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="844" end="870" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="903" end="921" title="Scottish Executive" label="Scottish Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="981" end="1000" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="1023" end="1040" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1088" end="1113" title="Scotland Office#Ministers" label="Scotland Office ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883048" start="1185" end="1236" title="Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland" label="parliamentary under-secretary of state for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q578432" start="1255" end="1265" title="Ian Murray (Scottish politician)" label="Ian Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="1296" end="1310" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="1311" end="1323" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="1356" end="1371" title="shadow minister" label="shadow minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q14957218" start="1379" end="1417" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland" label="shadow secretary of state for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="1524" end="1542" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1555" end="1579" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1589" end="1607" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1616" end="1635" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="1677" end="1700" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="Jacobite rising of 1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="1750" end="1763" title="Lord Advocate" label="lord advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="1810" end="1821" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="1925" end="1932" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214" start="1975" end="1993" title="Secretary of State (United Kingdom)" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866421" start="2044" end="2057" title="History of Scottish devolution" label="1999 Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="2058" end="2068" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311619" start="2088" end="2103" title="Scottish Office" label="Scottish Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="2147" end="2166" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500378" start="2179" end="2209" title="British government departments" label="British government departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q277020" start="2247" end="2262" title="Scotland Office" label="Scotland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="2828" end="2847" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="2977" end="3003" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="3023" end="3042" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q333158" start="3044" end="3056" title="Donald Dewar" label="Donald Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="3706" end="3740" title="members of the Scottish Parliament" label="members of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3744" end="3753" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489446" start="4371" end="4404" title="Cabinet collective responsibility" label="Cabinet collective responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="4626" end="4649" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="4696" end="4714" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q277020" start="4854" end="4869" title="Scotland Office" label="Scotland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="5758" end="5797" title="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="secretary of state for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846384" start="5812" end="5817" title="Secretary of State for Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356865" start="5888" end="5902" title="Rodney Brazier" label="Rodney Brazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112653" start="5980" end="6004" title="Local government in England" label="English local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q936913" start="6794" end="6819" title="John Erskine, Earl of Mar (1675–1732)" label="John Erskine, Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444326" start="6834" end="6852" title="Secretary of State (Kingdom of Scotland)" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="6906" end="6924" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="7018" end="7023" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="7031" end="7053" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="7062" end="7083" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="7101" end="7124" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="Jacobite rising of 1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="7209" end="7223" title="Home Secretary" label="home secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="7250" end="7263" title="Lord Advocate" label="lord advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q120109150" start="7615" end="7632" title="48 &amp;amp; 49 Vict." label="48 &amp;amp; 49 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="8200" end="8208" title="Political minister" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311619" start="8226" end="8241" title="Scottish Office" label="Scottish Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="8249" end="8274" title="United Kingdom government" label="United Kingdom government"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="8451" end="8458" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="8656" end="8666" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599947" start="8704" end="8726" title="Great Seal of Scotland" label="Great Seal of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q117743293" start="8755" end="8791" title="keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland" label="keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="8813" end="8839" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q333488" start="10819" end="10840" title="Charles Gordon-Lennox, 6th Duke of Richmond" label="Charles Gordon-Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q333808" start="10971" end="10987" title="Sir George Trevelyan, 2nd Baronet" label="George Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254150" start="11067" end="11078" title="John Ramsay, 13th Earl of Dalhousie" label="John Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="11163" end="11177" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11259" end="11273" title="Schomberg Kerr" label="Schomberg Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718450" start="11356" end="11371" title="Alexander Bruce, 6th Lord Balfour of Burleigh" label="Alexander Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844725" start="11456" end="11469" title="Andrew Murray, 1st Viscount Dunedin" label="Andrew Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q335178" start="11552" end="11561" title="John Hope, 7th Earl of Hopetoun" label="John Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11727985" start="11643" end="11656" title="John Sinclair, 1st Baron Pentland" label="John Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792331" start="11742" end="11762" title="Thomas McKinnon Wood" label="Thomas McKinnon Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662543" start="11842" end="11856" title="Harold Tennant" label="Harold Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347872" start="11935" end="11947" title="Robert Munro, 1st Baron Alness" label="Robert Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386511" start="12038" end="12059" title="Ronald Munro Ferguson" label="Ronald Munro Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q337459" start="12181" end="12196" title="William Adamson" label="William Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759238" start="12278" end="12290" title="Sir John Gilmour, 2nd Baronet" label="John Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786520" start="12372" end="12390" title="Archibald Sinclair" label="Archibald Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576408" start="12473" end="12488" title="Godfrey Collins" label="Godfrey Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964761" start="12568" end="12581" title="Walter Elliot (Scottish politician)" label="Walter Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226788" start="12663" end="12676" title="John Colville, 1st Baron Clydesmuir" label="John Colville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392836" start="12757" end="12769" title="Ernest Brown (British politician)" label="Ernest Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q255340" start="12850" end="12865" title="Tom Johnston (British politician)" label="Thomas Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671733" start="12949" end="12963" title="Harry Primrose, 6th Earl of Rosebery" label="Harry Primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287870" start="13043" end="13058" title="Joseph Westwood" label="Joseph Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800743" start="13138" end="13153" title="Arthur Woodburn" label="Arthur Woodburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428035" start="13232" end="13245" title="Hector McNeil" label="Hector McNeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143784" start="13325" end="13337" title="James Stuart, 1st Viscount Stuart of Findhorn" label="James Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246292" start="13418" end="13429" title="John Maclay" label="John Maclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833078" start="13508" end="13521" title="Michael Noble, Baron Glenkinglas" label="Michael Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q333404" start="13645" end="13656" title="Willie Ross, Baron Ross of Marnock" label="Willie Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584951" start="13742" end="13757" title="Gordon Campbell" label="Gordon Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333293" start="13835" end="13847" title="Bruce Millan" label="Bruce Millan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333145" start="13932" end="13946" title="George Younger" label="George Younger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14031" end="14045" title="Malcom Rifkind" label="Malcom Rifkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q333030" start="14127" end="14135" title="Ian Lang" label="Ian Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830372" start="14220" end="14235" title="Michael Forsyth" label="Michael Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q333158" start="14312" end="14324" title="Donald Dewar" label="Donald Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q333461" start="14400" end="14409" title="John Reid, Baron Reid of Cardowan" label="John Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q334128" start="14489" end="14502" title="Helen Liddell" label="Helen Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q296639" start="14581" end="14597" title="Alistair Darling" label="Alistair Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q259106" start="14678" end="14695" title="Douglas Alexander" label="Douglas Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q332587" start="14773" end="14783" title="Des Browne" label="Des Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q333702" start="14861" end="14871" title="Jim Murphy" label="Jim Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259082" start="14953" end="14968" title="Danny Alexander" label="Danny Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="15045" end="15058" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q269124" start="15141" end="15160" title="Alistair Carmichael" label="Alistair Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q333520" start="15245" end="15258" title="David Mundell" label="David Mundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30165682" start="15340" end="15352" title="Alister Jack" label="Alister Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q578432" start="15427" end="15437" title="Ian Murray (Scottish politician)" label="Ian Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="15484" end="15510" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444326" start="15513" end="15531" title="Secretary of State (Kingdom of Scotland)" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="15582" end="15601" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883048" start="15604" end="15641" title="Under-Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Under-Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14957218" start="15708" end="15746" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855081" start="15749" end="15778" title="Secretary of State (Jacobite)" label="Secretary of State (Jacobite)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="15781" end="15820" title="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846384" start="15823" end="15851" title="Secretary of State for Wales" label="Secretary of State for Wales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303250" wikidata="Q156205" url="?curid=303250" title="Johan Christian Fabricius">
<text>Johann Christian Fabricius (7 January 1745 – 3 March 1808) was a Danish zoologist, specialising in &quot;Insecta&quot;, which at that time included all arthropods: insects, arachnids, crustaceans and others. He was a student of Carl Linnaeus, and is considered one of the most important entomologists of the 18th century, having named nearly 10,000 species of animals, and established the basis for the modern insect classification.

==Biography==
Johann Christian Fabricius was born on 7 January 1745 at Tønder in the Duchy of Schleswig, where his father was a doctor. He studied at the gymnasium at Altona and entered the University of Copenhagen in 1762. Later the same year he travelled together with his friend and relative Johan Zoëga to Uppsala, where he studied under Carl Linnaeus for two years. On his return, he started work on his , which was finally published in 1775. Throughout this time, he remained dependent on subsidies from his father, who worked as a consultant at Frederiks Hospital.

Fabricius was appointed a professor in Copenhagen in 1770, and in 1775 or 1776, the University of Kiel appointed Fabricius professor of natural history and economics, promising that they would build a natural history museum and a botanical garden. Although he tried to resign three times, on one occasion only being prevented by an appeal from his students to the Danish King and Duke of Schleswig, Christian VII, Fabricius held the position at Kiel for the rest of his life.

During his time in Kiel, Fabricius repeatedly travelled to London in the summer to study the collections of British collectors, such as Joseph Banks and Dru Drury. Towards the end of his career, Fabricius spent much of his time living in Paris, where he frequently met with naturalists such as Georges Cuvier and Pierre André Latreille; he was also interested in the events of the French Revolution. On hearing of the British attack on Copenhagen in 1807, Fabricius returned to Kiel, damaging his already fragile health. He died on 3 March 1808, at the age of 63. His daughter died in an accident in Paris, but he was survived by two sons, who both studied medicine.

==Evolution==

The evolutionary ideas of Fabricius are not well known. He believed that man originated from the great apes and that new species could be formed by the hybridization of existing species. He also has been called the &quot;Father of Lamarckism&quot; because of his belief that new species could form from morphological adaptation. Fabricius wrote about the influence of environment on development of species and selection phenomena (females preferring the strongest males).

==Works==

Fabricius is considered one of the greatest entomologists of the 18th century. He was a greater observer of insects than his more botanically-minded mentor, Carl Linnaeus. Fabricius named 9,776 species of insects, compared to Linnaeus&#x27; tally of around 3,000. He identified many species of Tenebrionidae from the Egyptian Sinai on the basis of other entomologists&#x27; collections.

Fabricius added two distinct areas to the classification system. He considers both artificial and natural characteristics. Artificial characteristics allow for the determination of a species, and natural ones allow for the relationship to other genera and varieties.

In contrast to Linnaeus&#x27; classification of the insects, which was based primarily on the number of wings, and their form, Fabricius used the form of the mouthparts to discriminate the orders (which he termed &quot;classes&quot;). He stated &quot;those whose nourishment and biology are the same, must then belong to the same genus.&quot; Fabricius&#x27; system remains the basis of insect classification today, although the names he proposed are not. For instance, his name for the order containing the beetles was &quot;Eleutherata&quot;, rather than the modern &quot;Coleoptera&quot;, and he used &quot;Piezata&quot; for Hymenoptera; his term Glossata is still in use, but for a slightly smaller group among the Lepidoptera, rather than the whole order. Fabricius also foresaw that the male genitalia would provide useful characters for systematics, but could not apply that insight himself.

Fabricius was the first to divide the Staphylinidae (rove beetles), which Linnaeus had considered a single genus that he called &quot;Staphylinus&quot;, establishing in 1775 the genus &quot;Paederus&quot;. He also described 77 species of Staphylinidae.

His major works on systematic entomology were:
* (1775)
* (1776)
* (1781). Full title: 
* (1787)
* (1792–1799)
* (1801)
* (1803)
* (1804)
* (1805)
* (1807)

Many of his works can be found in digital libraries:
* Biodiversity Heritage Library (24 items)
* Google Books (24 items)
* Gallica (12 items)
* HathiTrust (1 item)

Fabricius&#x27; collections are shared between the Natural History Museum, London, the , Paris, the Hope Department of Entomology, Oxford, the Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery, Glasgow, the Zoological Museum in Kiel, and the , Copenhagen.

Fabricius also wrote a few works on economics, although these are much less important than his zoological works. They include (1773), (1786–1790) and (1781).

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*ZMCU Collection contents online
*Digital version of &quot;Entomologia systematica, emendata et aucta&quot;
*Henriksen, Kai L. (1932) Johann Christian Fabricius, pp. 76–80 in: Meisen, V. Prominent Danish Scientists through the Ages. University Library of Copenhagen 450th Anniversary. Levin &amp; Munksgaard, Copenhagen.

==External links==

*Circumscriptional names
* AnimalBase Comprehensive Fabricius literature and Fabricius taxa list.
* ITIS &quot;Taxon authors&quot;: list of taxa described by Fabricius
* Works by Johann Christian Fabricius at the Biodiversity Heritage Library
* &quot;Encyclopedia of Life&quot;−EOL.org: Taxa described by Fabricius — &quot; Type Fabricius into the search box, complete and many supported by images&quot;.]
* An accentuated list of the British Lepidoptera London 1858 — &quot;biography on page XVI gives Fabricius&#x27; own account of his travels&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156205" start="0" end="26" title="Johan Christian Fabricius" label="Johann Christian Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="72" end="81" title="zoology" label="zoologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="152" end="161" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="164" end="170" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="173" end="181" title="arachnid" label="arachnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="184" end="194" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="228" end="241" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="417" end="431" title="Biological classification" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223979" start="505" end="511" title="Tønder" label="Tønder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="519" end="537" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Duchy of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="588" end="597" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630" start="601" end="607" title="Altona, Hamburg" label="Altona"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="624" end="648" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6215484" start="729" end="740" title="Johan Zoëga" label="Johan Zoëga"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="744" end="751" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="776" end="789" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780842" start="986" end="1004" title="Frederiks Hospital" label="Frederiks Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q156737" start="1091" end="1109" title="University of Kiel" label="University of Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970365" start="1208" end="1230" title="natural history museum" label="natural history museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="1237" end="1253" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="1371" end="1382" title="King of Denmark" label="Danish King"/>
<link wikidata="Q617703" start="1387" end="1404" title="Duke of Schleswig" label="Duke of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q156572" start="1406" end="1419" title="Christian VII of Denmark" label="Christian VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="1620" end="1632" title="Joseph Banks" label="Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q523865" start="1637" end="1646" title="Dru Drury" label="Dru Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1722" end="1727" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="1778" end="1792" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q312771" start="1797" end="1819" title="Pierre André Latreille" label="Pierre André Latreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1865" end="1882" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q376154" start="1902" end="1930" title="Battle of Copenhagen (1807)" label="British attack on Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2141" end="2149" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="2264" end="2274" title="Hominidae" label="great apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="2288" end="2295" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="2319" end="2332" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q208800" start="2398" end="2408" title="Lamarckism" label="Lamarckism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="2577" end="2586" title="Sexual selection" label="selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="2695" end="2708" title="entomology" label="entomologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="2781" end="2792" title="botany" label="botanically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="2808" end="2821" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q615799" start="2945" end="2958" title="Tenebrionidae" label="Tenebrionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q276572" start="3411" end="3416" title="insect wing" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324240" start="3465" end="3475" title="insect mouthparts" label="mouthparts"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="3815" end="3821" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="3881" end="3891" title="Coleoptera" label="Coleoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="3935" end="3946" title="Hymenoptera" label="Hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q132742" start="3957" end="3965" title="Glossata" label="Glossata"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="4026" end="4037" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="4105" end="4114" title="genitalia" label="genitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516404" start="4151" end="4162" title="systematics" label="systematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q467400" start="4245" end="4258" title="Staphylinidae" label="Staphylinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q139742" start="4397" end="4405" title="Paederus" label="Paederus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128305" start="4763" end="4773" title="HathiTrust" label="HathiTrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="4835" end="4857" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760005" start="4884" end="4913" title="Hope Department of Entomology" label="Hope Department of Entomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465387" start="4927" end="4959" title="Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery" label="Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q220268" start="4974" end="4999" title="Zoological Museum in Kiel" label="Zoological Museum in Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="5011" end="5021" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="5060" end="5069" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q172266" start="5775" end="5804" title="Biodiversity Heritage Library" label="Biodiversity Heritage Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303251" wikidata="Q3708832" url="?curid=303251" title="IP address blocking">
<text>IP address blocking or IP banning is a configuration of a network service that blocks requests from hosts with certain IP addresses. IP address blocking is commonly used to protect against brute force attacks and to prevent access by a disruptive address. It can also be used to restrict access to or from a particular geographic area; for example, syndicating content to a specific region through the use of Internet geolocation.

IP address blocking can be implemented with a hosts file (e.g., for Mac, Windows, Android, or OS X) or with a TCP wrapper (for Unix-like operating systems). It can be bypassed using methods such as proxy servers; however, &quot;this&quot; can be circumvented with DHCP lease renewal.

==How it works==
Every device connected to the Internet is assigned a unique IP address, which is needed to enable devices to communicate with each other. With appropriate software on the host website, the IP address of visitors to the site can be logged and can also be used to determine the visitor&#x27;s geographical location.

Logging the IP address can, for example, monitor if a person has visited the site before, for example, to vote more than once, as well as to monitor their viewing pattern, how long since they performed any activity on the site (and set a time out limit), besides other things.

Knowing the visitor&#x27;s geolocation indicates, besides other things, the visitor&#x27;s country. In some cases, requests from or responses to a certain country would be blocked entirely. Geo-blocking has been used, for example, to block shows in certain countries, such as censoring shows deemed inappropriate. This is especially frequent in places such as China.

Internet users may circumvent geo-blocking and censorship and protect their personal identity using a Virtual Private Network.

On a website, an IP address block can prevent a disruptive address from access, though a warning and/or account block may be used first. Dynamic allocation of IP addresses by ISPs can complicate IP address blocking by making it difficult to block a specific user without blocking many IP addresses (blocks of IP address ranges), thereby creating collateral damage. For websites with low-enough popularity (often intentionally, with explicitly declaring the majority of potential visitors as out-of-scope) the large-scale collateral damage is often tolerable: most of website accesses, for addresses belong to the same IP range, are accesses of persons just having a dynamic IP address, but the same Internet service provider (ISP), country, city and city districts, based on which IP ranges are assigned by ISPs. On websites with low-enough total visitor count, it is improbable that all these features match more than a single person. For large websites, Terms of Services usually reserve the right of their admins to block access at own discretion, enabling them to create collateral damage this way.

==Implementations==
Unix-like operating systems commonly implement IP address blocking using a TCP wrapper, configured by host access control files &quot;/etc/hosts.deny&quot; and &quot;/etc/hosts.allow&quot;.

Both companies and schools offering remote user access use Linux programs such as DenyHosts or Fail2ban for protection from unauthorized access while allowing permitted remote access. This is also useful for allowing remote access to computers. It is also used for Internet censorship.

IP address blocking is possible on many systems using a hosts file, which is a simple text file containing hostnames and IP addresses. Hosts files are used by many operating systems, including Microsoft Windows, Linux, Android, and OS X.

==Circumvention==

Proxy servers and other methods can be used to bypass the blocking of traffic from IP addresses. However, anti-proxy strategies are available. Consumer-grade internet routers can sometimes obtain a new public IP address on-demand from the ISP using DHCP lease renewal to circumvent individual IP address blocks. This, however, can be countered by blocking the range of IP addresses from which the internet service provider is assigning new IP addresses, which is usually a shared IP address prefix. However, this may impact legitimate users from the same internet service provider who have IP addresses in the same range, which inadvertently creates a denial-of-service attack.

In the case &quot;Craigslist v. 3Taps&quot; (2013), US federal judge Charles R. Breyer held that circumventing an address block to access a website is a violation of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act for &quot;unauthorized access&quot;, and is thus punishable by civil damages.

==See also==
*Block (Internet)
*Content-control software

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3708832" start="0" end="19" title="IP address blocking" label="IP address blocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708832" start="23" end="33" title="IP address blocking" label="IP banning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640628" start="58" end="73" title="network service" label="network service"/>
<link wikidata="Q829281" start="100" end="105" title="Host (network)" label="hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="119" end="129" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q869370" start="189" end="207" title="brute force attack" label="brute force attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q916335" start="409" end="429" title="Internet geolocation" label="Internet geolocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149007" start="478" end="488" title="hosts file" label="hosts file"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049304" start="542" end="553" title="TCP wrapper" label="TCP wrapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="559" end="568" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="630" end="642" title="proxy server" label="proxy server"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="696" end="706" title="DHCP lease" label="DHCP lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="794" end="804" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q638949" start="1025" end="1046" title="geolocation" label="geographical location"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221906" start="1354" end="1365" title="geo-location" label="geolocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19853509" start="1517" end="1529" title="Geo-blocking" label="Geo-blocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="1603" end="1612" title="Internet censorship" label="censoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385874" start="1687" end="1692" title="Censorship in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="1797" end="1820" title="Virtual Private Network" label="Virtual Private Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="1998" end="2001" title="ISP" label="ISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="2522" end="2547" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214489" start="2779" end="2796" title="Terms of Service" label="Terms of Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="2947" end="2956" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049304" start="3022" end="3033" title="TCP wrapper" label="TCP wrapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="3197" end="3202" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190013" start="3220" end="3229" title="DenyHosts" label="DenyHosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q736080" start="3233" end="3241" title="Fail2ban" label="Fail2ban"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3481" end="3491" title="Hosts (file)#Blocking" label="hosts file"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="3683" end="3695" title="Proxy server" label="Proxy server"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="3932" end="3942" title="DHCP lease" label="DHCP lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q646589" start="4163" end="4180" title="IP address prefix" label="IP address prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406" start="4335" end="4359" title="denial-of-service attack" label="denial-of-service attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241288" start="4380" end="4399" title="Craigslist v. 3Taps" label="Craigslist v. 3Taps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081816" start="4431" end="4448" title="Charles R. Breyer" label="Charles R. Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157437" start="4532" end="4560" title="Computer Fraud and Abuse Act" label="Computer Fraud and Abuse Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="4624" end="4637" title="civil damages" label="civil damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125156" start="4654" end="4670" title="Block (Internet)" label="Block (Internet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515741" start="4672" end="4696" title="Content-control software" label="Content-control software"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303255" wikidata="Q1140038" url="?curid=303255" title="The Harry Potter Lexicon">
<text>The Harry Potter Lexicon is a fan-created online encyclopedia of the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series.

==Overview==
The site was created by American school librarian Steve Vander Ark. It contains detailed information for all seven published &quot;Harry Potter&quot; books. The Lexicon lists characters, places, creatures, spells, potions and magical devices, as well as analyzing magical theory and other details of the series. The Lexicon is credited as creating one of the first timelines of all events occurring in the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; universe. A similar timeline of events was adopted by Warner Bros. for inclusion with their &quot;Harry Potter&quot; film DVDs, and was accepted by author J. K. Rowling as conforming to her works.

The Lexicon is a winner of J. K. Rowling&#x27;s Fan Site Award. Rowling said: 
==Lawsuit==
On October 31, 2007, J. K. Rowling and Warner Brothers filed a lawsuit against RDR Books over the publication of Vander Ark&#x27;s Lexicon in book form. The lawsuit was heard in a New York court on April 14, 2008, so precedent from the Second Circuit applies.

The lawsuit states: 

The result of the lawsuit was that the book could be published, but not in its present form. A modified version of the book was published in 2009.
This case went to bench trial in the New York Federal District Court of Judge Robert Patterson on April 14, 2008. RDR Books’ defense team, which includes solo San Francisco practitioner, Lizbeth Hasse of the Creative Industry Law Group, solo New York practitioner David Hammer, and the Fair Use Project at Stanford University Law School, has replied to the suit, arguing:
Rowling stated that her efforts to halt the publishing of the Lexicon have been crushing her creativity, and said that she was not sure if she has &quot;the will or the heart&quot; to now publish her own encyclopedia.

On 8 September 2008, Rowling won her copyright case against RDR Books. The judge concluded that there was too much direct quotation (attributed and unattributed) and that though the books was transformative in respect of the Harry Potter series, it was less transformative of the &quot;schoolbooks&quot; (&quot;Magical Creatures&quot; and &quot;History of Quidditch&quot;). The minimum award was made of $750 for each of the infringed works, for a total of $6,750, and an injuction was made preventing publication of the book in its then current form.

Lexicon publisher RDR Books said:

==Publication==
In December, 2008, a modified (and shorter) version of Vander Ark&#x27;s Lexicon was approved for publication and was released January 16, 2009 as &quot;The Lexicon: An Unauthorized Guide to Harry Potter Fiction&quot;.

==See also==

* Harry Potter fandom

==References==
==External links==
* The Harry Potter Lexicon
* Case page on Justia.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1140038" start="0" end="24" title="The Harry Potter Lexicon" label="The Harry Potter Lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="49" end="61" title="encyclopedia" label="encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="75" end="87" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208255" start="291" end="301" title="List of characters in the Harry Potter books" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q208361" start="303" end="309" title="List of places in the Harry Potter books" label="places"/>
<link wikidata="Q110660" start="311" end="320" title="Magical beasts (Harry Potter)" label="creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q190327" start="342" end="357" title="Magical objects in Harry Potter" label="magical devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402016" start="380" end="387" title="Magic (Harry Potter)" label="magical"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="601" end="613" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="664" end="668" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="702" end="715" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="875" end="890" title="Warner Brothers" label="Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1016" end="1024" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="1068" end="1086" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="the Second Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637977" start="1284" end="1295" title="bench trial" label="bench trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429938" start="1552" end="1568" title="Fair Use Project" label="Fair Use Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="1572" end="1602" title="Stanford University Law School" label="Stanford University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q388591" start="2697" end="2716" title="Harry Potter fandom" label="Harry Potter fandom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303256" wikidata="Q153274" url="?curid=303256" title="The Fields of Athenry">
<text>&quot;The Fields of Athenry&quot; is a song written in 1979 by Pete St. John in the style of an Irish folk ballad. Set during the Great Famine of the 1840s, the lyrics feature a fictional man from near Athenry in County Galway, who stole food for his starving family and has been sentenced to transportation to the Australian penal colony at Botany Bay. It has become a widely known, popular anthem for Irish sports supporters. 

==History==
&quot;The Fields of Athenry&quot; was written in 1979 by Pete St. John, who stated he heard a story about a young man from the Athenry area who had been caught stealing corn to feed his family during the Irish famine years, and was deported to Australia. A claim was made in 1996 that a broadsheet ballad published in the 1880s had similar words; however, the folklorist and researcher John Moulden found no basis to this claim, and Pete St. John stated that he wrote the words as well as the music.

In 1979, the song was recorded by Danny Doyle, reaching the top ten in the Irish Singles Chart. The song charted again in 1982 for Barleycorn, reaching number seven in Ireland, but the most successful version was released by Paddy Reilly in 1982. While peaking only at number four, it remained in the Irish charts for 72 weeks. Two further versions have since reached the Irish top ten: the Cox Crew getting to number five in 1999, while Dance to Tipperary peaked at number six in 2001.

The lyrics say the convict&#x27;s crime is that he &quot;stole Trevelyan&#x27;s corn&quot;; this is a reference to Charles Edward Trevelyan, a senior English civil servant in the administration of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland in Dublin Castle. Trevelyan famously said, &quot;the judgement of God sent the calamity to teach the Irish a lesson&quot;. The corn in question, wheat oats and barley, were being grown in Ireland and exported notwithstanding the potato famine: popular tradition holds that Trevelyan was culpable for failing to prevent its export.

In 1831, a visitor to Ireland recorded the anguish of the transported and their families:

&quot;The first sound I heard as I approached the Irish coast, was the accent of distress. As the steamer rounded the harbour of Kingstown, she passed under the stern of a convict ship moored near the shore; on the opposite rocks were seated some women miserably attired, with infants in their arms, and in a state of grief and wretchedness: one of them shouted in Irish to the ship, from the bars of which was heard the voice of a man in reply. The prisoners on board were rioters, who, having been sentenced to transportation, were thus taking their last farewell of their desolate families&quot;.

==Sporting anthem==
The song was regularly heard from on the terraces in the late 1980s from supporters of the Galway county hurling team. The song was adopted by Republic of Ireland national football team supporters during the 1990 World Cup and subsequently by Celtic supporters in the early 1990s.

Celtic Football Club in Glasgow has a large following in Ireland and among people in Scotland of Irish descent. During the Great Famine in Ireland during the 1840s, 100,000 Irish famine victims emigrated to Glasgow. When Celtic&#x27;s long-serving Irish goalkeeper Packie Bonner had a testimonial match in 1991, he invited Pete St. John to attend the event and speak to the crowd before the game. St John began by thanking Glasgow for looking after the famine victims, and then began to sing &quot;Fields of Athenry&quot;, accompanied by thousands of fans. He later described it as one of the most memorable moments of his life.&quot;.

The song&#x27;s popularity, due in part to its use at sporting events, has helped to attract tourists to Athenry. In recognition of this, the town&#x27;s officials invited Pete St. John to a civic reception and presented him with a mace and chain as a token of their appreciation.

The song is also associated with the Connacht, Munster, London Irish and Ireland rugby union teams. It is also seen by many as Galway&#x27;s county song, sung at the various GAA matches when the county is playing.

Fans of Cork City F.C. adopted &quot;The Fields of Bishopstown&quot; to the same tune, with lyrics changed from the original version. It is sung regularly at home games.

&quot;The Fields of Anfield Road&quot; was adopted by Liverpool supporters to the same tune, but with adapted lyrics referencing their history and stadium. The song was used to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the 1989 Hillsborough disaster.

Persija Jakarta&#x27;s supporters, The Jak Mania also use this song as their chants with the title &quot;Field of GBK&quot; and different lyrics in Indonesian.

At the 2008 Olympic Light Heavyweight Boxing Final, which featured Irish boxer Kenny Egan, Tom Humphries of &quot;The Irish Times&quot; noted, &quot;By the time Egan and Zhang emerged the great rhythmic roars of &quot;Zhang! Zhang! Zhang!&quot; competed to drown out the lusty warblings of a large Irish contingent who returned to singing of the problems of social isolation in rural Athenry.&quot;

During the UEFA Euro 2012 group stage game against Spain, the Irish fans started singing the song roughly 83 minutes into the game and sang for the last six minutes of regulation, as well as past the full-time whistle, knowing that they were going to be eliminated from the group as they were down by four goals and had failed to accrue the points necessary to remain in the tournament. Some commentators stopped commenting for the final minutes, so the crowd could be heard. This was widely reported in the international media.

==Recordings==
Other artists to have recorded versions include Mary Duff, Máiréad Carlin, Paddy Reilly, Daniel O&#x27;Donnell, Frank Patterson, Ronan Tynan, Brush Shiels, James Galway, The Dubliners, Charlie Haden with daughter Petra Haden, Seanchai &amp; The Unity Squad, Scottish band North Sea Gas, English folk singer Felix Slander, English band Kelda with vocalist Jack Routledge, US group Shilelagh Law, US punk band No Use for a Name, New Zealanders Hollie Smith and Steve McDonald, Dropkick Murphys, London-Irish band Neck, The Durutti Column, The High Kings, The Irish Tenors, Off Kilter and Kieran Moriarty. It was also recorded by Serbian bands Orthodox Celts and Tir na n&#x27;Og, and US Celtic/folk band Scythian. In 2013, it was released by Neil Byrne and Ryan Kelly of Celtic Thunder for their album &quot;Acoustically Irish&quot;.

A reggae version of this song was recorded by the Century Steel Band in the early 1980s.

Irish-Londoners, Neck, released a &quot;Psycho-Ceilidh&quot; version of the song as a single in support of the Republic of Ireland national football team during the 2002 FIFA World Cup. Dropkick Murphys recorded two versions of the song: the first, an uptempo rock arrangement, appeared on their 2003 album &quot;Blackout&quot;; the second was a softer version they recorded specially for the family of Sergeant Andrew Farrar, a United States Marine from the 2nd Military Police Battalion killed January 28, 2005 (his 31st birthday) in Fallujah, Iraq. Farrar was a fan of Dropkick Murphys, and requested that their version of the song be played at his funeral if he were to die in combat. Blaggards blended the song with Johnny Cash&#x27;s &quot;Folsom Prison Blues&quot; in a medley called &quot;Prison Love Songs&quot;. Other punk versions of the song have been recorded by the bands No Use for a Name, The Tossers, and the Broken O&#x27;Briens. The Greenland Whalefishers, a Celtic-punk band from Norway, also recorded a version on their &quot;Streets Of Salvation&quot; CD.
The song was also recorded by Canadian Celtic rock band the Mudmen on their album &quot;Another Day&quot; released in 2010.
In 2003, then Cape Town based Tom Purcell recorded a haunting a cappella version, that still stands the test of time.

Johnny Logan covered the song on his album, &quot;The Irish Connection&quot; (2007).

The song appears on the 2012 Bob Brolly album &quot;Till We Meet Again&quot;.

Welsh folk singer Dafydd Iwan used the tune for his song &quot;Esgair Llyn&quot;, a lament on the depopulation of rural Wales. He first recorded it in 1991 and continues to perform it in concert.

The song has been translated to Scottish Gaelic, entitled &quot;Raointean Ath an Rìgh,&quot; and was sung by the Scottish singer Iain &quot;Costello&quot; MacIver, from the Isle of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides.

The tune was also used for the hymn by Rachael Doey, “Outside the City Wall”.

It has been recorded by Colm R McGuiness.

==In film==
The song is sung in the movie &quot;Veronica Guerin&quot;, by Brian O&#x27;Donnell, then aged 11, a street singer in Dublin, although it is credited on the soundtrack as &quot;Bad News&quot;. It is also sung &quot;a cappella&quot; by a female character at a wake in the 1994 film &quot;Priest&quot;. It also appears in &quot;Dead Poets Society&quot;, an anachronism, as the film is set in 1959, before the song was written, and &quot;16 Years of Alcohol&quot;. An &quot;a cappella&quot; version of the first verse and chorus can be found during a singing contest judged by Janeane Garofalo in the film &quot;The Matchmaker&quot;. Cancer Boy, a character in the 1996 film &quot;Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy&quot;, is briefly shown whistling the tune.

==See also==
* Irish rebel music
* List of Irish ballads
* Other rugby anthems:
** Flower of Scotland
** Ireland&#x27;s Call
** Swing Low, Sweet Chariot (sung by England fans)
** Cwm Rhondda (Bread of Heaven) sung by Wales fans.

==References ==
==External links==

* Pete St John
* Movie appearances</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q153274" start="6" end="27" title="The Fields of Athenry" label="The Fields of Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900803" start="63" end="76" title="Pete St. John" label="Pete St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="96" end="113" title="Irish folk music" label="Irish folk ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="130" end="142" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q755389" start="202" end="209" title="Athenry" label="Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="213" end="226" title="County Galway" label="County Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770529" start="280" end="307" title="penal transportation" label="sentenced to transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913919" start="311" end="352" title="Convicts in Australia" label="the Australian penal colony at Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q541947" start="392" end="398" title="anthem" label="anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900803" start="499" end="512" title="Pete St. John" label="Pete St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="611" end="615" title="cereal" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q849965" start="729" end="746" title="broadsheet ballad" label="broadsheet ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220295" start="977" end="988" title="Danny Doyle (singer)" label="Danny Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056800" start="1018" end="1037" title="Irish Singles Chart" label="Irish Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715645" start="1074" end="1084" title="The Barleycorn" label="Barleycorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q783850" start="1168" end="1180" title="Paddy Reilly" label="Paddy Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1334" end="1342" title="Cox Crew" label="Cox Crew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1381" end="1399" title="Dance to Tipperary" label="Dance to Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249693" start="1546" end="1570" title="Charles Edward Trevelyan" label="Charles Edward Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="1632" end="1658" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="1662" end="1675" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="1786" end="1790" title="cereal" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q213711" start="2808" end="2815" title="hurling" label="hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="2846" end="2888" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="2911" end="2925" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="2946" end="2952" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q371002" start="3250" end="3263" title="Packie Bonner" label="Packie Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126167" start="3941" end="3949" title="Connacht Rugby" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140373" start="3951" end="3958" title="Munster Rugby" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193020" start="3960" end="3972" title="London Irish" label="London Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="3977" end="3984" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="3985" end="3996" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="4031" end="4056" title="County Galway" label="Galway&amp;#x27;s county song"/>
<link wikidata="Q932284" start="4127" end="4141" title="Cork City F.C." label="Cork City F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1982395" start="4296" end="4322" title="The Fields of Anfield Road" label="The Fields of Anfield Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="4344" end="4353" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q458689" start="4419" end="4432" title="History of Liverpool F.C." label="their history"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="4437" end="4444" title="Anfield" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="4512" end="4533" title="Hillsborough disaster" label="Hillsborough disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q593708" start="4536" end="4551" title="Persija Jakarta" label="Persija Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068044" start="4650" end="4653" title="Gelora Bung Karno Stadium" label="GBK"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="4684" end="4694" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q953406" start="4704" end="4747" title="Boxing at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Light heavyweight" label="2008 Olympic Light Heavyweight Boxing Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q964267" start="4776" end="4786" title="Kenny Egan" label="Kenny Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816271" start="4788" end="4801" title="Tom Humphries" label="Tom Humphries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="4811" end="4826" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="5108" end="5122" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="UEFA Euro 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779346" start="5690" end="5699" title="Mary Duff" label="Mary Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15198975" start="5701" end="5715" title="Máiréad Carlin" label="Máiréad Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q783850" start="5717" end="5729" title="Paddy Reilly" label="Paddy Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161999" start="5731" end="5752" title="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488918" start="5754" end="5769" title="Frank Patterson" label="Frank Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365483" start="5771" end="5782" title="Ronan Tynan" label="Ronan Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646008" start="5784" end="5796" title="Brush Shiels" label="Brush Shiels"/>
<link wikidata="Q160371" start="5798" end="5810" title="James Galway" label="James Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q478629" start="5812" end="5825" title="The Dubliners" label="The Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q319283" start="5827" end="5840" title="Charlie Haden" label="Charlie Haden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283054" start="5855" end="5866" title="Petra Haden" label="Petra Haden"/>
<link wikidata="Q375364" start="6050" end="6067" title="No Use for a Name" label="No Use for a Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793540" start="6084" end="6096" title="Hollie Smith" label="Hollie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613322" start="6101" end="6115" title="Steve McDonald (Celtic music)" label="Steve McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="6117" end="6133" title="Dropkick Murphys" label="Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955489" start="6153" end="6157" title="Neck (Band)" label="Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724658" start="6159" end="6177" title="The Durutti Column" label="The Durutti Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189396" start="6179" end="6193" title="The High Kings" label="The High Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742569" start="6195" end="6211" title="The Irish Tenors" label="The Irish Tenors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078924" start="6213" end="6223" title="Off Kilter (band)" label="Off Kilter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405428" start="6228" end="6243" title="Kieran Moriarty" label="Kieran Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q820985" start="6283" end="6297" title="Orthodox Celts" label="Orthodox Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721875" start="6302" end="6318" title="Alfapop" label="Tir na n&amp;#x27;Og"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439685" start="6344" end="6352" title="Scythian (band)" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053225" start="6382" end="6392" title="Neil Byrne" label="Neil Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713861" start="6397" end="6407" title="Ryan Kelly (singer)" label="Ryan Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053225" start="6411" end="6425" title="Celtic Thunder" label="Celtic Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="6477" end="6483" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063201" start="6525" end="6543" title="Century Steel Band" label="Century Steel Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6571" end="6577" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955489" start="6582" end="6586" title="Neck (Band)" label="Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150334" start="6612" end="6619" title="Ceilidh" label="Ceilidh"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="6676" end="6718" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="6730" end="6749" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="6751" end="6767" title="Dropkick Murphys" label="Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q60390" start="6878" end="6886" title="Blackout (Dropkick Murphys album)" label="Blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q191170" start="7101" end="7109" title="Fallujah" label="Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="7111" end="7115" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923851" start="7254" end="7263" title="Blaggards" label="Blaggards"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="7286" end="7297" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q742829" start="7311" end="7330" title="Folsom Prison Blues" label="Folsom Prison Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q375364" start="7451" end="7468" title="No Use for a Name" label="No Use for a Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263874" start="7470" end="7481" title="The Tossers" label="The Tossers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604230" start="7517" end="7539" title="Greenland Whalefishers" label="Greenland Whalefishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6321974" start="7703" end="7709" title="Mudmen" label="Mudmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q298559" start="7886" end="7898" title="Johnny Logan (singer)" label="Johnny Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635315" start="7936" end="7956" title="The Irish Connection (Johnny Logan album)" label="The Irish Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196977" start="8001" end="8011" title="Bob Brolly" label="Bob Brolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157150" start="8069" end="8080" title="Dafydd Iwan" label="Dafydd Iwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="8280" end="8295" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="8421" end="8434" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Isle of Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="8442" end="8456" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146246" start="8629" end="8644" title="Veronica Guerin (film)" label="Veronica Guerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="8807" end="8817" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q781835" start="8879" end="8885" title="Priest (1994 film)" label="Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q106316" start="8918" end="8936" title="Dead Poets Society" label="Dead Poets Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165415" start="9027" end="9046" title="16 Years of Alcohol" label="16 Years of Alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40143" start="9166" end="9182" title="Janeane Garofalo" label="Janeane Garofalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q466929" start="9201" end="9215" title="The Matchmaker (1997 film)" label="The Matchmaker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9270" end="9299" title="Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy" label="Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672918" start="9360" end="9377" title="Irish rebel music" label="Irish rebel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q430139" start="9380" end="9401" title="List of Irish ballads" label="List of Irish ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q208275" start="9428" end="9446" title="Flower of Scotland" label="Flower of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419910" start="9450" end="9469" title="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Call" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750385" start="9473" end="9497" title="Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" label="Swing Low, Sweet Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008016" start="9524" end="9535" title="Cwm Rhondda" label="Cwm Rhondda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303261" wikidata="Q6148929" url="?curid=303261" title="Top 40">
<text>In the music industry, the Top 40 is a list of the 40 currently most popular songs in a particular genre. It is the best-selling or most frequently broadcast popular music. Record charts have traditionally consisted of a total of 40 songs. &quot;Top 40&quot; or &quot;contemporary hit radio&quot; is also a radio format. 

== History==
According to producer Richard Fatherley, Todd Storz was the inventor of the format, at his radio station KOWH in Omaha, Nebraska. Storz invented the format in the early 1950s, using the number of times a record was played on jukeboxes to compose a weekly list for broadcast. The format was commercially successful, and Storz and his father Robert, under the name of the Storz Broadcasting Company, subsequently acquired other stations to use the new Top 40 format. In 1989, Todd Storz was inducted into the Nebraska Broadcasters Association Hall of Fame.

The term &quot;Top 40&quot;, describing a radio format, appeared in 1960. The Top 40, whether surveyed by a radio station or a publication, was a list of songs that shared only the common characteristic of being newly released. Its introduction coincided with a transition from the old ten-inch 78 rpm record format for single &quot;pop&quot; recordings to the seven-inch vinyl 45 rpm format, introduced in 1949, which was outselling it by 1954 and soon replaced it completely in 1958. The Top 40 thereafter became a survey of the popularity of 45 rpm singles and their airplay on the radio. Some nationally syndicated radio shows, such as &quot;American Top 40&quot;, featured a countdown of the 40 highest-ranked songs on a particular music or entertainment publication. Although such publications often listed more than 40 charted hits, such as the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, time constraints allowed for the airing of only 40 songs; hence, the term &quot;top 40&quot; gradually became part of the vernacular associated with popular music.

An article in the Spring 2012 issue of &quot;Nebraska History&quot; magazine offered this comment as to Todd Storz&#x27; legacy: &quot;the radio revolution that Storz began with KOWH was already sweeping the nation. Thousands of radio station owners had realized the enormous potential for a new kind of radio. When television became popular, social monitors predicted that radio would die. However, because of the invention of Storz and others like him, radio would be reborn&quot;.

Storz is credited by some sources as helping to popularize rock and roll music. By the mid-1950s, his station, and the numerous others which eventually adopted the Top 40 format, were playing records by artists such as &quot;Presley, Lewis, Haley, Berry and Domino&quot;.

From the 1980s onwards, different recording formats have competed with the 45 rpm vinyl record. This includes cassette singles, CD singles, digital downloads and streaming. Many music charts changed their eligibility rules to incorporate some, or all, of these.

Some disc jockeys presenting Top 40 and similar format programs have been implicated in various payola scandals.

==See also==

*Contemporary hit radio
*Mainstream Top 40

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Pete Battistini, &quot;American Top 40 with Casey Kasem The 1970s&quot;, &quot;Authorhouse.com&quot;, January 31, 2005. 
* Susan Douglas, &quot;Listening In: Radio and the American Imagination&quot; (New York: Times Books, 1999)
* 
* Ben Fong-Torres, &quot;The Hits Just Keep On Coming: The History of Top 40 Radio&quot; (San Francisco: Backbeat Books, 1998)
* Elwood F. &#x27;Woody&#x27; Goulart, &quot;The Mystique and Mass Persuasion: Bill Drake &amp; Gene Chenault’s Rock and Roll Radio Programming&quot; (2006)
* David MacFarland, &quot;The Development of the Top 40 Radio Format&quot; (New York: Arno Press, 1979)

== External links ==
* Public Radio documentary featuring a history of Top 40</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="7" end="21" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="27" end="33" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="158" end="171" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="173" end="185" title="Record chart" label="Record chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="268" end="290" title="contemporary hit radio" label="contemporary hit radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="307" end="319" title="radio format" label="radio format"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812658" start="377" end="387" title="Todd Storz" label="Todd Storz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327275" start="441" end="445" title="KCRO" label="KOWH"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="449" end="464" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q815249" start="561" end="568" title="jukebox" label="jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="934" end="946" title="radio format" label="radio format"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1178" end="1207" title="Phonograph record#78 rpm disc developments" label="ten-inch 78 rpm record format"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1437" end="1451" title="Single (music)" label="45 rpm singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q467079" start="1538" end="1553" title="American Top 40" label="American Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1744" end="1773" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="2484" end="2497" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="2650" end="2657" title="Elvis Presley" label="Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="2659" end="2664" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202319" start="2666" end="2671" title="Bill Haley" label="Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="2673" end="2678" title="Chuck Berry" label="Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q209586" start="2683" end="2689" title="Fats Domino" label="Domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246734" start="2808" end="2823" title="cassette single" label="cassette single"/>
<link wikidata="Q719645" start="2826" end="2835" title="CD single" label="CD single"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="2860" end="2869" title="Streaming media" label="streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="2966" end="2977" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297671" start="3057" end="3063" title="payola" label="payola"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="3090" end="3112" title="Contemporary hit radio" label="Contemporary hit radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q862774" start="3114" end="3131" title="Mainstream Top 40" label="Mainstream Top 40"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303265" wikidata="Q385366" url="?curid=303265" title="Corsair International">
<text>Corsair International, legally &quot;Corsair S.A.&quot;, previously Corsairfly and Corse Air International, is a French airline headquartered in Rungis and based at Orly Airport. It is a subsidiary of German investor Intro Aviation (53%) and TUI Group (27%). It operates scheduled long-haul services to leisure destinations in the French overseas territories, Africa and North America, as well as charter flights to other destinations.

==History==
===Early years===


The airline was established in 1981 and started operations on 17 May 1981 as Corse Air International. It was founded by the Corsican Rossi family. In 1990 it was acquired by Nouvelles Frontières, a French tour operator, and the name was changed to Corsair. In 1991, the airline obtained worldwide traffic rights. In 2000, the TUI Group, one of the world&#x27;s leading tour-operator groups, took over Nouvelles Frontières.

In 2004, Corsair aircraft were repainted with the colours of TUI, a blue fuselage with the TUI-logo, like its sister airlines. At the end of 2005, the TUI Group decided to rename all its affiliated airlines TUIfly. As an interim step Corsair aircraft were repainted with Corsairfly markings, although all airlines in the group were expected to have adopted the common TUIfly brand by 2008.

The airline held the record for most seats on a passenger aircraft, with 587 seats on its Boeing 747-400s, until they received a new interior which led to a new lower capacity of 533 passengers.

In 2008, the airline announced its intention to expand its medium-haul network to the Mediterranean and its long-haul network to Canada and the United States (where it regularly flew in the 1990s), including the establishment of codeshare agreements with Air Canada. The first destination in this expansion was Miami in June 2010, but the rest of the plan was later abandoned due to a change in the airline&#x27;s strategy.

===Development since 2010===
In May 2010 Corsairfly announced its &quot;Takeoff 2012&quot; modernisation plan, including a reduction of workforce by 25%, the replacement of three Boeing 747-400 aircraft by two Airbus A330-300 aircraft from TUI Group, the refurbishment of all aircraft cabins, leaving the charter flights market, and the termination of routes to Kenya, the Dominican Republic, Québec City, Moncton and Israel.

In March 2012 the airline announced it would change its name to Corsair International and unveiled a new corporate image corresponding to planned operational changes.

In 2015 Corsair&#x27;s owner, German tourism company TUI Group, tried to sell the loss-making airline. After take-over negotiations with Air Caraïbes, the potential buyer walked away after advanced talks due to ongoing opposition from Corsair&#x27;s staff unions regarding the proposed future developments and cost reductions. Also in 2015, TUI Group announced that all TUI companies and airlines except Corsair were to use the TUI name.

In late 2018 it was reported that the TUI Group had restarted talks to sell the loss-making airline. It was expected to be sold by the end of the year to German investment corporation &quot;Intro&quot;, which had owned several other airlines in the past. In May 2018, a Corsair shareholder announced that Corsair International would retire its three remaining Boeing 747-400s by September 2021 as part of fleet renewal and replacement plans. In March 2019, Corsair officially announced that it would lease three Airbus A330-900s to replace its three Boeing 747-400s.

In March 2019 TUI announced that it had agreed to sell 53% of Corsair to a German airline investor, &quot;Intro Aviation&quot;, for an undisclosed sum. TUI would retain 27% of the airline, while employees would hold the remaining 20%. In October 2019, Corsair ended its codeshare agreement with Air Caraïbes.

The company announced on 19 April 2020 that it would immediately retire its three Boeing 747-400s because of the COVID-19 crisis and grounding. The then mixed fleet would have been transitioned to an all-A330 fleet, expected to comprise 13 aircraft by 2023. On 17 August 2021, Corsair and Air Austral announced the formation of a joint venture between the two companies.

On 13 March 2024, Corsair received its first of four additional Airbus A330-900s as part of transitioning to a fleet composed entirely of A330-900s, thus retiring its remaining A330-300 aircraft by the end of the year.

==Destinations==
Corsair International operates to destinations in Africa, North America, and other French overseas territories from its base at Paris Orly Airport. , Corsair International flies (or has flown) to the following destinations:

===Airline partnerships===
Corsair International has an interlining agreement with Air Antilles. The airline also partners with easyJet through its &quot;Worldwide by easyJet&quot; program, and additionally has codeshare agreements with the SNCF, the French national railway operator.

==Fleet==
===Current fleet===
, Corsair International operates an all-Airbus A330 fleet composed of the following aircraft:

===Former fleet===
While the company started in business as an operator of short- and medium range aircraft such as the Sud Aviation Caravelle and various versions of the Boeing 737, beginning in the 1990s, it progressively shifted its operations to long-range only. As a long-range airline, Corsair has operated the following jet aircraft types:

==See also==
*List of airlines of France

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q385366" start="0" end="21" title="Corsair International" label="Corsair International"/>
<link wikidata="Q385366" start="68" end="78" title="Corsair International" label="Corsairfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q385366" start="83" end="106" title="Corsair International" label="Corse Air International"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="120" end="127" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q478105" start="145" end="151" title="Rungis" label="Rungis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="165" end="177" title="Orly Airport" label="Orly Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q573103" start="242" end="251" title="TUI Group" label="TUI Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q203396" start="331" end="358" title="Overseas France" label="French overseas territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="360" end="366" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="371" end="384" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="593" end="600" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q573103" start="795" end="804" title="TUI Group" label="TUI Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="1374" end="1388" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="1735" end="1745" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="2084" end="2098" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="2115" end="2130" title="Airbus A330-300" label="Airbus A330-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q573103" start="2145" end="2154" title="TUI Group" label="TUI Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q406992" start="2637" end="2649" title="Air Caraïbes" label="Air Caraïbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="3299" end="3313" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="3489" end="3503" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="3777" end="3796" title="codeshare agreement" label="codeshare agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q406992" start="3802" end="3814" title="Air Caraïbes" label="Air Caraïbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="3930" end="3938" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q406847" start="4106" end="4117" title="Air Austral" label="Air Austral"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="4554" end="4572" title="Paris Orly Airport" label="Paris Orly Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354973" start="4707" end="4718" title="interlining" label="interlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q406779" start="4734" end="4746" title="Air Antilles" label="Air Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="4779" end="4786" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="4862" end="4881" title="codeshare agreement" label="codeshare agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646" start="4892" end="4896" title="SNCF" label="SNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="5007" end="5018" title="Airbus A330" label="Airbus A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503" start="5182" end="5204" title="Sud Aviation Caravelle" label="Sud Aviation Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="5233" end="5243" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055514" start="5424" end="5450" title="List of airlines of France" label="List of airlines of France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303272" wikidata="Q602370" url="?curid=303272" title="Crayfish plague">
<text>Crayfish plague (Aphanomyces astaci) is a water mold that infects crayfish, most notably the European &quot;Astacus&quot; which dies within a few weeks of being infected. When experimentally tested, species from Australia, New Guinea and Japan were also found to be susceptible to the infection.

==Morphology==
Crayfish plague invades tissue with hyphae. The hyphae develop sporangia that release primary spores, which develop into flagellated secondary zoospores after encystment. The secondary zoospores have two flagella each and can repeatedly encyst before finally reaching a host, attaching and germinating.

==History==
Crayfish plague first arrived in Europe in Italy in 1859, either with imported crayfish from North America, or in ballast water discharge. After its original introduction in Italy in 1860, it spread quickly through Europe and was discovered in Sweden in 1907, in Spain in 1972, in Norway in 1971, in Great Britain in 1981, in Turkey in 1984 and in Ireland in 1987.

In 1959, to bolster dwindling stocks of native crayfish, the signal crayfish was introduced to Sweden. The signal crayfish was known to be resistant, and it was not recognised at that time that it was a carrier of the disease. In 2015, after 150 years of contact, no resistance had been discovered in native European crayfish. But during later years, some populations that apparently have achieved different levels of resistance have been discovered.

This species was studied and named by the German Mycologist Friedrich Schikora (1859–1932), from a type specimen in Germany in 1906.

==Transmission==

Transport of signal crayfish, red swamp crayfish and infected native European freshwater crayfish between waters is the main cause of contamination, though the disease can also be spread via items that have been in contact with contaminated water, such as a fishing tackle or footwear. The spores are sensitive to high or low temperatures. Most authorities have local rules and regulations to minimize the movement of water between different waterbodies (in for example a boat), and recommend that crayfish used as bait should come from the same water as that being fished, or should be frozen to at least for one day before use, if there is a risk of contamination. The spores of crayfish plague disappear from an infected water system (connected lakes and rivers) within a few weeks once the last infected crayfish is removed. Reintroduction is then possible, as long as no infected waters are in contact with the lake.

==Signs==

Infection with &quot;Aphanomyces astaci&quot; is accompanied by few signs in its early stages, and the first indication of infection may be mortality. In the later stages, the muscles of the tail may appear whitened, or brownish-red where blood cells have encapsulated the hyphae. The effects of the neurotoxins in the oomycete can include appearing in daytime (crayfish are typically nocturnal) and a lack of coordination.

==References==
==External links==
*Global Invasive Species Database
*Canadian Fisheries and Oceans Crayfish Plague information
*Trade Environment Database Case Study on Crayfish Plague</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q602370" start="0" end="15" title="Crayfish plague" label="Crayfish plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q223597" start="42" end="52" title="water mold" label="water mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211742" start="66" end="74" title="crayfish" label="crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942450" start="108" end="115" title="Astacus" label="Astacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="212" end="221" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="223" end="233" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="238" end="243" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193129" start="348" end="353" title="hypha" label="hypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832012" start="375" end="384" title="sporangium" label="sporangia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="433" end="441" title="flagella" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="Q220341" start="455" end="463" title="zoospore" label="zoospore"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="671" end="676" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240832" start="742" end="765" title="ballast water discharge and the environment" label="ballast water discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="872" end="878" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="891" end="896" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="909" end="915" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="928" end="941" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="954" end="960" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="976" end="983" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q693000" start="1055" end="1070" title="signal crayfish" label="signal crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="1089" end="1095" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133124" start="1628" end="1646" title="Procambarus clarkii" label="red swamp crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="1856" end="1870" title="fishing" label="fishing tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q803978" start="2113" end="2117" title="fishing bait" label="bait"/>
<link wikidata="Q407752" start="2832" end="2842" title="neurotoxin" label="neurotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223597" start="2851" end="2859" title="oomycete" label="oomycete"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303273" wikidata="Q917934" url="?curid=303273" title="Bristol Freighter">
<text>The Bristol Type 170 Freighter is a British twin-engine aircraft designed and built by the Bristol Aeroplane Company as both a freighter and airliner. Its best known use was as an air ferry to carry cars and their passengers over relatively short distances. A passenger-only version was also produced, known as the Wayfarer. It was powered by twin 2000 hp 14-cylinder piston engines matched to 4-bladed propellers. It had wide opening clamshell doors on the nose, and with a high-set flight deck, this allowed full access to the cargo bay, including the ability to drive a vehicle directly in via a ramp.

The Freighter was developed during the Second World War, having attracted official attention from the British Air Ministry. They sought the development of a rugged aircraft capable of carrying various cargoes, including a 3-ton truck. Various changes to the design were made to accommodate their requirements, but it was completed too late to participate in the conflict;its first flight was in December 1945. The majority of sales of the Freighter were to commercial operators after the war, but it did have military service with several Air Forces.

In response to customer demand, an enlarged version to maximize vehicle-carrying capacity, known as the Bristol Superfreighter, was developed. By the end of production in 1958, 214 had been produced, and though all but retired in the 21st century it can be found preserved in aviation museums in the United Kingdom and internationally.

==Development==

The Bristol Type 170 was designed as a stop-gap project to provide work for the Bristol Aeroplane Company while the Bristol Brabazon was under development. Subsequently, the British Air Ministry expressed interest in the project, believing that it would provide a rugged transport aircraft capable of using unimproved airstrips; accordingly, a pair of prototypes were ordered on the condition that the design was modified so that it would be compatible with the air-transporting of a British Army 3-ton truck. For this requirement, the Air Ministry formulated and issued Specification 22/44 (which was later revised as C.9/45) around the envisioned design.

As proposed, the aircraft was an all-metal, twin-engine high-wing monoplane based on the pre-war Bristol Bombay, having wings of the same section and taper but with a swept leading edge and straight trailing edge with two spars in place of the seven used in the Bombay. The square-section fuselage was clear of internal obstructions; in the original design this was to be loaded via a trapdoor in the nose, but the Air Ministry requirements necessitated a change to clamshell doors in the nose. Considerable effort was made to maximise the usable internal volume of the aircraft in order to readily accommodate the carriage of bulky cargoes. The flight deck was elevated above the load space on the nose as to not obstruct access; the crew would enter the flight deck via a fixed vertical ladder on the side of the cargo bay. Power was to have been provided by a pair of a development of the Bristol Perseus using nine Bristol Centaurus cylinders, each engine rated at .

Early on, it had been envisioned that the Freighter would play a logistical role in the South-East Asian theatre of the war, being operated by British Far East Command. However, as it was becoming clear that the conflict would be over before the aircraft could enter service, an increasing emphasis was placed on suiting the aircraft to meet the demands of civilian operators. A cost analysis demonstrated that for civil use, it would be more economic to increase the all-up weight of the design from and to adopt the more powerful Bristol Hercules engine to power the Freighter. It was also considered that there would be a market for a passenger aircraft suitable for use from basic airstrips, and so a version without the nose doors and capable of carrying up to 36 passengers, to be known as the &quot;Wayfarer&quot;, was proposed.

On 2 December 1945, the first prototype, registered &quot;G-AGPV&quot;, was first flown at Filton by Cyril Uwins. Cyril found the aircraft to be generally satisfactory, but requested that the tailplane be lowered and increased in span as to enable the aircraft be trimmed to fly &quot;hands off&quot; over a wide range of centre of gravity positions.

==Design==
The Bristol Type 170 Freighter was a twin-engine, high mounted-wing monoplane that was developed specifically for the economic carriage of freight by air. It was a visually distinctive aircraft, possessing a &#x27;boxy&#x27; fuselage, rounded nose, and a high-set flight deck. In order to maximise the economical performance of the Freighter, compromises were implemented on other aspects of performance, resulting in a relatively low cruising speed; this was not viewed as being of importance to the role of a freighter and thus not a major diminishing factor. According to aviation publication &quot;Flight&quot;, the economics of the Freighter were judged to be a major factor of its market appeal, as well as the wider economic situation of the UK at this time.

Operationally, the Freighter was intended to be employed upon high-frequency short distance routes as opposed to long-haul routes. Being flown at the low speeds and short ranges for which the aircraft was intended, the fuel economy improvements that would be provided by a retractable undercarriage was outweighed by the increase in structural weight; therefore, it was decided that a fixed undercarriage would be used, which also had the benefits of reduced production and maintenance costs. The combination of a high-mounted wing and fixed undercarriage was considered to be atypical for the era, and resulted in greater drag than a low-mounted counterpart would have. The main gear legs, which featured Dowty-built shock absorbers, were supported by an arrangement of strengthened vertical struts, positioned beneath the aircraft&#x27;s engines and horizontally from the lower edge of the fuselage.

The lower nose of the Freighter was covered by a pair of large clamshell doors, for easy access to the main hold; as a direct consequence of this arrangement, the unpressurised fuselage was somewhat breezy during flight. The doors, which are hinged outwards, led into a main hold that had an internal volume of 2,020 cu ft; it was capable of being loaded with heavy payloads, up to a maximum of 350 cu ft per ton. To better facilitate loading, a built-in hoist is installed on the fixed upper surface of the nose, which reduced the need for airport-based infrastructure. Fixed restraining points to secure payloads are present throughout the internal space. On the passenger-carrying Wayfarer variant, the nose-mounted doors were substituted by a fixed shell and the area immediately behind would be used either as a cargo hold or galley.

The flight deck of the Freighter was positioned in an elevated position, directly above the clamshell doors. In addition to providing a good all-round view for the flight crew, this placement kept the flight deck clear of the loading activity below. &quot;Flight&quot; stated of the cockpit: &quot;The control and instrument layout is quite the best we have seen in any Bristol aircraft&quot;. The major controls are typically comfortable and smooth, while each pilot is provided with a standard blind-flying panel. Instrumentation fittings differed dependent upon customer specification, but a Sperry Corporation-built autopilot would typically be installed. The flight deck was typically operated by a two-man crew, a first pilot and second pilot or radio operator; in addition, space was provided at the rear for a third crew member.

The Bristol Hercules 734 radial engines that powered the type, along with all of its major subsystems such as the cowling, oil tank, cooler and control cables, could also be easily detached for servicing; an entire engine replacement could be performed within 90 minutes. The fuel system is uncomplicated, being contained within a pair of 300-gallon fuel tanks positioned in the interspar bays of the wings; neither fuel tanks or hydraulic pipelines were present in the outer wings. The only elements needing hydraulic systems were the clamshell doors and flaps. The electrically controlled carburation system had three different intakes, each suited to starting the engine under different conditions – these being hot, sub-zero, and temperate climates.

The airframe itself is deliberately simple in its construction, while the use of maintenance-intensive components was kept to an absolute minimum and, where necessary, these were made as accessible and readily serviceable as possible. Manufacturing of the Freighter was eased by many components being standardised and identical where feasible; this ideology was also applied to elements of the internal structure, such as the longerons, frames, and skin. The floor of the main hold is covered by wooden panels, designed to be easily replaceable in the event of damage; these were supported by a floor structure of deep transverse beams with a pair of longitudinal strips, strengthened by a support beam. Another ease-of-maintenance decision was to use cables for the control system where practical, while all flight control surfaces had fabric coverings, which was both light and easy to replace.

==Production history==
On 30 April 1946, the second prototype, which was also the first 34-seat Wayfarer, registered &quot;G-AGVB&quot;, made its first flight. It quickly commenced proving flights in the colours of Channel Islands Airways, where it carried in excess of 10,000 passengers over six months. The third aircraft, registered &quot;G-AGVC,&quot; was the first Freighter I and had fully operational nose doors. After a number of demonstration flights around the world, the Bristol 170 entered full production. One of the first sales was to the Argentine Air Force, which ordered 15 aircraft.

The managing director of Silver City Airways was Wing Commander Griffith James Powell, who realised that he could adapt the Bristol Freighter to fly passengers with their cars from Britain to Continental Europe and Jersey. As an &quot;air ferry&quot;, it would allow people going on holiday to avoid the lengthy waits and travel times involved in traditional sea ferries. On 14 July 1948, the airline made the first flight with a car, from Lympne Airport in Kent to Le Touquet on the northern coast of France. Silver City Airways would become one of its most prolific operators: during 1954, each Freighter in the company&#x27;s fleet averaged 2,970 landings and take offs — in excess of eight sectors per day for every day of the year.

In 1953, production of the freighter was moved to Whitney Straight&#x27;s Western Airways factory at Weston-super-Mare airport. A lengthened version, the Freighter 32, which featured movable wooden partitions in the cargo compartment, was introduced; it could be configured to carry either three 14 ft (3.3m) cars and 20 passengers or two larger vehicles and 12 passengers, the passenger seats being in the rear section of the fuselage. Silver City Airways dubbed this variant the &quot;Superfreighter&quot; and subsequently built an airport named &quot;Ferryfield&quot; at Lydd in Kent, beginning air ferry services in 1955. In the same year, Channel Air Bridge started operations from Southend, with four Bristol Freighters flying to Calais.

The last two Freighters of the 214 built were delivered in 1958, one to New Zealand in February and the last aircraft to Dan-Air in March 1958. The New Zealand aircraft was delivered to Straits Air Freight Express (SAFE), which eventually operated one of the largest fleets of Freighters. One of the lengthened aircraft, registered G-AMWA, had 60 seats fitted and was known as a Super Wayfarer.

==Operational history==

===Civil users===
In New Zealand SAFE Air moved rail freight from Wellington (the North Island) across the Cook Strait to Blenheim (the South Island) and back, using Bristol Freighters, starting in 1951. The airline later reconfigured its aircraft to accept palletised cargo loaded on patented &quot;cargons&quot;. This was a first anywhere in the aviation world.

Cargons were loaded near the rail yards and their load was calculated and arranged to remain within the aircraft&#x27;s load and centre of gravity limits. They were then trucked to the airport and placed on the Freighter using a mechanical loading device. The loader accepted cargons from horizontal-tray road vehicles and then raised them to the level of the aircraft&#x27;s cargo deck on electrically powered screw-jacks. The pallets could then be rolled into the nose of the aircraft. Other adaptations allowed the carrying of horses and other high-value large animals.

Freighters were the major link between the Chatham Islands and mainland New Zealand until Armstrong Whitworth Argosy aircraft replaced them. SAFE Air developed a soundproofed &quot;container&quot; for the half of the aircraft given over to passengers on these flights. Bristol 170s were still in commercial use with SAFE until the late 1970s.

Trans Australian Airlines bought four MK31 or MK 32s from the Pakistan Air Force. Two were flown back to Sydney Australia where they were rebuilt and then sent to New Guinea for TAA ‘s Sunbird services, flying freight into the New Guinea highlands. One then went to Archerfield airport in Brisbane Australia and was used for shipping Crayfish from Tasmania.

===Military users===

In military service, Bristol Freighters were operated by the air forces of Argentina, Australia, Burma, Canada, Iraq, Pakistan and New Zealand. Bristol Freighters were operated briefly by the Pakistan Air Force. After withdrawal, some of the Pakistan aircraft were bought by SAFE Air and used in New Zealand. The Royal Canadian Air Force used five Freighters to carry spares and supplies between the United Kingdom and their bases in France and West Germany.

The Royal New Zealand Air Force ordered 12 &quot;Mk 31M&quot; Freighters in the late 1940s. RNZAF Freighters ranged as far as supplying the New Zealand Army in Malaya, the British High Commissions (and other support staff) in the Maldives, Ceylon, India and Nepal, performing Far East Air Force tasks in Malaya (often when other aircraft types were unserviceable owing to maintenance problems) and Hong Kong. They ran a highly reliable military shuttle service for allies in Thailand during the Vietnam War and served several other roles, being adapted for—amongst other things—aerial topdressing experiments, although to avoid competition with private enterprise, the New Zealand government did not use them in that role.

The airline Aigle Azur operated Bristol 170 Freighters in early 1950s French Indo-China. At least one aircraft was impressed by French authorities to fly supplies into the base at Dien Bien Phu.

===Final days===
The New Zealand Freighters were retired from military use when replaced by Hawker Siddeley Andovers in the 1970s. After retirement, a number of smaller local operators briefly flew Freighters. Some were exported to Canada. A SAFE Air Freighter is preserved in taxiable condition at Blenheim and another at the Royal New Zealand Air Force Museum in Christchurch. A third is on display at Founders Historical Park in Nelson, and a fourth, the only one of its kind in Europe, is in storage in Bristol, United Kingdom after being transported from Ardmore Airport (New Zealand) by Aerospace Bristol. Other Freighter airframes around New Zealand now serve as novelty tea-rooms, backpacker hostels, and motel rooms, such as one in Ōtorohanga.

One Freighter was in service in turn with British Ministry of Supply, the Royal Australian Air Force and subsequently went into commercial use in Australia until 1978 after which it went on to become a museum exhibit and was given over to the RAAF Museum at Point Cook, Victoria, Australia in 1988.

Bristol freighter Mk 31M G-BISU was operated by Instone Airline at Stansted, Essex, UK, for a number of years. This was an ex-RNZAF aircraft and left Ardmore on 2 March 1981 for its 86-hour ferry flight to the UK. It subsequently flew its first charter flight on 3 August 1981 delivering two racehorses to Deauville. This role of flying livestock was to take up half a year, while other work included carriage of oil drilling machinery, car parts, newspapers and mail. Re-registered as &quot;C-FDFC&quot;, in 1996 it crashed on takeoff with the crew escaping, but was essentially a write-off. The captain, John Duncan, and co-pilot Malcolm Cutter reported that the aircraft entered a severe yaw after takeoff, which was uncontrollable despite use of full opposite aileron and rudder control. In trying to avoid collision the aircraft stalled.

The last Freighter in service, which flew for Instone Airline then later returned to New Zealand, was bought from surplus by Hawkair in Terrace, British Columbia, Canada. In 2004, this aircraft undertook its final ferry flight to the Reynolds-Alberta Museum in Wetaskiwin, Alberta.

==Variants==
;Freighter Mk I
:Utility transport Series I or Freighter with a strengthened floor and hydraulically-operated nose doors.

;Freighter Mk IA
:Mixed-traffic variant with 16-passenger seats

;Freighter Mk IB
:Variant of Mk I for British European Airways

;Freighter Mk IC
:Variant of Mk IA for British European Airways

;Freighter Mk ID
:Variant of Mk IA for British South American Airways

;Wayfarer Mk II
:Airliner (passenger variant) Series II or Wayfarer. The nose doors were omitted and additional windows were added.

;Wayfarer Mk IIA
:Variant of Mk II with 32 seats

;Wayfarer Mk IIB
:Variant of Mk IIA for British European Airways

;Wayfarer Mk IIC
:Variant of Mk II with 20 seats and baggage hold

;Freighter Mk XI
:Variant of Mk I with 108 ft (32.92 m) wing and extra tankage.

;Freighter Mk XIA
:Mixed-traffic version of Mk IX

;Freighter Mk 21
:More powerful-engined version.

;Freighter Mk 21E
:Convertible version of Mk 21 with 32 removable seats

;Freighter Mk 31
:Variant of Mk 21 with larger tailfin.

;Freighter Mk 31E
:Convertible version of Mk 31

;Freighter Mk 31M
:Military version of Mk 31 with provision for supply dropping

;Freighter Mk 32 (Bristol Superfreighter)
:Higher-capacity version with fuselage lengthened by 5 ft (1.52 m).

;Type 179 Freighter
:Replacement for Freighter with a twin boom tail, not built.

;Type 179A Freighter
:As Type 179 but with an upswept rear fuselage and a ramp-loading door, not built.

;Type 179B Freighter
:Version of Type 179 with standard tail and powered by Centarus engines, not built.

;Type 216
:Freighter/car ferry replacement of Freighter. It was intended to be powered by a pair of Rolls-Royce Dart turboprop engines. Not built.
==Operators==

===Civil operators===
*Flota Aerea Mercante Argentina
*Air Express
*Ansett-ANA
*Ansett-MAL
*Australian National Airways
*Brain &amp; Brown Airfreighters
*Jetair Australia
*Trans Australia Airlines
*Avions Fairey
*SABENA
*Real Transportes Aéreos
*Associated Airways
*Central Northern Airways
*Hawkair
*Lambair
*Maritime Central Airways
*North Canada Air
*Norcanair
*Pacific Western Airlines
*Transair
*Trans Canada Airlines
*Trans Provincial Airlines
*Wardair
*Shell Company of Ecuador
*Aigle Azur
*Air Atlas
*Air Djibouti 
*Air Fret
*Air Outremer
*Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux
*Corse Air
*&quot;Société Aérienne du Littoral&quot;
*&quot;Société Indochinoise de Transport Aériens&quot;
*&quot;Transportes Aériens Reunis&quot;
*LTU
*Panavia Ltd
*Bharat Airways
*Dalmia Jain Airways
*Indian National Airways
*Aer Lingus
*Aer Turas
*Società Avio Trasporti Torino
*Air Laos
*Middle East Airlines
*Hercules Airline
*SAFE Air
*West African Airways Corporation
*Central African Airways two aircraft delivered in 1948, both sold in 1949.
*Saudi Arabian Airlines
*Aviaco
*Iberia
*Suidair operated one Bristol Wayfarer.
* 
*Air Charter
*Air Ferry
*Air Kruise
*Airwork
*Autair
*Aviation Traders
*BKS Air Transport
*Britavia
*British Air Ferries
*British European Airways
*British United Air Ferries
*Channel Air Bridge
*Channel Airways
*Channel Island Airways
*Dan-Air
*Hunting Aerosurveys
*Instone Airlines
*Manx Airlines 1947–1958
*Midland Air Cargo
*Ministry of Civil Aviation
*Silver City Airways
*Trans European Aviation
*Air Vietnam
===Military operators===
*Argentine Air Force
*Royal Australian Air Force – Four in service from 1949 to 1967. They were used for transport duties in support of the Weapons Research Establishment, Woomera, South Australia.
**No. 34 Squadron RAAF
**No. 1 Air Trials Unit
**No. 2 Air Trials Unit
**Aircraft Research and Development Unit
*Burmese Air Force
*Royal Canadian Air Force
*Iraqi Air Force
*Royal New Zealand Air Force
**No. 1 Squadron RNZAF
**No. 3 Squadron RNZAF
**No. 41 Squadron RNZAF
**Transport Support Unit RNZAF
*Royal Pakistan Air Force
**No. 6 Squadron &quot;Antelopes&quot;
*A&amp;AEE Boscombe Down
*Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE)
==Accidents and incidents==

Sixty-eight of the 214 Freighters built were destroyed or damaged beyond economical repair in accidents. At least 45 of these were fatal, resulting in the deaths of at least 385 passengers and crew.

==Surviving aircraft==
Of 214 aircraft produce, there are 11 complete airframes of varying quality that survive in the 21st century.

===Argentina===
;On display
*Mk 1A &quot;TC-330&quot; of the Argentine Air Force at Museo Nacional de Aeronáutica de Argentina, Morón, Buenos Aires.

===Australia===

;On display
*Mk 21 &quot;A81-1&quot; at Royal Australian Air Force Museum, Point Cook, Victoria.
*Mk 31M &quot;VH-ADL&quot; at the Australian National Aviation Museum, Moorabbin Airport, Melbourne.

===Canada===
;On display
*Mk 31M &quot;CF-WAE&quot;, former Royal Canadian Air Force and Norcanair aircraft at Royal Aviation Museum of Western Canada, Manitoba.
*Mk 31 &quot;C-GYQS&quot;, former Royal New Zealand Air Force (NZ5907) and civil aircraft, at the Reynolds-Alberta Museum, Wetaskiwin Airport, Alberta, in its final Hawkair markings.
*Mk 31 &quot;CF-TFX&quot;, on display (in Wardair colours) at Yellowknife Airport, Yellowknife, (NT).

;Derelict
*Stripped hulk of Mk 31M &quot;CF-TFZ&quot; on the shore of Beaverlodge Lake, Saskatchewan, where it crashed in 1956.

===New Zealand===
;On display
*Mk 31M &quot;NZ5903&quot;, at the Royal New Zealand Air Force Museum.
*Mk 31M &quot;NZ5906&quot;, outdoor display and used as two-bedroom motel accommodation, Woodlyn Park, near Waitomo Caves.
*Mk 31M &quot;ZK-CLU&quot;, outdoor display at Founders Heritage Park, Nelson.
*Mk 31E &quot;ZK-CPT&quot;, in SAFE Air colours, at the Omaka Aerodrome, Blenheim. The aircraft has been restored and can taxi, but does not fly.

;Fuselage only

* The Ferrymead Aeronautical Society holds the forward fuselage section of the ex-SAFE Air ZK-CRK and the cockpit deck of ZK-AYG

*Fuselage of Mk 31M &quot;NZ5902&quot;/&quot;ZK-EPA&quot; sits derelict on private property at Awhitu, near Auckland and is for sale in July 2021 and creating a lot of media interest 

===United Kingdom===
;In storage
*Mk 31M &quot;NZ5911&quot;, currently being restored by Aerospace Bristol. Shipped from New Zealand.

==Specifications (Freighter Mk.31)==

==See also==
&#x27;

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===

* Barnes, C. H., &quot;Bristol Aircraft since 1910&quot; (2nd ed). London: Putnam, 1970. .
* Eastwood, Tony and John Roach. &quot;Piston Engine Airliner Production List&quot;. West Drayton, UK: Aviation Hobby Shop, 1991. . 
* &quot;The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Aircraft&quot; (Part Work 1982–1985). London: Orbis Publishing, 1985.
* Jackson, A.J. &quot;British Civil Aircraft Since 1919, Volume 1&quot;. London: Putnam, 1974. .
* King, Derek A. &quot;The Bristol 170, Freighter, Wayfarer and Superfreighter.&quot; Tonbridge, Kent, UK: Air-Britain (Historians) Ltd., 2011. .
* Shackleton, W. S.,&quot;Dealing with Some New Facts and Figures of the Bristol Freighter&quot; Flight International, 5 February 1945, pp. 176–179. 
* Stroud, John. &quot;Post-War Propliners: Bristol Freigher&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane Monthly&quot;, July 1993, Vol. 22, No. 7. pp. 50–55. |
* &quot;The Bristol Freighter.&quot; &quot;Flight&quot;, 23 November 1944. pp. 555–556.


==External links==
* RNZAF Museum Freighter page
* Bristol Type 170 – Freighter, Wayfarer and Superfreighter versions
* Showing the Flag – The Bristol Freighter&#x27;s Tour of North and South America
* &quot;Bristol Freighter ... turns car freighter!&quot; a 1948 advertisement for the Freighter in &quot;Flight&quot;
* &quot;New Bristol 170&quot; a 1948 &quot;Flight&quot; article
* LIFE photo of Bristol freighter locust sprayer in Iraq, 1959</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q917934" start="4" end="30" title="Bristol Freighter" label="Bristol Type 170 Freighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="91" end="116" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol Aeroplane Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="141" end="149" title="airliner" label="airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698325" start="180" end="189" title="air ferry" label="air ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q917934" start="315" end="323" title="Bristol Freighter" label="Wayfarer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="645" end="661" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="716" end="728" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879173" start="828" end="839" title="Bedford OY" label="3-ton truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969034" start="1262" end="1284" title="Bristol Superfreighter" label="Bristol Superfreighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="1592" end="1617" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol Aeroplane Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q917893" start="1628" end="1644" title="Bristol Brabazon" label="Bristol Brabazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="1694" end="1706" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1996" end="2008" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879173" start="2009" end="2020" title="Bedford OY" label="3-ton truck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2083" end="2102" title="List of Air Ministry specifications#1940.E2.80.931949" label="Specification 22/44"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="2236" end="2245" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q917889" start="2267" end="2281" title="Bristol Bombay" label="Bristol Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="2459" end="2467" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644972" start="3062" end="3077" title="Bristol Perseus" label="Bristol Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q917913" start="3089" end="3106" title="Bristol Centaurus" label="Bristol Centaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q524272" start="3230" end="3254" title="South-East Asian theatre of World War II" label="South-East Asian theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969959" start="3285" end="3309" title="British Far East Command" label="British Far East Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q912540" start="3674" end="3690" title="Bristol Hercules" label="Bristol Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200904" start="4080" end="4091" title="Cyril Uwins" label="Cyril Uwins"/>
<link wikidata="Q581516" start="4243" end="4247" title="trim tab" label="trim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="4301" end="4318" title="centre of gravity" label="centre of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="4938" end="4956" title="Flight International" label="&amp;quot;Flight&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="5394" end="5407" title="landing gear" label="undercarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="5732" end="5736" title="Aerodynamic drag" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303671" start="5815" end="5820" title="Dowty Group" label="Dowty"/>
<link wikidata="Q211251" start="5827" end="5841" title="shock absorber" label="shock absorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="6175" end="6188" title="Cabin pressurization" label="unpressurised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411613" start="6467" end="6472" title="hoist (device)" label="hoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q497741" start="6843" end="6849" title="Galley (kitchen)" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q784567" start="7447" end="7465" title="Sperry Corporation" label="Sperry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="7472" end="7481" title="autopilot" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="7715" end="7728" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="8120" end="8129" title="hydraulics" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="8246" end="8250" title="Flap (aeronautics)" label="flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="8281" end="8292" title="carburation" label="carburation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662372" start="8871" end="8879" title="longeron" label="longeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q552034" start="9197" end="9203" title="Wire rope" label="cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705284" start="9254" end="9277" title="flight control surfaces" label="flight control surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9558" end="9581" title="Channel Islands Airways" label="Channel Islands Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q57770" start="9896" end="9915" title="Argentine Air Force" label="Argentine Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515905" start="9970" end="9989" title="Silver City Airways" label="Silver City Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="9994" end="10008" title="Wing Commander (rank)" label="Wing Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="10137" end="10155" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="10160" end="10166" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698325" start="10180" end="10189" title="air ferry" label="air ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="10308" end="10315" title="ferry" label="ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853368" start="10385" end="10399" title="Lympne Airport" label="Lympne Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="10403" end="10407" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q323164" start="10411" end="10421" title="Le Touquet" label="Le Touquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10447" end="10453" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438272" start="10733" end="10749" title="Whitney Straight" label="Whitney Straight"/>
<link wikidata="Q85852424" start="10757" end="10772" title="Western Airways" label="Western Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q845623" start="10784" end="10801" title="Weston-super-Mare" label="Weston-super-Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969034" start="11170" end="11184" title="Bristol Superfreighter" label="Superfreighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986577" start="11237" end="11247" title="Lydd Airport" label="Ferryfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639689" start="11257" end="11261" title="Lydd" label="Lydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072380" start="11327" end="11345" title="Channel Air Bridge" label="Channel Air Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="11370" end="11378" title="Southend" label="Southend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="11419" end="11425" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="11500" end="11511" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158942" start="11549" end="11556" title="Dan-Air" label="Dan-Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621160" start="11614" end="11641" title="Straits Air Freight Express" label="Straits Air Freight Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="11897" end="11901" title="Rail transport" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="11902" end="11909" title="freight" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="11915" end="11925" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="11931" end="11943" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="11956" end="11967" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q883831" start="11971" end="11979" title="Blenheim, New Zealand" label="Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="11985" end="11997" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="12343" end="12360" title="Center of gravity" label="centre of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q115459" start="12831" end="12846" title="Chatham Islands" label="Chatham Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q689384" start="12878" end="12904" title="Armstrong Whitworth AW.660 Argosy" label="Armstrong Whitworth Argosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="13588" end="13597" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="13599" end="13608" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="13610" end="13615" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="13617" end="13623" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="13625" end="13629" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="13631" end="13639" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="13705" end="13723" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="13977" end="14004" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="14113" end="14129" title="New Zealand Army" label="New Zealand Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="14133" end="14139" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="14145" end="14152" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="14153" end="14169" title="High Commissioner" label="High Commissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="14203" end="14211" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="14213" end="14219" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="14221" end="14226" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="14231" end="14236" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434527" start="14249" end="14267" title="RAF Far East Air Force" label="Far East Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="14371" end="14380" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="14448" end="14456" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="14468" end="14479" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688035" start="14551" end="14569" title="aerial topdressing" label="aerial topdressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212703" start="14709" end="14719" title="Aigle Azur" label="Aigle Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="14767" end="14784" title="French Indo-China" label="French Indo-China"/>
<link wikidata="Q36027" start="14877" end="14890" title="Dien Bien Phu" label="Dien Bien Phu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128763" start="14985" end="15008" title="Hawker Siddeley Andover" label="Hawker Siddeley Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697927" start="15220" end="15254" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force Museum" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="15258" end="15270" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q206687" start="15325" end="15331" title="Nelson, New Zealand" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="15400" end="15423" title="Bristol, United Kingdom" label="Bristol, United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791673" start="15453" end="15482" title="Ardmore Airport (New Zealand)" label="Ardmore Airport (New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993345" start="15486" end="15503" title="Aerospace Bristol" label="Aerospace Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936464" start="15634" end="15644" title="Ōtorohanga" label="Ōtorohanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q965321" start="15697" end="15715" title="Ministry of Supply" label="Ministry of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="15721" end="15747" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306366" start="15890" end="15901" title="RAAF Museum" label="RAAF Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207994" start="15905" end="15915" title="Point Cook" label="Point Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q209021" start="16253" end="16262" title="Deauville" label="Deauville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369827" start="16916" end="16923" title="Hawkair" label="Hawkair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021037" start="16927" end="16952" title="Terrace, British Columbia" label="Terrace, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147196" start="17025" end="17048" title="Reynolds-Alberta Museum" label="Reynolds-Alberta Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q950050" start="17052" end="17062" title="Wetaskiwin" label="Wetaskiwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="17064" end="17071" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="17313" end="17337" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="17378" end="17402" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971082" start="17443" end="17473" title="British South American Airways" label="British South American Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="17698" end="17722" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969034" start="18234" end="18249" title="Bristol Superfreighter" label="Freighter Mk 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q450478" start="18737" end="18753" title="Rolls-Royce Dart" label="Rolls-Royce Dart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18822" end="18852" title="Flota Aerea Mercante Argentina" label="Flota Aerea Mercante Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q247116" start="18867" end="18877" title="Ansett-ANA" label="Ansett-ANA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872172" start="18891" end="18918" title="Australian National Airways" label="Australian National Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448822" start="18971" end="18995" title="Trans Australia Airlines" label="Trans Australia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q141146" start="19012" end="19018" title="SABENA" label="SABENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301096" start="19020" end="19043" title="Real Transportes Aéreos" label="Real Transportes Aéreos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369827" start="19091" end="19098" title="Hawkair" label="Hawkair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481022" start="19100" end="19107" title="Lambair" label="Lambair"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111054" start="19153" end="19162" title="Norcanair" label="Norcanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360205" start="19164" end="19188" title="Pacific Western Airlines" label="Pacific Western Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833748" start="19190" end="19198" title="Transair (UK)" label="Transair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537318" start="19200" end="19221" title="Trans Canada Airlines" label="Trans Canada Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q428008" start="19250" end="19257" title="Wardair" label="Wardair"/>
<link wikidata="Q212703" start="19285" end="19295" title="Aigle Azur" label="Aigle Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q643713" start="19308" end="19320" title="Air Djibouti" label="Air Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835322" start="19347" end="19383" title="Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux" label="Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q707568" start="19533" end="19536" title="LTU International" label="LTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q876323" start="19588" end="19611" title="Indian Airlines" label="Indian National Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q83716" start="19613" end="19623" title="Aer Lingus" label="Aer Lingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825566" start="19625" end="19634" title="Aer Turas" label="Aer Turas"/>
<link wikidata="Q859510" start="19677" end="19697" title="Middle East Airlines" label="Middle East Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621160" start="19717" end="19725" title="Straits Air Freight Express" label="SAFE Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984253" start="19727" end="19759" title="West African Airways Corporation" label="West African Airways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053680" start="19761" end="19784" title="Central African Airways" label="Central African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q541179" start="19837" end="19859" title="Saudi Arabian Airlines" label="Saudi Arabian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q790771" start="19861" end="19867" title="Aviaco" label="Aviaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="19869" end="19875" title="Iberia Airlines" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19877" end="19884" title="Suidair" label="Suidair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697798" start="19920" end="19931" title="Air Charter Limited" label="Air Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697869" start="19933" end="19942" title="Air Ferry Limited" label="Air Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740229" start="19944" end="19954" title="Air Kruise" label="Air Kruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699082" start="19956" end="19963" title="Airwork Services" label="Airwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308791" start="19965" end="19971" title="Court Line" label="Autair"/>
<link wikidata="Q790835" start="19973" end="19989" title="Aviation Traders" label="Aviation Traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064437" start="19991" end="20008" title="Northeast Airlines (UK)" label="BKS Air Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969547" start="20010" end="20018" title="British Aviation Services" label="Britavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="20041" end="20065" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q920362" start="20067" end="20093" title="British United Air Ferries" label="British United Air Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072380" start="20095" end="20113" title="Channel Air Bridge" label="Channel Air Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062247" start="20115" end="20130" title="Channel Airways" label="Channel Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158942" start="20156" end="20163" title="Dan-Air" label="Dan-Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944874" start="20165" end="20184" title="Hunting-Clan Air Transport" label="Hunting Aerosurveys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20186" end="20202" title="Instone Airlines" label="Instone Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515905" start="20276" end="20295" title="Silver City Airways" label="Silver City Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833665" start="20297" end="20320" title="Trans European Aviation" label="Trans European Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828240" start="20322" end="20333" title="Air Vietnam" label="Air Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q57770" start="20360" end="20379" title="Argentine Air Force" label="Argentine Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="20381" end="20407" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068811" start="20531" end="20555" title="Woomera, South Australia" label="Woomera, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043411" start="20559" end="20579" title="No. 34 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 34 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698521" start="20630" end="20668" title="Aircraft Research and Development Unit" label="Aircraft Research and Development Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920908" start="20670" end="20687" title="Burmese Air Force" label="Burmese Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="20689" end="20713" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443729" start="20715" end="20730" title="Iraqi Air Force" label="Iraqi Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="20732" end="20759" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043116" start="20762" end="20782" title="No. 1 Squadron RNZAF" label="No. 1 Squadron RNZAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043465" start="20785" end="20805" title="No. 3 Squadron RNZAF" label="No. 3 Squadron RNZAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057594" start="20808" end="20829" title="No. 41 Squadron RNZAF" label="No. 41 Squadron RNZAF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20832" end="20860" title="Transport Support Unit RNZAF" label="Transport Support Unit RNZAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="20862" end="20886" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Royal Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043774" start="20889" end="20925" title="No. 6 Squadron (Pakistan Air Force)" label="No. 6 Squadron &amp;quot;Antelopes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825663" start="20927" end="20950" title="Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment" label="A&amp;amp;AEE Boscombe Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q376223" start="20952" end="20993" title="Telecommunications Research Establishment" label="Telecommunications Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940493" start="21447" end="21489" title="Museo Nacional de Aeronáutica de Argentina" label="Museo Nacional de Aeronáutica de Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306366" start="21570" end="21603" title="RAAF Museum" label="Royal Australian Air Force Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207994" start="21605" end="21625" title="Point Cook, Victoria" label="Point Cook, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824444" start="21661" end="21696" title="Australian National Aviation Museum" label="Australian National Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111054" start="21818" end="21827" title="Norcanair" label="Norcanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147196" start="21989" end="22012" title="Reynolds-Alberta Museum" label="Reynolds-Alberta Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369827" start="22056" end="22063" title="Hawkair" label="Hawkair"/>
<link wikidata="Q428008" start="22116" end="22123" title="Wardair" label="Wardair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724008" start="22136" end="22155" title="Yellowknife Airport" label="Yellowknife Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="22171" end="22173" title="Northwest Territories" label="NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878256" start="22247" end="22263" title="Beaverlodge Lake" label="Beaverlodge Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="22265" end="22277" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697927" start="22371" end="22405" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force Museum" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122127" start="22515" end="22528" title="Waitomo Caves" label="Waitomo Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474607" start="22577" end="22599" title="Founders Heritage Park" label="Founders Heritage Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089492" start="22665" end="22680" title="Omaka Aviation Heritage Centre" label="Omaka Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993345" start="23176" end="23193" title="Aerospace Bristol" label="Aerospace Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="24006" end="24026" title="Flight International" label="Flight International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825662" start="24132" end="24149" title="Aeroplane Monthly" label="Aeroplane Monthly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303274" wikidata="Q1328149" url="?curid=303274" title="Gudermannian function">
<text>In mathematics, the Gudermannian function relates a hyperbolic angle measure formula_1 to a circular angle measure formula_2 called the &quot;gudermannian&quot; of formula_1 and denoted formula_4. The Gudermannian function reveals a close relationship between the circular functions and hyperbolic functions. It was introduced in the 1760s by Johann Heinrich Lambert, and later named for Christoph Gudermann who also described the relationship between circular and hyperbolic functions in 1830. The gudermannian is sometimes called the hyperbolic amplitude as a limiting case of the Jacobi elliptic amplitude formula_5 when parameter formula_6

The real Gudermannian function is typically defined for formula_7 to be the integral of the hyperbolic secant

:formula_8

The real inverse Gudermannian function can be defined for formula_9 as the integral of the (circular) secant

:formula_10

The hyperbolic angle measure formula_11 is called the &quot;anti-gudermannian&quot; of formula_12 or sometimes the lambertian of formula_12, denoted formula_14 In the context of geodesy and navigation for latitude formula_2, formula_16 (scaled by arbitrary constant formula_17) was historically called the meridional part of formula_12 (French: &quot;latitude croissante&quot;). It is the vertical coordinate of the Mercator projection.

The two angle measures formula_2 and formula_1 are related by a common stereographic projection

:formula_21

and this identity can serve as an alternative definition for formula_22 and formula_23 valid throughout the complex plane:

:formula_24


== Circular–hyperbolic identities ==

We can evaluate the integral of the hyperbolic secant using the stereographic projection (hyperbolic half-tangent) as a change of variables:

:formula_25

Letting formula_26 and formula_27 we can derive a number of identities between hyperbolic functions of formula_1 and circular functions of formula_29

:formula_30

These are commonly used as expressions for formula_31 and formula_32 for real values of formula_33 and formula_12 with formula_35 For example, the numerically well-behaved formulas

:formula_36

(Note, for formula_37 and for complex arguments, care must be taken choosing branches of the inverse functions.)

We can also express formula_1 and formula_2 in terms of formula_40

:formula_41

If we expand formula_42 and formula_43 in terms of the exponential, then we can see that formula_44 formula_45 and formula_46 are all Möbius transformations of each-other (specifically, rotations of the Riemann sphere):

:formula_47

For real values of formula_1 and formula_2 with formula_50, these Möbius transformations can be written in terms of trigonometric functions in several ways,

:formula_51

These give further expressions for formula_31 and formula_32 for real arguments with formula_35 For example,

:formula_55

== Complex values ==
As a function of a complex variable, formula_56 conformally maps the infinite strip formula_57 to the infinite strip formula_58 while formula_59 conformally maps the infinite strip formula_60 to the infinite strip formula_61

Analytically continued by reflections to the whole complex plane, formula_56 is a periodic function of period formula_63 which sends any infinite strip of &quot;height&quot; formula_63 onto the strip formula_65 Likewise, extended to the whole complex plane, formula_59 is a periodic function of period formula_67 which sends any infinite strip of &quot;width&quot; formula_67 onto the strip formula_69 For all points in the complex plane, these functions can be correctly written as:

:formula_70

For the formula_22 and formula_23 functions to remain invertible with these extended domains, we might consider each to be a multivalued function (perhaps formula_73 and formula_74, with formula_22 and formula_23 the principal branch) or consider their domains and codomains as Riemann surfaces.

If formula_77 then the real and imaginary components formula_78 and formula_79 can be found by:

:formula_80

(In practical implementation, make sure to use the 2-argument arctangent, 

Likewise, if formula_81 then components formula_82 and formula_83 can be found by:

:formula_84

Multiplying these together reveals the additional identity
:formula_85

=== Symmetries ===

The two functions can be thought of as rotations or reflections of each-other, with a similar relationship as formula_86 between sine and hyperbolic sine:
:formula_87

The functions are both odd and they commute with complex conjugation. That is, a reflection across the real or imaginary axis in the domain results in the same reflection in the codomain:
:formula_88

The functions are periodic, with periods formula_63 and formula_67:
:formula_91

A translation in the domain of formula_22 by formula_93 results in a half-turn rotation and translation in the codomain by one of formula_94 and vice versa for formula_95

:formula_96

A reflection in the domain of formula_22 across either of the lines formula_98 results in a reflection in the codomain across one of the lines formula_99 and vice versa for formula_95

:formula_101

This is related to the identity
:formula_102

=== Specific values ===

A few specific values (where formula_103 indicates the limit at one end of the infinite strip):
:formula_104

==Derivatives==
As the Gudermannian and inverse Gudermannian functions can be defined as the antiderivatives of the hyperbolic secant and circular secant functions, respectively, their derivatives are those secant functions:

:formula_105

== Argument-addition identities ==

By combining hyperbolic and circular argument-addition identities,

:formula_106

with the circular–hyperbolic identity,
:formula_107

we have the Gudermannian argument-addition identities:

:formula_108

Further argument-addition identities can be written in terms of other circular functions, but they require greater care in choosing branches in inverse functions. Notably,

:formula_109

which can be used to derive the per-component computation for the complex Gudermannian and inverse Gudermannian.

In the specific case formula_110 double-argument identities are

:formula_111

== Taylor series ==
The Taylor series near zero, valid for complex values formula_112 with formula_113 are

:formula_114

where the numbers formula_115 are the Euler secant numbers, 1, 0, -1, 0, 5, 0, -61, 0, 1385 ... (sequences , , and in the OEIS). These series were first computed by James Gregory in 1671.

Because the Gudermannian and inverse Gudermannian functions are the integrals of the hyperbolic secant and secant functions, the numerators formula_115 and formula_117 are same as the numerators of the Taylor series for and , respectively, but shifted by one place.

The reduced unsigned numerators are 1, 1, 1, 61, 277, ... and the reduced denominators are 1, 6, 24, 5040, 72576, ... (sequences and in the OEIS).

==History==

The function and its inverse are related to the Mercator projection. The vertical coordinate in the Mercator projection is called isometric latitude, and is often denoted formula_118 In terms of latitude formula_2 on the sphere (expressed in radians) the isometric latitude can be written

:formula_120

The inverse from the isometric latitude to spherical latitude is formula_121 (Note: on an ellipsoid of revolution, the relation between geodetic latitude and isometric latitude is slightly more complicated.)

Gerardus Mercator plotted his celebrated map in 1569, but the precise method of construction was not revealed. In 1599, Edward Wright described a method for constructing a Mercator projection numerically from trigonometric tables, but did not produce a closed formula. The closed formula was published in 1668 by James Gregory.

The Gudermannian function per se was introduced by Johann Heinrich Lambert in the 1760s at the same time as the hyperbolic functions. He called it the &quot;transcendent angle&quot;, and it went by various names until 1862 when Arthur Cayley suggested it be given its current name as a tribute to Christoph Gudermann&#x27;s work in the 1830s on the theory of special functions.
Gudermann had published articles in &quot;Crelle&#x27;s Journal&quot; that were later collected in a book
which expounded formula_122 and formula_123 to a wide audience (although represented by the symbols formula_124 and formula_125).

The notation formula_22 was introduced by Cayley who starts by calling formula_127 the Jacobi elliptic amplitude formula_128 in the degenerate case where the elliptic modulus is formula_129 so that formula_130 reduces to formula_131 This is the inverse of the integral of the secant function. Using Cayley&#x27;s notation,

:formula_132

He then derives &quot;the definition of the transcendent&quot;,

:formula_133

observing that &quot;although exhibited in an imaginary form, [it] is a real function of 

The Gudermannian and its inverse were used to make trigonometric tables of circular functions also function as tables of hyperbolic functions. Given a hyperbolic angle formula_1, hyperbolic functions could be found by first looking up formula_26 in a Gudermannian table and then looking up the appropriate circular function of formula_2, or by directly locating formula_1 in an auxiliary formula_32 column of the trigonometric table.

== Generalization ==

The Gudermannian function can be thought of mapping points on one branch of a hyperbola to points on a semicircle. Points on one sheet of an &quot;n&quot;-dimensional hyperboloid of two sheets can be likewise mapped onto a &quot;n&quot;-dimensional hemisphere via stereographic projection. The hemisphere model of hyperbolic space uses such a map to represent hyperbolic space.

==Applications==

*The angle of parallelism function in hyperbolic geometry is the complement of the gudermannian, formula_139
* On a Mercator projection a line of constant latitude is parallel to the equator (on the projection) at a distance proportional to the anti-gudermannian of the latitude.
* The Gudermannian function (with a complex argument) may be used to define the transverse Mercator projection.
* The Gudermannian function appears in a non-periodic solution of the inverted pendulum.
* The Gudermannian function appears in a moving mirror solution of the dynamical Casimir effect.
* If an infinite number of infinitely long, equidistant, parallel, coplanar, straight wires are kept at equal potentials with alternating signs, the potential-flux distribution in a cross-sectional plane perpendicular to the wires is the complex Gudermannian function.
* The Gudermannian function is a sigmoid function, and as such is sometimes used as an activation function in machine learning.
* The (scaled and shifted) Gudermannian function is the cumulative distribution function of the hyperbolic secant distribution.
* A function based on the Gudermannian provides a good model for the shape of spiral galaxy arms.

== See also ==
*Tractrix

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Supplement No. 1 to &quot;The Canadian Cartographer&quot; 13.
* 
* [First published as ]
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Penn, Michael (2020) &quot;the Gudermannian function!&quot; on YouTube.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1328149" start="20" end="41" title="Gudermannian function" label="Gudermannian function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003216" start="52" end="68" title="hyperbolic angle" label="hyperbolic angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="92" end="106" title="angle" label="circular angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="264" end="281" title="circular function" label="circular function"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="287" end="306" title="hyperbolic function" label="hyperbolic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q122999" start="343" end="366" title="Johann Heinrich Lambert" label="Johann Heinrich Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q77316" start="388" end="407" title="Christoph Gudermann" label="Christoph Gudermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328149" start="536" end="556" title="Gudermannian function" label="hyperbolic amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q17123612" start="562" end="575" title="limiting case (mathematics)" label="limiting case"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="608" title="Jacobi elliptic functions#am" label="Jacobi elliptic amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="649" end="653" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201936" start="843" end="876" title="integral of the secant function" label="integral of the (circular) secant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328149" start="1006" end="1016" title="Gudermannian function" label="lambertian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="1069" end="1076" title="geodesy" label="geodesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="1081" end="1091" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328149" start="1197" end="1212" title="Gudermannian function" label="meridional part"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1228" end="1234" title="French (language)" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="1307" end="1326" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q866099" start="1400" end="1424" title="stereographic projection" label="stereographic projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="1547" end="1560" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1705" end="1728" title="tangent half-angle substitution#Hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic half-tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071270" start="1735" end="1754" title="Integration by substitution" label="change of variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625091" start="2206" end="2214" title="Branch point" label="branches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2379" end="2390" title="Exponential function#Complex plane" label="exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q595742" start="2458" end="2479" title="Möbius transformation" label="Möbius transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q825857" start="2527" end="2541" title="Riemann sphere" label="Riemann sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="2878" end="2908" title="Complex analysis" label="function of a complex variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="2921" end="2937" title="conformal map" label="conformally maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q485287" start="3099" end="3121" title="Analytic continuation" label="Analytically continued"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378892" start="3125" end="3136" title="Schwarz reflection principle" label="reflections"/>
<link wikidata="Q629085" start="3722" end="3742" title="multivalued function" label="multivalued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923691" start="3814" end="3830" title="principal branch" label="principal branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="3875" end="3890" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q776598" start="4055" end="4076" title="atan2" label="2-argument arctangent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4390" end="4422" title="Hyperbolic functions#Hyperbolic functions for complex numbers" label="between sine and hyperbolic sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="4460" end="4463" title="even and odd functions" label="odd"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="4486" end="4505" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="4656" end="4664" title="periodic function" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5573" end="5583" title="hyperbolic functions#Sums of arguments" label="hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5588" end="5596" title="trigonometric functions#Sum and difference formulas" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5651" end="5679" title="#Circular–hyperbolic identities" label="circular–hyperbolic identity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5984" end="6009" title="Gudermannian function#Complex values" label="per-component computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="6169" end="6182" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q947015" start="6305" end="6325" title="Euler numbers" label="Euler secant numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="6389" end="6393" title="On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences" label="OEIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q313906" start="6432" end="6445" title="James Gregory (mathematician)" label="James Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6658" end="6675" title="Hyperbolic functions#Taylor series expressions" label="Taylor series for"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6680" end="6680" title="Trigonometric functions#Power series expansion" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="6863" end="6867" title="On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences" label="OEIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="6932" end="6951" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7014" end="7032" title="Latitude#Isometric latitude" label="isometric latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="7079" end="7087" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="7126" end="7132" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="7278" end="7301" title="ellipsoid of revolution" label="ellipsoid of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353" start="7397" end="7414" title="Gerardus Mercator" label="Gerardus Mercator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294162" start="7517" end="7530" title="Edward Wright (mathematician)" label="Edward Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q313906" start="7710" end="7723" title="James Gregory (mathematician)" label="James Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q122999" start="7777" end="7800" title="Johann Heinrich Lambert" label="Johann Heinrich Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="7838" end="7858" title="hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q159430" start="7954" end="7967" title="Arthur Cayley" label="Arthur Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q77316" start="8023" end="8042" title="Christoph Gudermann" label="Christoph Gudermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368270" start="8146" end="8167" title="Crelle&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Crelle&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8428" end="8453" title="Jacobi elliptic functions#am" label="Jacobi elliptic amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201936" start="8601" end="8632" title="integral of the secant function" label="integral of the secant function"/>
<link wikidata="Q787322" start="8900" end="8920" title="trigonometric tables" label="trigonometric tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q505628" start="9473" end="9498" title="hyperboloid" label="hyperboloid of two sheets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9600" end="9636" title="Hyperbolic geometry#The hemisphere model" label="hemisphere model of hyperbolic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617405" start="9708" end="9728" title="angle of parallelism" label="angle of parallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="9741" end="9760" title="hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9768" end="9778" title="Angle#Combining angle pairs" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="9819" end="9838" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329238" start="10063" end="10093" title="transverse Mercator projection" label="transverse Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q550134" start="10165" end="10182" title="inverted pendulum" label="inverted pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q275393" start="10265" end="10279" title="Casimir effect" label="Casimir effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q55451" start="10391" end="10401" title="electric potential" label="potentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q526668" start="10583" end="10599" title="sigmoid function" label="sigmoid function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677469" start="10637" end="10656" title="activation function" label="activation function"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="10734" end="10766" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258632" start="10774" end="10804" title="hyperbolic secant distribution" label="hyperbolic secant distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="10884" end="10897" title="spiral galaxy" label="spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365281" start="10921" end="10929" title="Tractrix" label="Tractrix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303275" wikidata="Q3843170" url="?curid=303275" title="Magic (software)">
<text>Magic is an electronic design automation (EDA) layout tool for very-large-scale integration (VLSI) integrated circuit (IC) originally written by John Ousterhout and his graduate students at UC Berkeley. Work began on the project in February 1983. A primitive version was operational by April 1983, when Joan Pendleton, Shing Kong and other graduate student chip designers suffered through many fast revisions devised to meet their needs in designing the SOAR CPU chip, a follow-on to Berkeley RISC.

Fearing that Ousterhout was going to propose another name that started with &quot;C&quot; to match his previous projects &quot;Cm*&quot;, &quot;Caesar&quot;, and &quot;Crystal&quot;, Gordon Hamachi proposed the name &quot;Magic&quot; because he liked the idea of being able to say that people used magic to design chips. The rest of the development team enthusiastically agreed to this proposal after he devised the backronym Manhattan Artwork Generator for Integrated Circuits. The Magic software developers called themselves magicians, while the chip designers were Magic users.

As free and open-source software, subject to the requirements of the BSD license, Magic continues to be popular because it is easy to use and easy to expand for specialized tasks.

==Differences==
The main difference between Magic and other VLSI design tools is its use of &quot;corner-stitched&quot; geometry, in which all layout is represented as a stack of planes, and each plane consists entirely of &quot;tiles&quot; (rectangles). The tiles must cover the entire plane. Each tile consists of an (X, Y) coordinate of its lower left-hand corner, and links to four tiles: the right-most neighbor on the top, the top-most neighbor on the right, the bottom-most neighbor on the left, and the left-most neighbor on the bottom. With the addition of the type of material represented by the tile, the layout geometry in the plane is exactly specified. The corner-stitched geometry representation leads to the concept of layout as &quot;paint&quot; to be applied to, or erased from, a canvas. This is considerably different from other tools that use the concept of layout as &quot;objects&quot; to be placed and manipulated separately from one another. Each concept has its own strengths and weaknesses in terms of both practical use and speed of computation. The corner-stitched representation is particularly well suited to searches within a single plane, for which it excels in speed. It is not particularly well suited to extremely large databases: The need to maintain four pointers for each tile, as well as the need to store tiles representing the space between areas of material on a layout, makes it more memory-intensive than object-based representations.

An extension to the corner-stitched geometry representation called the &quot;split tile&quot; method, added in version 7.1, allows true representation of non-Manhattan geometry. This method allows each tile in the database to specify two material types, in which case the tile is regarded as being bisected by a diagonal line from corner to corner, with one material type on one side of the diagonal and the other material type on the other side of the diagonal. An additional flag specifies whether the diagonal runs from the top left corner to the bottom right, or the top right corner to the bottom left. The split-tile method has the advantage that nearly all rules that apply to corner-stitched geometry apply, unaltered, to split tiles. A further advantage is that all non-Manhattan geometry must have corners lying on the database internal grid. This makes it impossible to generate geometry that is off-grid within a single plane, a rule error for most fabrication processes that is a common problem with object-based representations.

=== Design rule checking ===
Magic features real-time design rule checking, something that some costly commercial VLSI design software packages don&#x27;t feature. Magic implements this by counting distance using Manhattan distance, which is much faster to compute than Euclidean distance. Magic versions from 7.3 properly compute Euclidean distance when given the codice_1 command. Euclidean distance checks are a trivial extension of the Manhattan distance checks, and require very little overhead. On a straight-line edge, the Manhattan and Euclidean distances are the same. Only on corners do the two distances diverge. When checking corners, it is only necessary to keep track of the direction of search from the corner point. Any geometry found inside the square representing the Manhattan distance from the corner undergoes an additional check to see if the same geometry lies outside the quarter-circle radius representing the Euclidean distance. Since this additional check is applied only to geometry found in violation of the Manhattan distance rule, it is not invoked often, so the computational overhead is very small.

Magic currently runs under Linux, although versions exist for DOS, OS/2, and other operating systems. Magic is frequently used in conjunction with IRSIM and other simulation programs.

== Internals ==
It uses Tcl/Tk under the hood.

== File formats ==

=== Importing and exporting ===

* Magic supports CIF/Calma GDS files.

== See also ==

* XCircuit
* Netgen

==References==

;Notes
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Magic VLSI Layout Tool
* Magic, Man Pages &amp; Tutorial
* Magic, Old version
* IRSIM
* VLSI Layout of 16 bit Full Adder using Magic software</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3843170" start="0" end="5" title="Magic (software)" label="Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194864" start="12" end="40" title="electronic design automation" label="electronic design automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q876049" start="63" end="91" title="very-large-scale integration" label="very-large-scale integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="99" end="117" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q92636" start="145" end="160" title="John Ousterhout" label="John Ousterhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="190" end="201" title="UC Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638583" start="484" end="497" title="Berkeley RISC" label="Berkeley RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="916" end="925" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843170" start="926" end="927" title="Magic (software)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843170" start="936" end="937" title="Magic (software)" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843170" start="944" end="945" title="Magic (software)" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843170" start="958" end="959" title="Magic (software)" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843170" start="969" end="970" title="Magic (software)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="1085" end="1114" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="1151" end="1162" title="BSD license" label="BSD license"/>
<link wikidata="Q573509" start="2902" end="2911" title="Manhattan distance" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200669" start="3842" end="3862" title="design rule checking" label="design rule checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q573509" start="4001" end="4019" title="Manhattan distance" label="Manhattan distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q847073" start="4058" end="4076" title="Euclidean distance" label="Euclidean distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="4948" end="4953" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="4983" end="4986" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="4988" end="4992" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="5004" end="5021" title="operating systems" label="operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5068" end="5073" title="IRSIM" label="IRSIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270401" start="5084" end="5103" title="electronic circuit simulation" label="simulation programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q616360" start="5130" end="5136" title="Tcl/Tk" label="Tcl/Tk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027477" start="5224" end="5227" title="Caltech Intermediate Form" label="CIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023036" start="5228" end="5233" title="Calma" label="Calma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485017" start="5234" end="5237" title="GDSII" label="GDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597404" start="5264" end="5272" title="XCircuit" label="XCircuit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303280" wikidata="Q1852992" url="?curid=303280" title="List of Test cricket grounds">
<text>One hundred and twenty-three grounds have hosted men&#x27;s Test cricket since the first officially recognised Test match between Australia and England in Melbourne in March 1877. The grounds are listed in the order in which they were first used as a venue for a men&#x27;s Test cricket match. The list excludes World Series Cricket venues and women&#x27;s Test venues.

On 8 July 2009, Sophia Gardens in Cardiff became the 100th Test venue. The Stormont cricket ground in Belfast became the 123rd and most recent Test venue when it staged a match between Ireland and Zimbabwe in July 2024.

==List of men&#x27;s Test cricket grounds==
Last updated on 6 February 2025 (Test 2581):

 – 22 Tests from 1896 to 1939; not used for first-class cricket since 1946; redeveloped as Johannesburg Railway Station.
 – Staged only one Test; not used for cricket since 1973; home ground of Sheffield United F.C.
 – 4 Tests from 1910 to 1921; not used for first-class cricket since 1922; demolished.
 – Staged two Tests, one in 1928 and the other in 1931; not used for first-class cricket since 1931.
 – 6 Tests from 1948 to 1954; not used for first-class cricket since 1956; now used only for rugby union.
 – First used by Pakistan for 8 Tests, later for 9 Tests by Bangladesh, including the inaugural home Test for both sides, on 1 January 1955 and 10 November 2000 respectively. Used exclusively for football since March 2005.
 – Staged only one Test in 1992; subsequent Tests in Bulawayo played at the Queens Sports Club.
 – Hosted the first Day-Night Test match on 27 November 2015.

==Grounds by country==
List of number of grounds by country up to 6 February 2025 (Test 2581):

==See also==
* List of One Day International cricket grounds
* List of Twenty20 International cricket grounds
* List of women&#x27;s Test cricket grounds
* List of cricket grounds by capacity

== References ==
Specific
General

== External links ==
* ESPNcricinfo – Grounds</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q73138804" start="29" end="36" title="Ground (cricket)" label="grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="49" end="72" title="Test cricket" label="men&amp;#x27;s Test cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349761" start="312" end="332" title="World Series Cricket" label="World Series Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031085" start="344" end="361" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Test cricket" label="women&amp;#x27;s Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395150" start="387" end="401" title="Sophia Gardens (cricket ground)" label="Sophia Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="405" end="412" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620253" start="446" end="469" title="Stormont (cricket ground)" label="Stormont cricket ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="473" end="480" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q127436975" start="556" end="589" title="Zimbabwean cricket team in Ireland in 2024" label="Ireland and Zimbabwe in July 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="726" end="745" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175720" start="773" end="801" title="Johannesburg Railway Station" label="Johannesburg Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="876" end="897" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="941" end="960" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="1054" end="1073" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="1129" end="1148" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="1179" end="1190" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1388" end="1396" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592989" start="1685" end="1730" title="List of One Day International cricket grounds" label="List of One Day International cricket grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600805" start="1733" end="1779" title="List of Twenty20 International cricket grounds" label="List of Twenty20 International cricket grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036640" start="1782" end="1823" title="List of women&amp;#x27;s Test cricket grounds" label="List of women&amp;#x27;s Test cricket grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614573" start="1826" end="1861" title="List of cricket grounds by capacity" label="List of cricket grounds by capacity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303285" wikidata="Q2032295" url="?curid=303285" title="Thomas Blood">
<text>Thomas Blood (1618 – 24 August 1680) was an Anglo-Irish officer and self-styled colonel best known for his attempt to steal the Crown Jewels of England from the Tower of London in 1671. Described in an American source as a &quot;noted bravo and desperado,&quot; he was also known for his attempt to kidnap and, later, to kill, his enemy James Butler, 1st Duke of Ormond.

==Early life==
Sources suggest that Blood was born in County Clare, in the Kingdom of Ireland, the son of a successful land-owning blacksmith of English descent, and was partly raised at Sarney, near Dunboyne, in County Meath. He was apparently a Presbyterian. His family was respectable and prosperous (by the standards of the time); his father held lands in Counties Clare, Meath and Wicklow. His grandfather was a member of the Irish Parliament, and had lived at Kilnaboy Castle (also in County Clare). He received his education in Lancashire, England. At the age of 20, he married Maria Holcroft, the daughter of John Holcroft of Holcroft Hall, Culcheth, Cheshire, and Golborne, Lancashire, and returned to Ireland.

At the outbreak of the First English Civil War in 1642, Blood returned to England and initially took up arms with the Royalist forces loyal to Charles I. As the conflict progressed he switched sides and became a lieutenant in Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s Roundheads. In 1653 at the cessation of hostilities Cromwell awarded Blood land grants as payment for his service and appointed him a justice of the peace. Following the Restoration of King Charles II to the Crowns of the Three Kingdoms in 1660, Blood fled with his family to Ireland. The confiscations and restitutions under the Act of Settlement 1662 (which sought to cancel and annul some of the grants of land and real properties allocated as reward to new holders being Cromwellians under the Act of Settlement 1652) brought Blood to financial ruin, and in return Blood sought to unite his fellow Cromwellians in Ireland to cause insurrection.

==Irish discontent==
As part of the expression of discontent, Blood conspired to storm Dublin Castle, usurp the government, and kidnap for ransom the 1st Duke of Ormond, who was the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. On the eve of the attempt, the plot was foiled. Blood managed to evade the authorities by hiding with his countrymen in the mountains, and ultimately escaped to the United Dutch Provinces in the Low Country. A few of Blood&#x27;s collaborators were captured and executed. As a result, some historians speculated that Blood swore vengeance against Ormond.

While in the Dutch Republic, Blood gained the favour of Admiral de Ruyter, an opponent of the English forces in the Anglo-Dutch Wars, and was implicated in the Scottish Pentland Rising of 1666 by the Scottish Presbyterian Covenanters. At some point during this period, Blood became associated with the wealthy George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham, who 19th-century commentators believed used Blood as a means to punish his own political and social adversaries, since his own class ranking did not allow him to meet them &quot;in the field&quot;.

In 1670, despite his status as a wanted man, Blood returned to England and is believed to have taken the name Ayloffe and practised as a doctor or an apothecary in Romford Market, east of London. A second attempt, this time on the life of the Duke of Ormond, followed.

Since Ormond&#x27;s return to England, he had taken up residence at Clarendon House. Blood had followed Ormond&#x27;s movements and noted that he frequently returned late in the evening accompanied by a small number of footmen. On the night of 6 December 1670, Blood and his accomplices attacked Ormond while the latter travelled St James&#x27;s Street. Ormond was dragged from his coach, bound to one of Blood&#x27;s henchmen, and taken on horseback along Piccadilly with the intention of hanging him at Tyburn. The gang pinned a paper to Ormond&#x27;s chest spelling out their reasons for his capture and murder. With one of his servants who had given chase on horseback, Ormond succeeded in freeing himself and escaped. The plot&#x27;s secrecy meant that Blood was not suspected of the crime, despite a reward being offered for the capture of the attempted assassins. In the King&#x27;s presence, James&#x27;s son, Thomas Butler, accused the Duke of Buckingham of being behind the crime. Thomas threatened to shoot Buckingham dead in revenge, if his father, James, was murdered.

===Theft of the Crown Jewels===

Blood did not lie low for long, and within six months he made his notorious attempt to steal the Crown Jewels. In April or May 1671 he visited the Tower of London dressed as a parson and accompanied by a female companion pretending to be his wife. The Crown Jewels could be viewed by the payment of a fee to the custodian. While viewing the Crown Jewels, Blood&#x27;s &quot;wife&quot; feigned a stomach complaint and begged the newly appointed Master of the Jewel House, 77-year-old Talbot Edwards, to fetch her some spirits. Given the proximity of the jewel keeper&#x27;s domestic quarters to the site of the commotion, Edwards&#x27; wife invited them upstairs to their apartment to recover, after which Blood and his wife thanked the Edwardses and left.

Over the following days Blood returned to the Tower to visit the Edwardses and presented Mrs Edwards with four pairs of white gloves as a gesture of thanks. As Blood became ingratiated with the family, an offer was made for a fictitious nephew of Blood&#x27;s to marry the Edwardses&#x27; daughter, who, Blood alleged, would be eligible, by virtue of the marriage, to an income of several hundred pounds.

On 9 May 1671, in furtherance of the deception, Blood convinced Edwards to show the jewels to him, his supposed nephew, and two of his friends while they waited for a dinner that Mrs Edwards was to put on for Blood and his companions. The jewel keeper&#x27;s apartment was in Martin Tower above a basement where the jewels were kept behind a metal grille. Reports suggest that Blood&#x27;s accomplices carried canes that concealed rapier blades, daggers, and pocket pistols. In entering the Jewel House, one of the men made a pretence of standing watch outside while the others joined Edwards and Blood. The door was closed and a cloak thrown over Edwards, who was struck with a mallet, knocked to the floor, bound, gagged and stabbed to subdue him.

After removing the grille, Blood used the mallet to flatten the Imperial State Crown of Charles II so that he could hide it beneath his clerical coat. Another conspirator, Blood&#x27;s brother-in-law Hunt, filed the Sceptre with the Cross in two (as it did not fit in their bag), while the third man, Perrot, stuffed the Sovereign&#x27;s Orb down his breeches. Meanwhile Edwards refused to stay subdued and fought against his bindings. Accounts vary as to whether Edwards&#x27; struggle caused sufficient disturbance to raise the alarm or whether the attempt was foiled in more fortuitous circumstances.

Popular reports describe Edwards&#x27; son, Wythe, returning from military service in Flanders, happening upon the attempted theft. At the door of the Jewel House, Wythe was met by the impromptu guard, who challenged him, before the young Edwards entered and went upstairs. The &quot;guard&quot; then alerted his fellow gang members. At around the same time, the elder Edwards managed to free his gag, and raised the alarm shouting, &quot;Treason! Murder! The crown is stolen!&quot;

As Blood and his gang fled to their horses waiting at St Catherine&#x27;s Gate, they dropped the sceptre and fired on the warders who attempted to stop them, wounding one. One drawbridge guard was struck with fear and failed to discharge his musket. As they ran along the Tower wharf it is said they joined the calls for alarm to confuse the guards until they were chased down by Captain Beckman, brother-in-law of the younger Edwards. Although Blood shot at him, he missed and was captured before reaching the Iron Gate. Having fallen from his cloak, the crown was found while Blood refused to give up, struggling with his captors and declaring, &quot;It was a gallant attempt, however unsuccessful! It was for a crown!&quot; The globe and orb were recovered although several stones were missing and others were loose. Hunt and Perrot were also taken, but not punished.

===Aftermath===
Following his capture, Blood refused to answer to anyone but the King and was consequently taken to the palace in chains, where he was questioned by King Charles, Prince Rupert, and others. King Charles asked Blood, &quot;What if I should give you your life?&quot;, and Blood replied, &quot;I would endeavour to deserve it, Sire!&quot;
To the disgust of Ormond, Blood was not only pardoned but also given land in Ireland worth £500 a year. In contrast, Edwards&#x27; family was awarded less than £300 by the King, a sum which was never paid in full, and he returned to his duties at the Tower regaling visitors with his tales of the attempted theft. He died in 1674 and his tomb is in the chapel of St Peter&#x27;s Ad Vincula, at the Tower of London.

The reasons for the King&#x27;s pardon are unknown. Some historians have speculated that the King feared an uprising in revenge by followers of Blood, who were thought to have taken an oath to their leader. Others speculate that the King had a fondness for audacious scoundrels such as Blood, and that he was amused by the Irishman&#x27;s claim that the jewels were worth only £6,000 as opposed to the £100,000 at which the Crown had valued them.

There is also a suggestion that the King was flattered and amused by Blood&#x27;s revelation that he had previously intended to kill him while he was bathing in the Thames but had been swayed otherwise, having found himself in &quot;awe of majesty.&quot; It has also been suggested that his actions had the connivance of the King, who was very short of money at the time.

Following his pardon, Blood became a familiar figure around London and made frequent appearances at Court, where he was employed to advocate in the claims of suitors to the Crown. In John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester&#x27;s &quot;History of Insipids&quot;, he wrote of Blood:

In 1679 Blood fell into dispute with the Duke of Buckingham, his former patron, and Buckingham sued Blood for £10,000, for insulting remarks Blood had made about his character. In the proceedings that followed, Blood was convicted by the King&#x27;s Bench in 1680 and granted bail, although he never paid the damages.

==Death==
Blood was released from prison in July 1680 but had fallen into a coma by 22 August. He died on 24 August at his home in Bowling Alley, Westminster. His body was buried in the churchyard of St Margaret&#x27;s Church (now Christchurch Gardens) near St. James&#x27;s Park. It is believed that his body was exhumed by the authorities for confirmation: such was his reputation for trickery, it was suspected he had faked his death and funeral to avoid paying his debt to Buckingham. Blood&#x27;s epitaph read:

===Legacy===
Blood&#x27;s son Holcroft Blood became a distinguished military engineer rising to the rank of Brigadier-General; he commanded the Duke of Marlborough&#x27;s artillery at the Battle of Blenheim. Descendants including General Bindon Blood, civil engineer William Bindon Blood, Maurice Petherick, and Brian Inglis, had distinguished careers in British and Irish society.

The Newcastle-Upon-Tyne, England based indie professional wrestler Thomas Blood took his name directly from the historical figure although his character is not based on him.

==Depictions==

* The 1934 movie &quot;Colonel Blood&quot;, by W. P. Lipscomb, depicts Blood&#x27;s theft of the Crown jewels and his subsequent pardon.
* Blood may have been, in part, the inspiration for a character in Rafael Sabatini&#x27;s novel &quot;Captain Blood&quot;, which in turn resulted in several film adaptations, most famously the 1935 version starring Errol Flynn and Olivia de Havilland.
*Michael Wilding portrayed Blood in the 1957 episode &quot;The Trial of Colonel Blood&quot; of NBC&#x27;s anthology series, &quot;The Joseph Cotten Show&quot;.
*The theft of the jewels was heavily fictionalised in the film &quot;The King&#x27;s Thief&quot;
*Blood was a character in George MacDonald Fraser&#x27;s 1983 novel &quot;The Pyrates&quot; which was filmed by the BBC in 1986
* Blood was a major character in a humorous play about the theft, called &quot;The Crown Jewels&quot;, written by screenwriter Simon Nye and performed at the Garrick Theatre in London in 2023. The part was played by Aidan McArdle, and the cast included Al Murray as Charles II, Neil Morrissey as his accomplice Perrot, and Mel Giedroyc as Mrs Edwards.
* In November 2024, Channel 4 broadcast A History of Royal Scandals series 2 episode 4 entitled &quot;Crime&quot; in which Suzannah Lipscomb discussed Blood&#x27;s theft of the Crown Jewels, his meeting with King Charles, and the mystery surrounding his burial.

==References==
==Further reading==
* David C. Hanrahan, &quot;Colonel Blood: The Man Who Stole The Crown Jewels&quot; (hardback 2003, paperback 2004)
* Robert Hutchinson, &quot;The Audacious Crimes of Colonel Blood: The Spy Who Stole the Crown Jewels and Became the King&#x27;s Secret Agent&quot;, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 2015.

==External links==

*Time and History 7:00 A.M. British Crown Jewels Stolen
*A Story of Thomas Blood&#x27;s attempted theft of St. Edward&#x27;s Crown, The Sceptre with the Cross and The Sovereign&#x27;s Orb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2032295" start="0" end="12" title="Thomas Blood" label="Thomas Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="44" end="55" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="56" end="63" title="officer (armed forces)" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="80" end="87" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q918264" start="128" end="151" title="Crown Jewels of England" label="Crown Jewels of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="161" end="176" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q948569" start="337" end="369" title="James Butler, 1st Duke of Ormond" label="James Butler, 1st Duke of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="426" end="438" title="County Clare" label="County Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="447" end="465" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="503" end="513" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012505" start="572" end="580" title="Dunboyne" label="Dunboyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q183544" start="585" end="597" title="County Meath" label="County Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="619" end="631" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182591" start="758" end="765" title="County Wicklow" label="Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="803" end="819" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Irish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220558" start="838" end="853" title="Kilnaboy" label="Kilnaboy Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="907" end="917" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239539" start="989" end="1002" title="John Holcroft" label="John Holcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550452" start="1006" end="1019" title="Holcroft Hall" label="Holcroft Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192880" start="1021" end="1029" title="Culcheth" label="Culcheth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="1031" end="1039" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615957" start="1045" end="1053" title="Golborne" label="Golborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="1055" end="1065" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142505" start="1116" end="1139" title="First English Civil War" label="First English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="1211" end="1219" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="1236" end="1245" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="1319" end="1334" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="1342" end="1352" title="Roundheads" label="Roundheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="1417" end="1428" title="land grants" label="land grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="1476" end="1496" title="justice of the peace" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="1512" end="1523" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1527" end="1542" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676696" start="1672" end="1694" title="Act of Settlement 1662" label="Act of Settlement 1662"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676678" start="1840" end="1862" title="Act of Settlement 1652" label="Act of Settlement 1652"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="2079" end="2092" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q948569" start="2138" end="2160" title="James Butler, 1st Duke of Ormond" label="the 1st Duke of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="2174" end="2200" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="2367" end="2408" title="Dutch Republic" label="United Dutch Provinces in the Low Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q316945" start="2614" end="2631" title="Michiel de Ruyter" label="Admiral de Ruyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q755170" start="2674" end="2690" title="Anglo-Dutch Wars" label="Anglo-Dutch Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872215" start="2727" end="2742" title="Battle of Rullion Green" label="Pentland Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="2780" end="2791" title="Covenanters" label="Covenanters"/>
<link wikidata="Q336101" start="2868" end="2907" title="George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham" label="George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131236" start="3258" end="3268" title="apothecary" label="apothecary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273226" start="3272" end="3286" title="Romford Market" label="Romford Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q255607" start="3446" end="3461" title="Clarendon House" label="Clarendon House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382663" start="3597" end="3604" title="footmen" label="footmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634407" start="3708" end="3730" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Street" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124023" start="3835" end="3845" title="Piccadilly" label="Piccadilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362341" start="3883" end="3889" title="Tyburn, London" label="Tyburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159088" start="4296" end="4309" title="Thomas Butler, 6th Earl of Ossory" label="Thomas Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q918264" start="4591" end="4603" title="Crown Jewels of England" label="Crown Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="4641" end="4656" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q955464" start="4670" end="4676" title="parson" label="parson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347864" start="6067" end="6072" title="Walking stick" label="canes"/>
<link wikidata="Q816745" start="6088" end="6101" title="Rapier" label="rapier blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688607" start="6148" end="6159" title="Jewel House" label="Jewel House"/>
<link wikidata="Q131868466" start="6472" end="6506" title="State Crown of Charles II" label="Imperial State Crown of Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q918264" start="6624" end="6646" title="Sceptre with the Cross" label="Sceptre with the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q918264" start="6729" end="6749" title="Sovereign&amp;#x27;s Orb" label="Sovereign&amp;#x27;s Orb"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="7099" end="7107" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q23383" start="7673" end="7683" title="drawbridge" label="drawbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="7739" end="7745" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600249" start="7885" end="7892" title="Martin Beckman" label="Beckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="8548" end="8561" title="Prince Rupert of the Rhine" label="Prince Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938714" start="9084" end="9110" title="Church of St Peter ad Vincula" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Ad Vincula"/>
<link wikidata="Q358912" start="10141" end="10175" title="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester" label="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="10474" end="10491" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="10701" end="10712" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q823412" start="10755" end="10780" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q125157065" start="10786" end="10806" title="Christ Church, Broadway" label="Christchurch Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q216914" start="10813" end="10834" title="St. James&amp;#x27;s Park" label="St. James&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="11057" end="11064" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528880" start="11102" end="11116" title="Holcroft Blood" label="Holcroft Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="11180" end="11197" title="Brigadier-General" label="Brigadier-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="11216" end="11235" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q154635" start="11260" end="11278" title="Battle of Blenheim" label="Battle of Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914039" start="11310" end="11322" title="Sir Bindon Blood" label="Bindon Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q59130459" start="11339" end="11359" title="William Bindon Blood" label="William Bindon Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793408" start="11361" end="11378" title="Maurice Petherick" label="Maurice Petherick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924922" start="11384" end="11396" title="Brian Inglis" label="Brian Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426400" start="11669" end="11682" title="Colonel Blood (film)" label="Colonel Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536771" start="11693" end="11707" title="W. P. Lipscomb" label="W. P. Lipscomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q345104" start="11850" end="11865" title="Rafael Sabatini" label="Rafael Sabatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621164" start="11885" end="11898" title="Captain Blood (novel)" label="Captain Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425815" start="11976" end="11988" title="Captain Blood (1935 film)" label="1935 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q93188" start="11998" end="12009" title="Errol Flynn" label="Errol Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q95068" start="12014" end="12033" title="Olivia de Havilland" label="Olivia de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385992" start="12036" end="12051" title="Michael Wilding (actor)" label="Michael Wilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="12130" end="12133" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="12141" end="12157" title="anthology series" label="anthology series"/>
<link wikidata="Q132200524" start="12165" end="12187" title="The Joseph Cotten Show (TV series)" label="The Joseph Cotten Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200457" start="12264" end="12285" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Thief" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q965456" start="12318" end="12341" title="George MacDonald Fraser" label="George MacDonald Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758857" start="12366" end="12377" title="The Pyrates" label="The Pyrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519448" start="12547" end="12556" title="Simon Nye" label="Simon Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758423" start="12578" end="12593" title="Garrick Theatre" label="Garrick Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="12597" end="12603" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275251" start="12636" end="12649" title="Aidan McArdle" label="Aidan McArdle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704500" start="12673" end="12682" title="Al Murray" label="Al Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989062" start="12698" end="12712" title="Neil Morrissey" label="Neil Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810704" start="12743" end="12755" title="Mel Giedroyc" label="Mel Giedroyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="12792" end="12801" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650747" start="12895" end="12912" title="Suzannah Lipscomb" label="Suzannah Lipscomb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303295" wikidata="Q756716" url="?curid=303295" title="Moravians">
<text>Moravians ( or colloquially , outdated ) are a West Slavic ethnic group from the Moravia region of the Czech Republic, who speak the Moravian dialects of Czech or Common Czech or a mixed form of both. Along with the Silesians of the Czech Republic, a part of the population to identify ethnically as Moravian has registered in Czech censuses since 1991. The figure has fluctuated and in the 2011 census, 6.01% of the Czech population declared Moravian as their ethnicity. Smaller pockets of people declaring Moravian ethnicity are also native to neighboring Slovakia.

==Etymology==

A certain ambiguity in Czech derives from the fact that it distinguishes between (Bohemia proper) and (Czech Republic as a whole), but the corresponding adjective and noun designating an inhabitant and/or a member of a nation can be related to either of them. The adjective and the noun (&#x27;Bohemian&#x27;) carry only the meaning of a &quot;socially unconventional person&quot;.

==History==
===Moravian tribe===
The Moravians (Old Slavic self-designation , , ) were a West Slavic tribe in the Early Middle Ages. Although it is not known exactly when the Moravian tribe was founded, Czech historian Dušan Třeštík claimed the tribe was formed between the turn of the 6th century to the 7th century, around the same time as the other Slavic tribes.

In the 9th century, Moravians settled mainly around the historic Region of Moravia and Western Slovakia, but also in parts of central-southern Poland, Lower Austria (up to the Danube) and Upper Hungary. The first known mention of the Moravians was in the Annales Regni Francorum in 822 AD. The tribe was located by the Bavarian Geographer between the tribe of the Bohemians and the tribe of the Bulgarians.

In the 9th century, Moravians gained control over neighbouring Nitra and founded the Realm of Great Moravia, ruled by the Mojmír dynasty until the 10th century. At times, the empire controlled even other neighboring regions, including Bohemia and parts of present-day Hungary, Poland and Ukraine. It emerged into one of the most powerful states in Central Europe.

After the breakup of the Moravian Realm, the Moravian tribe was divided between the new states of Bohemia and Hungary. Part of western Moravians were assimilated by the Czechs and presently identify as Czechs. The modern nation of the Slovaks was formed out of the eastern part of the Moravian tribe within the Kingdom of Hungary.

===Moravians within the Czech lands===

Bretislaus I, Duke of Bohemia, in solving the succession question in his will (he had five sons) decided to completely reorganize Moravia, so that it should be governed by the younger sons of the royal family. It was still considered one country, but from an objective standpoint it was weakened, and Moravia could not lead to the formation of the medieval &quot;nation&quot; as quickly as in Bohemia. The way leading to the differentiation of the Moravians from the Czechs was caused by political and economic changes of the late 12th and early 13th century. Czech historical tradition was grown in Moravia during the Middle Ages, for example Czech Chronicles was reread and distributed.

Until the beginning of the 20th century, the Slavic-speaking inhabitants of Moravia publicly identified themselves as Moravians, not Czechs. Then, for fear of Germanization, Moravians would begin to publicly refer to themselves as Moravian Czechs — joining a stronger neighbour. But internally they still felt their nationality (for example, here). Slovaks were considered as Czechs by politicians, too. In the Czechoslovak and communist eras, Moravian nationality would be banned, so for the first time since the fall of the dangers of Germanization (1945), Moravian nationality appeared in the 1991 census.

After the Velvet Revolution a strong political movement to reinstate the Moravian-Silesian land ( in Czech, since it was one of the four lands of Czechoslovakia between 1928 and 1939, was active in Moravia. Accordingly, the officially-united Czech ethnicity was split in line with the historical division of the Czech Republic into Bohemia, Moravia and Czech Silesia (the &quot;Czech lands&quot;). Some of the Czech-speaking inhabitants of Moravia declared Moravian ethnicity, and some of the Czech speaking inhabitants of Czech Silesia declared Silesian ethnicity.

There were 1,363,000 citizens of the Czech Republic who declared Moravian ethnicity in 1991. However, the number dropped to 380,474 in the 2001 census: many persons previously declaring themselves as Moravians declared themselves again as Czechs in this census. In 2011, the number increased again to 630 897. The strongest sense of patriotism towards Moravia is found in the environs of Brno, the former capital of Moravia. However, the results of the census are skewed by the fact that most Moravians do not know that they can sign up for the Moravian nationality, but would use the option, according to a 2011 survey.

Only in the first years after the Velvet Revolution in 1989 did a few Moravian political parties seem to be able to gain some success in elections. However, they lost much of their strength around the time of the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993 when Czechoslovakia peacefully split into the Czech Republic and Slovak Republic.

According to the 2011 census, the percentage of people without religion was the lowest in the Moravian Zlín Region, followed by the partly-Bohemian, partly-Moravian, Vysočina Region; the South Moravian Region; the Moravian-Silesian Region; and the predominantly-Moravian Olomouc Region.

== See also ==
* List of Moravians
* Old Salem

== References ==
=== Inline citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q756716" start="0" end="9" title="Moravians" label="Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="15" end="27" title="Colloquialism" label="colloquially"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="47" end="58" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="81" end="88" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="103" end="117" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44268" start="133" end="150" title="Moravian dialects" label="Moravian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="154" end="159" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="163" end="175" title="Czech language#Common Czech" label="Common Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q140472" start="216" end="225" title="Silesians" label="Silesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="558" end="566" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="607" end="612" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q15965770" start="1004" end="1013" title="Moravians (tribe)" label="Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="1015" end="1025" title="Old Church Slavic" label="Old Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="1056" end="1067" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="1081" end="1098" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q742262" start="1186" end="1199" title="Dušan Třeštík" label="Dušan Třeštík"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="1410" end="1417" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696333" start="1422" end="1438" title="Western Slovakia" label="Western Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1478" end="1484" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="1486" end="1499" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1511" end="1517" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1529" end="1536" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q564409" start="1590" end="1613" title="Annales Regni Francorum" label="Annales Regni Francorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q646153" start="1654" end="1673" title="Bavarian Geographer" label="Bavarian Geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565812" start="1699" end="1708" title="Bohemians (tribe)" label="Bohemians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="1730" end="1740" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q837326" start="1806" end="1811" title="Principality of Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193152" start="1837" end="1850" title="Great Moravia" label="Great Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273603" start="1865" end="1879" title="Mojmír dynasty" label="Mojmír dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="1978" end="1985" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2011" end="2018" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2020" end="2026" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2031" end="2038" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="2091" end="2105" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162698" start="2206" end="2213" title="Duchy of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899771" start="2218" end="2225" title="Principality of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="2310" end="2316" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="2343" end="2350" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="2419" end="2437" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q355013" start="2480" end="2509" title="Bretislaus I, Duke of Bohemia" label="Bretislaus I, Duke of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="3329" end="3342" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="3790" end="3807" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="4112" end="4119" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45551" start="4133" end="4146" title="Czech Silesia" label="Czech Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185573" start="4158" end="4169" title="Czech lands" label="Czech lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="4586" end="4592" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="4735" end="4739" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="5003" end="5020" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="5182" end="5211" title="dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="dissolution of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="5225" end="5239" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="5266" end="5280" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="5285" end="5300" title="Slovak Republic" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192536" start="5406" end="5417" title="Zlín Region" label="Zlín Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q190930" start="5469" end="5484" title="Vysočina Region" label="Vysočina Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q192697" start="5490" end="5511" title="South Moravian Region" label="South Moravian Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q190550" start="5517" end="5541" title="Moravian-Silesian Region" label="Moravian-Silesian Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q193307" start="5574" end="5588" title="Olomouc Region" label="Olomouc Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632619" start="5608" end="5625" title="List of Moravians" label="List of Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q844445" start="5628" end="5637" title="Old Salem" label="Old Salem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303299" wikidata="Q1800765" url="?curid=303299" title="Defrocking">
<text>Defrocking, unfrocking, degradation, or laicization of clergy is the removal of their rights to exercise the functions of the ordained ministry. It may be grounded on criminal convictions, disciplinary problems, or disagreements over doctrine or dogma, but may also be done at their request for personal reasons, such as running for civil office, taking over a family business, declining health or old age, desire to marry against the rules for clergy in a particular church, or an unresolved dispute. The form of the procedure varies according to the Christian denomination concerned.

The words &quot;defrocking&quot; or &quot;unfrocking&quot; refers to the ritual removal of the frock-like vestments of clergy and ministers. These rituals are generally no longer practiced and were sometimes separate from dismissals from ordained ministry, leading some to contend that modern use of &quot;defrocking&quot; is inaccurate. However, others maintain &quot;defrocking&quot; as a common synonym for laicization, one particularly popular in English.

==History==
In the Medieval and Renaissance church, priests were publicly defrocked or &quot;degraded&quot; by having their vestments ceremonially removed. The procedure was intended to evoke shame and humiliation in the subject. A description of the degradation of Archbishop Thomas Cranmer for heresy in 1556, based on eye-witness accounts, was recorded by John Foxe:
...when they came to take off his pall, (which is a solemn vesture of an archbishop,) then said he, &quot;Which of you hath a pall, to take off my pall;&quot; which imported as much as they, being his inferiors, could not degrade him. Whereunto one of them said, in that they were but bishops, they were his inferiors, and not competent judges; but being the pope&#x27;s delegates, they might take his pall. And so they did, and so proceeding took every thing in order from him, as it was put on. Then a barber clipped his hair round about, and the bishop scraped the tops of his fingers where he had been anointed... Last of all they stripped him out of his gown into his jacket, and put upon him a poor yeoman-beadle&#x27;s gown, full bare and nearly worn, and as evil-favouredly made as one might lightly see, and a townsman&#x27;s cap on his head; and so delivered him to the secular power&quot;.

==Catholicism==

Members of the Catholic Church clergy may be dismissed from the clerical state, an action known as &quot;laicization&quot;. The term &quot;defrocking&quot; is not normally used within the Catholic Church, although journalistic reports on laicization of Catholic clergy sometimes use it. Laicization differs from suspension. The latter is a censure prohibiting certain acts by a cleric, whether the acts are of a religious character deriving from his ordination (&quot;acts of the power of orders&quot;) or are exercises of his power of governance or of rights and functions attached to the office he holds. As a censure, suspension is meant to cease when the censured person shows repentance. Laicization, on the contrary, is a permanent measure, whereby for a sufficient reason a cleric is from then on juridically treated as a layman. Laicization is sometimes imposed as a punishment (Latin, &quot;ad poenam&quot;), or it may be granted as a favour (Latin, &quot;pro gratia&quot;) at the priest&#x27;s own request. New regulations issued in 2009 regarding priests who abandon their ministry for more than five years and whose behaviour is a cause of serious scandal have made it easier for bishops to secure laicization of such priests even against the priests&#x27; wishes. Once a priest or bishop is laicized, they do not lose what is conferred to them through the graces imparted to them that relate to the Sacrament of Holy Orders.

==Eastern Orthodoxy==
Certain Eastern Orthodox theologians believe that ordination to the priesthood does not confer an indelible character on the person&#x27;s soul and that laicization could remove the ordained status completely. From the time of laicization all actions of a former cleric that would have been considered sacred are normally considered invalid.

&quot;Laicization&quot; of a cleric may come as a result of a request for removal from sacred orders, or as an ecclesiastical punishment. In the first case, very often, the cleric may ask to be laicized in order to enter a second marriage after the divorce or the death of his spouse. In this case, the man remains in good standing with the Church but is no longer a cleric. Laicization of a bishop can only be done by the convening of a Holy Synod.

Forced laicization or removal from sacred orders is a form of ecclesiastical punishment, imposed by the ruling bishop of a cleric for certain transgressions. According to the canonical procedure, if the cleric is found guilty of an infringement of a sacred vow, unrepentant heresy, breaking of canon law or ecclesiastical discipline, he can be suspended from exercising all clerical functions. If, disregarding his suspension, he continues to liturgize or does not repent of his actions, he may be permanently deposed from the sacred orders (in common parlance, &quot;laicized&quot;). Strictly speaking, the deposition can be appealed at the ecclesiastical court, but, in modern practice, the bishop&#x27;s decision is usually final.

Laicization as an ecclesiastical punishment may carry with it the excommunication of the former cleric from the church for a certain period, or indefinitely. The anathema, the permanent act of excommunication, against a member of the church or a former cleric is usually imposed by the decision of the synod of bishops or the ecclesiastical council. In such cases, this not only defrocks the former cleric but also banishes him from entering an Orthodox church, receiving the Eucharist and other sacraments, and being blessed by a priest.

==Anglicanism==
In Anglicanism, defrocking is extremely rare and often impossible. Different provinces in the Anglican Communion handle this differently; the canon law of the Church of England, for instance, states that &quot;No person who has been admitted to the order of bishop, priest, or deacon can ever be divested of the character of his order...&quot; though the church has processes to allow any clergy (by own volition or otherwise) to cease to function in the role. Anglican clergy are generally licensed to preach and administer sacraments by the bishop of the diocese in question; however if a bishop suspends this licence, the deacon or priest may no longer exercise their respective ministerial functions lawfully in that diocese. Within the Church of England The &quot;Clergy Discipline Measure 2003&quot; provides for a range of sanctions up to a lifelong ban from the exercise of ministry.

Similarly, in the Anglican Church of Canada &quot;deposition from the exercise of ministry if the person is ordained&quot; does not amount to defrocking, but merely removes the right to the exercise of ministry by ordained persons. These powers are given to the diocesan bishop (in most cases) subject to appeal to a diocesan court, or the diocesan court may exercise primary jurisdiction when the bishop asks it to (for diocesan bishops the provincial metropolitan is given primary jurisdiction, for metropolitans the provincial House of Bishops is given jurisdiction, for the primate it is the national House of Bishops). All these powers are subject to appeal to courts of appeal and on matters of doctrine to the Supreme Court of the Anglican Church of Canada (Appendix 4, General Synod Canon XVIII - Discipline). General Synod 2007 clarified deposition, including forbidding the practice of suspending the licence in cases where discipline proceedings could be commenced instead (Resolution A082).

According to the constitutions and canons of the Episcopal Church in the United States, Title IV &quot;Ecclesiastical Discipline&quot;, there are three modes of depriving a member of clergy from exercising ministerial rights: inhibition, suspension, or deposition. Inhibitions and suspensions are temporary. Clergy who are deposed are &quot;deprived of the right to exercise the gifts and spiritual authority of God&#x27;s word and sacraments conferred at ordination.&quot; (Title IV, Canon 15, Of Terminology Used in This Section, Deposition).

In the Anglican Church of Australia, the relevant canon provides for a bishop, priest or deacon to relinquish or be deposed from, or prohibited from functioning in, Holy Orders. Upon relinquishing or being deposed from Holy Orders, the relinquished or deposed person ceases to have any right, privilege or advantage attached to the relevant order(s) (of bishop, priest or deacon), and, if wholly relinquished or deposed, is considered, except for any Church law relating to a Church Tribunal, to be a lay person for the purposes of the Church. Where a person in Holy Orders has been prohibited from functioning, the prohibition has effect according to its terms.

==Methodism==
In the United Methodist Church, when an elder, bishop, or deacon is defrocked, his ministerial credentials are removed. Defrocking is usually the result of blatantly disobeying the Order and Discipline of the United Methodist Church and violating Biblical standards. A defrocked clergyman is prohibited from celebrating the sacraments (Holy Baptism and Holy Communion). A United Methodist elder or deacon may only have their credentials revoked through voluntary surrender or church trial. A minister who enters the status of honorable location retains their ordination credentials unless they voluntarily surrender them, while a minister who is involuntarily located may or may not, at the discretion of the Board of Ordained Ministry of their Annual Conference, retain their credentials of ordination. As a general rule, elders may only lose their credentials through voluntary surrender or action of a church court. Ministers who are found not competent to exercise their office may be suspended from ministry, but only for the duration of the incompetence. The United Methodist Book of Discipline outlines the specific rules for each option. Elders and deacons may not simply be defrocked by a bishop, but only through ecclesiastical due process.

== See also ==

* Cashiering
* Loss of clerical state

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1800765" start="0" end="10" title="Defrocking" label="Defrocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800765" start="12" end="22" title="Defrocking" label="unfrocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800765" start="24" end="35" title="Defrocking" label="degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800765" start="40" end="51" title="Defrocking" label="laicization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="55" end="61" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916183" start="167" end="186" title="criminal conviction" label="criminal conviction"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="234" end="242" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="246" end="251" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="552" end="574" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501052" start="693" end="702" title="vestments" label="vestments"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1067" end="1075" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1080" end="1091" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q199894" start="1325" end="1339" title="Thomas Cranmer" label="Thomas Cranmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="1344" end="1350" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380961" start="1407" end="1416" title="John Foxe" label="John Foxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200691" start="1452" end="1456" title="Pallium" label="pall"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="2123" end="2129" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692509" start="2130" end="2136" title="beadle" label="beadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2352" end="2367" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505704" start="2649" end="2659" title="Suspension (Catholic canonical penalty)" label="suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="2787" end="2797" title="Holy Orders" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3224" end="3229" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="3749" end="3773" title="Holy Orders" label="Sacrament of Holy Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="3806" end="3822" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4371" end="4379" title="marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="4390" end="4397" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q911924" start="4579" end="4589" title="Holy Synod" label="Holy Synod"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4842" end="4852" title="sacred vow" label="sacred vow"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="4866" end="4872" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="4886" end="4895" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315911" start="4914" end="4924" title="discipline" label="discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640717" start="5234" end="5254" title="ecclesiastical court" label="ecclesiastical court"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="5393" end="5408" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q211517" start="5489" end="5497" title="anathema" label="anathema"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="5772" end="5780" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="5803" end="5812" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="5823" end="5833" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="5886" end="5897" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="5977" end="5995" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="6042" end="6059" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q540782" start="6794" end="6819" title="Anglican Church of Canada" label="Anglican Church of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="7829" end="7866" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q540766" start="8333" end="8361" title="Anglican Church of Australia" label="Anglican Church of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="9011" end="9034" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353927" start="9044" end="9049" title="Elder (Methodism)" label="elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147268" start="9051" end="9057" title="bishop (Methodism)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="9062" end="9068" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943021" start="9185" end="9205" title="Book of Discipline (United Methodist)" label="Order and Discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="9251" end="9259" title="Biblical" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="9328" end="9338" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="9340" end="9352" title="Baptism" label="Holy Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="9357" end="9371" title="Holy Communion" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943021" start="10069" end="10104" title="United Methodist Book of Discipline" label="United Methodist Book of Discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671818" start="10274" end="10284" title="Cashiering" label="Cashiering"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959693" start="10287" end="10309" title="Loss of clerical state" label="Loss of clerical state"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303301" wikidata="Q334356" url="?curid=303301" title="William Kemmler">
<text>William Francis Kemmler (May 9, 1860 – August 6, 1890) was an American murderer who was the first person executed by electric chair. He was convicted of murdering Matilda &quot;Tillie&quot; Ziegler, his common-law wife, a year earlier. Although electrocution had previously been successfully used to kill a horse, Kemmler&#x27;s execution did not go smoothly.

==Early life==
William Kemmler was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1860. Both of his parents were immigrants from Germany, and both were alcoholics. After dropping out of school at age 10, unable to read or write, Kemmler worked in his father&#x27;s butcher shop. Kemmler&#x27;s father died from an infection he received after a drunken brawl, and his mother from complications of alcoholism. In the late 1870s Kemmler was reportedly slender, with dark brown hair. He spoke both English and German.

After his parents&#x27; deaths, he went into the peddling business, and earned enough money to buy a horse and cart. At this point, however, he was also becoming a heavy drinker. In one episode involving him and his friends, after a series of drunken binges, he said he could jump his horse and cart over an eight-foot fence, with the cart attached to the horse. The attempt was a failure, and his cart and goods were destroyed in the incident. He was known to friends as &quot;Philadelphia Billy&quot;, and his drinking binges were very well known around the saloons in his Buffalo neighborhood.

==Murder and execution==
===Murder, trial, and appeals===
The &quot;New York Times&quot; described the murder:

William Kemmler was a vegetable peddler in the slums of Buffalo, New York. An alcoholic, on March 29, 1889, he was recovering from a drinking binge the night before when he became enraged with his girlfriend [elsewhere referred to as his common-law wife] Tillie Ziegler. He accused her of stealing from him and preparing to run away with a friend of his. When the argument reached a peak, Kemmler calmly went to the barn, grabbed a hatchet, and returned to the house. He struck Tillie repeatedly, killing her. He then went to a neighbor&#x27;s house and announced he had just murdered his girlfriend.

The same day, Kemmler was accused of the murder of Matilda &quot;Tillie&quot; Ziegler, his common-law wife, who had been killed with a hatchet.

Kemmler&#x27;s resulting murder trial proceeded quickly. He was convicted of first-degree murder on May 10. Three days later he was sentenced to death, destined to be the first person executed in an electric chair under New York&#x27;s new execution law replacing hanging with electrocution. A chair was ready at the Auburn state prison. However, the leading developers of electrical power, including George Westinghouse, did not want to see their new product used in this manner. A lawyer filed an appeal claiming the electric chair violated the Eighth Amendment&#x27;s prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment.

On January 1, 1888, New York had instituted death by electrocution, the first such law ever. After Kemmler&#x27;s conviction, it was determined that his sentence was to be carried out at New York&#x27;s Auburn Prison via the new electric chair, a device invented in 1881 by Buffalo, New York, dentist Alfred Southwick. After nine years of development and legislation, the chair was considered ready for use. Kemmler&#x27;s lawyers appealed, arguing that electrocution was a cruel and unusual punishment.

The plan to carry out Kemmler&#x27;s execution via electric chair drew the situation into the AC/DC &quot;war of the currents&quot; between George Westinghouse, the largest supplier of alternating current equipment, and Thomas Edison, whose company ran its equipment on direct current. The alternating current that powered the electric chair (a current standard adopted by a committee after a demonstration performed at Edison&#x27;s laboratory by anti-AC activist Harold P. Brown showing AC&#x27;s lethality) was supplied by a Westinghouse generator surreptitiously acquired by Brown. This led to Westinghouse trying to stop what seemed to be Brown and Edison&#x27;s attempt to try to portray the AC used in Westinghouse electrical system as the deadly &quot;executioners&#x27; current&quot;, supporting Kemmler&#x27;s appeal by hiring lawyer W. Bourke Cockran to represent him. The appeal failed on October 9, 1889, and the U.S. Supreme Court turned down the case, titled &quot;In re Kemmler&quot;, on the grounds that there was no cruel and unusual punishment in death by electrocution.

===Execution===
On the morning of his execution, August 6, 1890, Kemmler was awakened at 5:00 a.m. He dressed quickly and put on a suit, necktie, and white shirt. After breakfast and some prayer, the top of his head was shaved. At 6:38 a.m., Kemmler entered the execution room and warden Charles Durston presented Kemmler to the 17 witnesses in attendance. Kemmler looked at the chair and said: &quot;Gentlemen, I wish you all good luck. I believe I am going to a good place, and I am ready to go.&quot;

Witnesses remarked that Kemmler was composed at his execution; he did not scream, cry, or resist in any way. He sat down on the chair, but was ordered to get up by the warden so a hole could be cut in his suit through which a second electrical lead could be attached. This was done and Kemmler sat down again. He was strapped to the chair, his face was covered and the metal restraint put on his bare head. He said, &quot;Take it easy and do it properly, I&#x27;m in no hurry.&quot; Durston replied, &quot;Goodbye, William&quot; and ordered the switch thrown.

The generator was charged with 1,000 volts, which was thought to be adequate to induce quick unconsciousness and cardiac arrest. The chair had already been tested; a horse had been electrocuted the day before. Current passed through Kemmler for 17 seconds. The power was turned off and Kemmler was declared dead by Edward Charles Spitzka. Witnesses noticed Kemmler was still breathing. The attending physicians, Spitzka and Carlos Frederick MacDonald, came forward to examine Kemmler. After confirming he was still alive, Spitzka reportedly called out, &quot;Have the current turned on again, quick—no delay.&quot;

In the second attempt, Kemmler was shocked with 2,000 volts. Blood vessels under his skin ruptured and bled, and some witnesses claimed his body caught fire. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported instead that &quot;an awful odor began to permeate the death chamber, and then, as though to cap the climax of this fearful sight, it was seen that the hair under and around the electrode on the head and the flesh under and around the electrode at the base of the spine was singeing. The stench was unbearable.&quot; Upon autopsy, doctors had found the blood vessels under the cap of his skull had carbonized and the top of the brain had hardened&quot;.&quot; Witnesses reported the smell of burning flesh and several nauseated spectators tried to leave the room.

The execution took approximately eight minutes and received substantial negative press from reporters covering it. The New York Times ran the headline: &quot;Far Worse Than Hanging&quot;. Westinghouse later commented &quot;They would have done better using an axe&quot;.

Kemmler is buried in the precincts of the prison where his execution took place.

==Media==
* William Kemmler was shown as a wax figure seated in the electric chair in the 1953 movie &quot;House of Wax&quot; starring Vincent Price. Price&#x27;s character does say they did not match Kemmler&#x27;s face, but instead resembled co-star Charles Bronson.
* In 2017&#x27;s &quot;The Current War&quot;, Conor MacNeill briefly portrayed Kemmler.

==See also==
* Capital punishment in the United States
* List of botched executions
* List of people executed in New York

==References==
===General references===
* &quot;La première exécution d&#x27;un condamné à mort par l&#x27;éléctricité&quot; in &quot;La Nature&quot;, No. 901, 6 Septembre 1890, pp. 209–211 
* John L. Caroll, &quot;Death Row. Hope for the future, Challenging Capital Punishment, London&quot;, 1988, pp. 269–288
* Jean-Claude Beaune, &quot;Les spectres mécaniques. essai sur les relations entre la mort et les techniques&quot;, Seyssel, Champ Vallon, 1988 
* Marc Vanden Berghe, &quot;De l&#x27;utopie de la &quot;mort propre&quot; à la chaise électrique : l&#x27;affaire Kemmler&quot; in &quot;La Revue Générale&quot;, Brussels, août/septembre 1996, pp. 31–42 
* Craig Brandon, &quot;The Electric Chair. An American Unnatural History&quot;, McFarland &amp; Company, 1999
* 

==External links==
* Newspaper coverage of Kemmler&#x27;s execution
* John N. Miskell&#x27;s Executions in Auburn
*People ex. rel. William Kemmler, Appellant. New York Court of Appeals, 1890
* Prison, Auburn, New York </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334356" start="0" end="23" title="William Kemmler" label="William Francis Kemmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="105" end="113" title="Capital punishment" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q185639" start="117" end="131" title="electric chair" label="electric chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="203" end="218" title="Common-law marriage" label="common-law wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="404" end="430" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q638172" start="916" end="924" title="peddling" label="peddling"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="1442" end="1449" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="2270" end="2285" title="Common-law marriage" label="common-law wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q672890" start="2314" end="2321" title="hatchet" label="hatchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="2401" end="2420" title="first-degree murder" label="first-degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q270938" start="2871" end="2894" title="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighth Amendment&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587621" start="2994" end="3007" title="electrocution" label="electrocution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278228" start="3144" end="3157" title="Auburn Prison" label="Auburn Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q185639" start="3170" end="3184" title="electric chair" label="electric chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="3215" end="3232" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723256" start="3242" end="3258" title="Alfred Southwick" label="Alfred Southwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374304" start="3415" end="3443" title="cruel and unusual punishment" label="cruel and unusual punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q868337" start="3552" end="3571" title="war of the currents" label="war of the currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q262367" start="3586" end="3605" title="George Westinghouse" label="George Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="3631" end="3650" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="3666" end="3679" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="3716" end="3730" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884150" start="3911" end="3926" title="Harold P. Brown" label="Harold P. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770728" start="4290" end="4307" title="W. Bourke Cockran" label="W. Bourke Cockran"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365916" start="4818" end="4824" title="Prison warden" label="warden"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="5716" end="5730" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342270" start="5918" end="5940" title="Edward Charles Spitzka" label="Edward Charles Spitzka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042089" start="6027" end="6053" title="Carlos Frederick MacDonald" label="Carlos Frederick MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6383" end="6401" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630655" start="6815" end="6825" title="Carbonization" label="carbonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q667733" start="7443" end="7455" title="House of Wax (1953 film)" label="House of Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="7471" end="7484" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q36105" start="7588" end="7603" title="Charles Bronson" label="Charles Bronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27765260" start="7628" end="7643" title="The Current War" label="The Current War"/>
<link wikidata="Q644984" start="7651" end="7665" title="Conor MacNeill" label="Conor MacNeill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="7709" end="7748" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="Capital punishment in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96389066" start="7751" end="7777" title="List of botched executions" label="List of botched executions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632213" start="7780" end="7815" title="List of people executed in New York" label="List of people executed in New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303304" wikidata="Q1412909" url="?curid=303304" title="JACK Audio Connection Kit">
<text>JACK Audio Connection Kit (or JACK; a recursive acronym) is a professional sound server API and pair of daemon implementations to provide real-time, low-latency connections for both audio and MIDI data between applications. JACK was developed by a community of open-source developers led by Paul Davis (who won an Open Source Award in 2004 for this work) and has been a key piece of infrastructure and the de facto standard for professional audio software on Linux since its inception in 2002. The server is free software, licensed under GPL-2.0-or-later, while the library is licensed under LGPL-2.1-or-later.

== Implementations ==
The JACK API is standardized by consensus, and two compatible implementations exist: jack1, which is implemented in plain C and has been in maintenance mode for a while, and jack2 (originally jackdmp), a re-implementation in C++ originally led by Stéphane Letz, which introduced multi-processor scalability and support for operating systems other than Linux.

JACK can be used with ALSA, PortAudio, CoreAudio, FFADO and OSS as hardware back-ends. Additionally, a dummy driver (useful if no sound output is desired, e.g. for offline rendering) and an Audio-over-UDP driver exist. One or both implementations can run on Linux, macOS, Solaris, Windows, iOS, FreeBSD, OpenBSD and NetBSD.

The JACK API is also implemented by PipeWire for backwards compatibility as a complete drop-in replacement provider for JACK clients, mapping JACK API calls to equivalent PipeWire calls. If used as a replacement for ALSA and PulseAudio as well, it can unify the different sound servers and APIs that might be typically found on a machine, and allow better integration between different software. PipeWire also claims to add a number of features and fix a number of limitations compared to JACK. The use of PipeWire as the default implementation of JACK is the default on Fedora 34 and newer.

== Low-latency scheduling ==
The scheduling requirements of JACK to achieve sufficiently low latencies were one of the driving forces behind the real-time optimization effort for the Linux kernel 2.6 series, whose initial latency performance had been disappointing compared to the older 2.4 series. Real-time tuning work culminated in numerous scheduling improvements to the mainline kernel and the creation of an -rt branch for more intrusive optimizations in the release 2.6.24, and later the CONFIG_PREEMPT_RT patch.

== Applications with JACK support ==
== See also ==

* LADSPA &amp; LV2 – APIs for plugins
* PulseAudio – sound server for desktop use
* List of Linux audio software
* Comparison of free software for audio
* ASIO free alternatives

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1412909" start="0" end="25" title="JACK Audio Connection Kit" label="JACK Audio Connection Kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412909" start="30" end="34" title="JACK Audio Connection Kit" label="JACK"/>
<link wikidata="Q466981" start="38" end="55" title="recursive acronym" label="recursive acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551207" start="75" end="87" title="sound server" label="sound server"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="88" end="91" title="Application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="104" end="110" title="daemon (computing)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="149" end="160" title="low-latency" label="low-latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370989" start="291" end="301" title="Paul Davis (programmer)" label="Paul Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="406" end="423" title="de facto standard" label="de facto standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="508" end="521" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="538" end="554" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPL-2.0-or-later"/>
<link wikidata="Q192897" start="592" end="609" title="GNU Lesser General Public License" label="LGPL-2.1-or-later"/>
<link wikidata="Q379635" start="1016" end="1020" title="ALSA (Linux)" label="ALSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075404" start="1022" end="1031" title="PortAudio" label="PortAudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132463" start="1033" end="1042" title="CoreAudio" label="CoreAudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425417" start="1044" end="1049" title="FFADO" label="FFADO"/>
<link wikidata="Q902871" start="1054" end="1057" title="Open Sound System" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q620167" start="1070" end="1079" title="Front and back ends" label="back-ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1252" end="1257" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="1259" end="1264" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="1266" end="1273" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1275" end="1282" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="1284" end="1287" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="1289" end="1296" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="1298" end="1305" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="1310" end="1316" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q56283498" start="1355" end="1363" title="PipeWire" label="PipeWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="1368" end="1391" title="Backward compatibility" label="backwards compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q48267" start="1890" end="1896" title="Fedora (operating system)" label="Fedora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123036" start="1945" end="1955" title="Scheduling (computing)" label="scheduling"/>
<link wikidata="Q213666" start="2057" end="2066" title="real-time operating system" label="real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="2095" end="2107" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241705" start="2407" end="2430" title="PREEMPT_RT" label="CONFIG_PREEMPT_RT patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q331379" start="2488" end="2494" title="LADSPA" label="LADSPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q221935" start="2501" end="2504" title="LV2" label="LV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466320" start="2526" end="2536" title="PulseAudio" label="PulseAudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244163" start="2570" end="2598" title="List of Linux audio software" label="List of Linux audio software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621368" start="2601" end="2638" title="Comparison of free software for audio" label="Comparison of free software for audio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2641" end="2663" title="Audio_Stream_Input/Output#Free_alternatives" label="ASIO free alternatives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303305" wikidata="Q259121" url="?curid=303305" title="Théodore Dubois">
<text>Clément François Théodore Dubois (; 24 August 1837 – 11 June 1924) was a French Romantic composer, organist, and music teacher.

After study at the Paris Conservatoire, Dubois won France&#x27;s premier musical prize, the Prix de Rome in 1861. He became an organist and choirmaster at several well-known churches in Paris, and at the same time was a professor in the Conservatoire, teaching harmony from 1871 to 1891 and composition from 1891 to 1896, when he succeeded Ambroise Thomas as the Conservatoire&#x27;s director. He continued his predecessor&#x27;s strictly conservative curriculum and was forced to retire early after a scandal erupted over the faculty&#x27;s attempt to rig the Prix de Rome competition to prevent the modernist Maurice Ravel from winning.

As a composer, Dubois was seen as capable and tasteful, but not strikingly original or inspired. He hoped for a career as an opera composer, but became better known for his church compositions. His books on music theory were influential, and remained in use for many years.

==Life and career==
===Early years===
Dubois was born in Rosnay in Marne, a village near Reims. The family was not connected with the musical profession: his father Nicolas was a basket maker, his grandfather Jean was a schoolmaster. His mother Célinie Dubois (née Charbonnier) did not have a profession and mostly spent time raising the young Théodore. Dubois studied the piano under Louis Fanart, the choirmaster of Reims Cathedral, and was a protégé of the mayor of Rosnay, Vicomte Eugène de Breuil, who introduced him to the pianist Jean-Henri Ravina. Through Ravina&#x27;s contacts, Dubois gained admission to the Paris Conservatoire, headed by Daniel Auber, in 1854. He studied the piano with Antoine François Marmontel, the organ with François Benoist, harmony with François Bazin and counterpoint and composition with Ambroise Thomas. While still a student he was engaged to play the organ at St Louis-des-Invalides from 1855 and Sainte-Clotilde (under César Franck) from 1858. He gained successively first prizes for harmony, fugue, and organ, and finally, in 1861, France&#x27;s premier musical prize the Prix de Rome.

The Prix brought with it liberally subsidised accommodation and tuition at the French Academy in Rome, at the Villa de Medici. During his time there, beginning in December 1861, Dubois became a friend of fellow students including Jules Massenet. Between his studies he visited the monuments of Rome and the surrounding countryside, attended the musical performances of the Sistine Chapel, and made trips to Naples, Pompeii, Venice, Verona, Mantua, Milan and Florence. He gave his impressions musical form in an overture in the classical style, an Italian buffo opera (&quot;La prova di opera seria&quot; – Rehearsal of an opera seria) and finally a solemn Mass. Among the eminent musicians he met during his time in Rome was Franz Liszt, who heard the Mass and encouraged the young Dubois.

===Return to Paris===
On his return to Paris in 1866 Dubois was appointed maître de chapelle (choirmaster) at Sainte-Clotilde, where, on Good Friday, 1867, his forces performed his &quot;Les Sept paroles du Christ&quot; (The Seven Last Words of Christ), afterwards performed at the Concerts populaires (1870) and in many other churches.

When Camille Saint-Saëns and Romain Bussine established the Société nationale de musique in 1871, Dubois was a founding member together with, among others, Henri Duparc, Gabriel Fauré, César Franck, Ernest Guiraud and Massenet. In the same year he was appointed choirmaster at the Church of the Madeleine. During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71 he joined the National Guard; his biographer Hugues Imbert records, &quot;it was in military uniform that he and Saint-Saëns often met at the église de la Madeleine, one to lead the chapel choirs, the other to ascend to the great organ&quot;. Both men escaped the bloody final days of the Paris Commune, Saint-Saëns to England and Dubois to his family home in Rosnay.

Dubois joined the faculty of the Conservatoire in 1871, succeeding Antoine Elwart as professor of harmony; he retained the post for the next 20 years. His students in his harmony and, later, composition classes included Paul Dukas, George Enescu, Albéric Magnard and Florent Schmitt. In August 1872 Dubois married the pianist Jeanne Duvinage (1843–1922), whose father was a conductor at the Opéra-Comique. It was a lifelong and happy marriage; they had two children.

Dubois had ambitions to be an opera composer, but was unable to gain a foothold at the major Parisian opera companies. At the old Théâtre Athénée his one-act &quot;La Guzla de l&#x27;Emir&quot; (The Emir&#x27;s Lute), with a libretto by Jules Barbier and Michel Carré, was successfully given in 1873 in a triple bill with short operas by Jean Gregoire Penavaire and Paul Lacôme. In 1878 he shared with Benjamin Godard, the prize at the Concours Musical instituted by the city of Paris, and his &quot;Paradis perdu&quot; (Paradise Lost) was performed, first at the public expense November 1878), and again on the two following Sundays at the Concerts du Châtelet.

In 1877 Saint-Saëns retired as organist of the Madeleine; Dubois replaced him and was succeeded as choirmaster by Fauré. In 1879 Dubois had an opera staged in one of the major Parisian houses: the Opéra Comique presented his one-act comedy &quot;Le Pain bis&quot; in February. &quot;Les Annales du théâtre et de la musique&quot; found the score unpretentious and &quot;not without wit and or skill&quot;, and though not particularly original, nonetheless very elegant, with some excellent melodies. Together with Fauré, Dubois travelled to Munich in July 1880 to attend performances of Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Tannhäuser&quot; and &quot;Die Meistersinger&quot;. Like Fauré, Dubois, though impressed by Wagner&#x27;s music, did not allow it to influence his own compositions as many of their fellow French composers did, although on his return to Paris he made an intensive study of Wagner&#x27;s scores.

Dubois never succeeded in having an opera staged by France&#x27;s premier house, the Paris Opéra, but in 1883 the three-act ballet &quot;La Farandole&quot;, to Dubois&#x27; music, was given there, with Rosita Mauri in the lead. &quot;Les Annales&quot; commented on &quot;distinguished music, of a melancholy hue, which lacks only a little more warmth and colour – the sun of the South&quot;, and added that although the music was not outstandingly inspired or original, it was capably written and well suited to the action throughout. The piece was popular and was frequently revived at the Opéra over the next few years. In the same year Dubois was appointed a chevalier of the Legion of Honour.

In 1884 Dubois had an expensive success with his four-act opera, &quot;Aben-Hamet&quot;. It opened at the Théâtre Italien in the Place du Châtelet and was enthusiastically received, but closed after four performances when a financial crisis forced the theatre out of business, leaving Dubois with personal liabilities to pay the singers&#x27; outstanding wages.

===Later years===
When Léo Delibes died in January 1891, Dubois was appointed to succeed him as professor of composition at the Conservatoire. After the death of Charles Gounod in 1894 Dubois was elected to succeed him as a member of the Académie des Beaux-Arts, a recognition, according to his biographer Jann Pasler, of &quot;the clarity and idealism of his music&quot;. 

In 1896 Thomas, director of the Conservatoire since 1871, died. Massenet, professor of counterpoint, fugue and composition, was widely expected to succeed him but overplayed his hand by insisting on appointment for life. When the French government refused, he resigned from the faculty. Dubois was appointed director and continued Thomas&#x27;s intransigently conservative regime. The music of Auber, Halévy and especially Meyerbeer was regarded as the correct model for students, and old French music such as that of Rameau and modern music, including that of Wagner, were kept rigorously out of the curriculum. Dubois was unremittingly hostile to Maurice Ravel who, when a Conservatoire student, did not conform to the faculty&#x27;s anti-modernism, and in 1902 Dubois unavailingly forbade Conservatoire students to attend performances of Debussy&#x27;s ground-breaking new opera, &quot;Pelléas et Mélisande&quot;.

In June 1905 Dubois was forced to bring his planned retirement forward after a public scandal caused by the faculty&#x27;s blatant attempt to stop Ravel winning the Prix de Rome. Fauré was appointed to succeed Dubois as director, with a brief from the French government to modernise the institution.

In his private capacity, Dubois was less reactionary than in the academic régime over which he presided. When Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Parsifal&quot; had its belated Parisian premiere in 1914, Dubois said to his colleague Georges Hüe that no music more beautiful had ever been written. Privately he was fascinated by Debussy&#x27;s music, with its &quot;subtiles harmonies et les précieux raffinements&quot; – subtle harmonies and precious refinements.

After his retirement from the Conservatoire, Dubois remained a familiar figure in Parisian musical circles. He was president of the association of Conservatoire alumni, and presided at its annual award ceremony. Until his final years he remained vigorous. The death of his wife in 1923 was a blow from which he did not recover, and he died at his Paris home, after a short illness, on 11 June 1924, aged 86.

==Music==

Although he wrote many religious works, Dubois had hopes for a successful career in opera. His fascination with Near-Eastern subjects led to the composition to his first staged work, &quot;La guzla de l&#x27;émir&quot;, and his first four-act opera, &quot;Aben-Hamet&quot;. The latter received excellent notices, for the cast (led by Emma Calvé and Jean de Reszke) and the work, but it did not gain a place in the regular repertoire. His other large-scale opera, &quot;Xavière&quot;, described as &quot;a dramatic idyll&quot;, is set in the rural Auvergne. The story revolves around a widowed mother who plots to kill her daughter, Xavière, with the help of her fiancé&#x27;s father to gain the daughter&#x27;s inheritance. Xavière survives the attack with the help of a priest, and the opera finishes with a conventional happy ending. Lucien Fugère and Mlle F. Dubois (no relation) led the cast at the Opéra-Comique, and the piece was pronounced a &quot;succès d&#x27;estime&quot;.

The music of Dubois also includes ballets, oratorios and three symphonies. His best known work is the oratorio &quot;Les sept paroles du Christ&quot; (&quot;The Seven Last Words of Christ&quot; [1867]), which continues to be performed from time to time. His &quot;Toccata in G&quot; (1889), remains in the regular organ repertoire. The rest of his large output has almost entirely disappeared from view. He has had a more lasting influence in teaching, with his theoretical works &quot;Traité de contrepoint et de fugue&quot; (on counterpoint and fugue) and &quot;Traité d&#x27;harmonie théorique et pratique&quot; (on harmony) still being sometimes used today.

===Selected works===

====Operas====

* &quot;La prova di un&#x27;opera seria&quot;, (unpublished, composed in Rome, 1863).
* &quot;La guzla de l&#x27;émir&quot;, opéra comique (1 act, J. Barbier &amp; M. Carré), f.p. 30 April 1873, Théâtre de l&#x27;Athénée, Paris.
* &quot;Le pain bis&quot;, opéra comique (1 act, A. Brunswick &amp; A.R. de Beauplan), f.p. 26/27 February 1879, Opéra-Comique (Théâtre Favart), Paris.
* &quot;L&#x27;enlèvement de Proserpine&quot;, scène lyrique (1 act, P. Collin), f.p. 1879.
* &quot;Aben-Hamet&quot;, opéra (4 acts, L. Détroyat &amp; A. de Lauzières), f.p. 16 December 1884, Théâtre du Châtelet, Paris.
* &quot;Xavière&quot;, idylle dramatique (3 acts, L. Gallet, after F. Fabre), f.p. 26 November 1895, Opéra Comique (Théâtre Lyrique), Paris.
* &quot;Miguela&quot;, opéra (3 acts) (Originally unperformed, except prélude and second act tableau from Act 3, concert perf. 23 February 1896, Paris.) f.p. 18 May 1916, Opéra, Paris.
* &quot;La fiancée d&#x27;Abydos&quot; (unperformed)
* &quot;Le florentin&quot; (unperformed)

====Ballets====

* &quot;La Korrigane&quot;, (ballet by Louis Mérante), f.p. 12 January 1880, Opéra, Paris.
* &quot;La Farandole&quot;, (ballet by Louis Mérante), f.p. 14 December 1883, Opéra-Comique, Paris.

===Vocal works===

* &quot;Les Sept Paroles du Christ&quot;, (1867) oratorio dedicated to Abbot Jean-Gaspard (1797-1871) curé of La Madeleine.
* &quot;Le Paradis Perdu&quot;, oratorio (1878 - Prix de la ville de Paris)
* Numerous cantatas, including: &quot;L&#x27;enlèvement de Proserpine&quot;, &quot;Hylas&quot;, &quot;Bergerette&quot;; &quot;Les Vivants et les Morts&quot;
* Masses and religious compositions

====Orchestral works====

* &quot;Marche héroïque de Jeanne d&#x27;Arc&quot;
* &quot;Fantaisie triomphale&quot; for organ &amp; orchestra
* &quot;Hymne nuptial&quot;
* &quot;Adonis&quot;, poème symphonique (1901)
* &quot;Méditation, Prières&quot; for strings, oboe, harp, &amp; organ
* &quot;Concerto-Capriccio&quot; for piano &amp; orchestra, C minor (1876)
* &quot;Concerto pour violon&quot; (1896)
* &quot;Concerto pour piano n° 2&quot;, F minor (1897)
* &quot;Notre-Dame de la Mer&quot;, poème symphonique
* &quot;Symphonie française&quot; (1908)
* &quot;Symphonie n°2&quot; (1911)
* &quot;Symphonie n°3&quot; (1915)
* &quot;Evocation&quot; (1915)
* &quot;Fantasietta&quot; (1917)
* &quot;Suite for Piano and String Orchestra in F minor&quot; (1917)

====Chamber music====
* &quot;Cantabile&quot; (or &quot;Andante Cantabile&quot;) for viola or cello and piano (1886)
* &quot;Hymne nuptial&quot; for violin, viola, cello, harp and organ
* Quintet for oboe, violin, viola, cello and piano
* &quot;Terzettino&quot; for flute, viola and harp (1905)
* Piano Quartet in A minor (1907)
* Dectet for string and wind quintets
* &quot;Nonetto&quot; for flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, 2 violins, viola, cello and double bass
* Nocturne for cello and piano

====Other compositions====

* Piano works : &quot;Chœur et Danse des Lutins&quot;, &quot;Six Poèmes Sylvestres&quot;, etc.
* Numerous pieces for organ and for harmonium.
* &quot;Douze Pièces pour orgue ou piano-pédalier&quot; (1889), including the famous &quot;Toccata&quot; in G (no. 3)
* &quot;Douze Pièces Nouvelles pour orgue ou piano-pédalier&quot; (1893), including &quot;In Paradisum&quot; (no. 9)
* &quot;Deux Petites Pièces pour orgue ou harmonium&quot; (1910) : &quot;Petite pastorale champenoise et Prélude&quot;
* &quot;42 Pièces pour orgue sans pédales ou harmonium&quot; (1925)

===Writings===
* Dubois, Théodore (1889). Notes et études d&#x27;harmonie pour servir de supplément au traité de H. Reber. Paris: Heugel. 
* Dubois, Théodore (1901). Traité de contrepoint et de fugue. Paris: Heugel.
* Dubois, Théodore (1921). Traité d&#x27;harmonie théorique et pratique. Paris: Heugel. 
* Dubois, Théodore (1921). Réalisations des basses et chants du Traité d&#x27;harmonie par Théodore Dubois. Paris: Heugel.

==Recording selection==
* Théodore Dubois, Organistes de Paris à la Belle Époque, Vol 1 (2004), Helga Schauerte-Maubouet, Organ Merklin Cathedral in Moulins(F) Syrius 141382.
* Theodore Dubois, The Romantic Piano Concerto #60, (2013) Concerto-capriccioso in C minor; Piano Concerto #2 and Suite for Piano and String Orchestra, Cédric Tiberghien (pianist), BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra, Andrew Manze-conductor, Hyperion 67931
* Théodore Dubois, Musique sacrée et symphonique &amp; Musique de Chambre (2015), Various performers; BruZane ES1018RSK (Volume 2 in &quot;Collection Portraits&quot;)

===Media===
==See also==

==Notes, references and sources==
===Notes===
===References===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Festival Théodore Dubois and official art | Palazzetto Bru Zane Venice
*Theodore Dubois Chamber Music sound-bites from several works and short biography
* Theodore Dubois. &quot;Adoration&quot; (Posth.). Andrew Pink (2021) Exordia ad missam.
* Xavière : idylle dramatique en trois actes, 1896 publication, digitized by BYU on archive.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q259121" start="0" end="32" title="Théodore Dubois" label="Clément François Théodore Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="80" end="88" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q463055" start="148" end="167" title="Paris Conservatoire" label="Paris Conservatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="221" end="233" title="Prix de Rome" label="Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q297717" start="469" end="484" title="Ambroise Thomas" label="Ambroise Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="740" end="753" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q833431" start="1101" end="1107" title="Rosnay, Marne" label="Rosnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12594" start="1111" end="1116" title="Marne (department)" label="Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="1133" end="1138" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q206823" start="1462" end="1477" title="Reims Cathedral" label="Reims Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6169331" start="1581" end="1598" title="Jean-Henri Ravina" label="Jean-Henri Ravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q463055" start="1663" end="1682" title="Paris Conservatoire" label="Paris Conservatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157672" start="1694" end="1706" title="Daniel Auber" label="Daniel Auber"/>
<link wikidata="Q586181" start="1743" end="1769" title="Antoine François Marmontel" label="Antoine François Marmontel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450915" start="1786" end="1802" title="François Benoist" label="François Benoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q633817" start="1817" end="1831" title="François Bazin (composer)" label="François Bazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q297717" start="1870" end="1885" title="Ambroise Thomas" label="Ambroise Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1945" end="1967" title="Les Invalides#The Cathedral of Saint-Louis des Invalides" label="St Louis-des-Invalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514062" start="1982" end="1997" title="Sainte-Clotilde, Paris" label="Sainte-Clotilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="2159" end="2171" title="Prix de Rome" label="Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q337494" start="2253" end="2275" title="French Academy in Rome" label="French Academy in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362663" start="2284" end="2299" title="Villa de Medici" label="Villa de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q194436" start="2404" end="2418" title="Jules Massenet" label="Jules Massenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="2547" end="2561" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="2581" end="2587" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="2589" end="2596" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="2598" end="2604" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="2606" end="2612" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="2614" end="2620" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="2622" end="2627" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="2632" end="2640" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q208080" start="2729" end="2734" title="buffo" label="buffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210675" start="2796" end="2807" title="opera seria" label="opera seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="2899" end="2910" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="3308" end="3327" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q76806" start="3332" end="3346" title="Romain Bussine" label="Romain Bussine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749118" start="3363" end="3391" title="Société nationale de musique" label="Société nationale de musique"/>
<link wikidata="Q364983" start="3459" end="3471" title="Henri Duparc (composer)" label="Henri Duparc"/>
<link wikidata="Q104919" start="3473" end="3486" title="Gabriel Fauré" label="Gabriel Fauré"/>
<link wikidata="Q50187" start="3488" end="3500" title="César Franck" label="César Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q727341" start="3502" end="3516" title="Ernest Guiraud" label="Ernest Guiraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q330564" start="3584" end="3607" title="La Madeleine, Paris" label="Church of the Madeleine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="3620" end="3639" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="3940" end="3953" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q374582" start="4087" end="4101" title="Antoine Elwart" label="Antoine Elwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q215556" start="4240" end="4250" title="Paul Dukas" label="Paul Dukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q77177" start="4252" end="4265" title="George Enescu" label="George Enescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q982192" start="4267" end="4282" title="Albéric Magnard" label="Albéric Magnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q321630" start="4287" end="4302" title="Florent Schmitt" label="Florent Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q872222" start="4411" end="4424" title="Opéra-Comique" label="Opéra-Comique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527623" start="4618" end="4633" title="Théâtre de Cluny" label="Théâtre Athénée"/>
<link wikidata="Q548181" start="4725" end="4738" title="Jules Barbier" label="Jules Barbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q602493" start="4743" end="4755" title="Michel Carré" label="Michel Carré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371615" start="4854" end="4865" title="Paul Lacôme" label="Paul Lacôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q817524" start="4890" end="4905" title="Benjamin Godard" label="Benjamin Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469315" start="5129" end="5149" title="Théâtre du Châtelet" label="Concerts du Châtelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q872222" start="5349" end="5362" title="Opéra Comique" label="Opéra Comique"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423785" start="5435" end="5474" title="Les Annales du Théâtre et de la Musique" label="Les Annales du théâtre et de la musique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="5692" end="5698" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="5738" end="5751" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q560619" start="5758" end="5768" title="Tannhäuser (opera)" label="Tannhäuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q465540" start="5785" end="5802" title="Die Meistersinger" label="Die Meistersinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q283339" start="6138" end="6149" title="Paris Opéra" label="Paris Opéra"/>
<link wikidata="Q463643" start="6255" end="6267" title="Rosita Mauri" label="Rosita Mauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="6732" end="6748" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q207951" start="7137" end="7148" title="Léo Delibes" label="Léo Delibes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180278" start="7276" end="7290" title="Charles Gounod" label="Charles Gounod"/>
<link wikidata="Q337531" start="7352" end="7375" title="Académie des Beaux-Arts" label="Académie des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q313917" start="7890" end="7896" title="Fromental Halévy" label="Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="7912" end="7921" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145" start="8007" end="8013" title="Jean-Philippe Rameau" label="Rameau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="8138" end="8151" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="8330" end="8344" title="Claude Debussy" label="Debussy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q368019" start="8378" end="8398" title="Pelléas et Mélisande (opera)" label="Pelléas et Mélisande"/>
<link wikidata="Q220340" start="8838" end="8846" title="Parsifal" label="Parsifal"/>
<link wikidata="Q358965" start="8925" end="8936" title="Georges Hüe" label="Georges Hüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q452065" start="9911" end="9921" title="Emma Calvé" label="Emma Calvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q924545" start="9926" end="9940" title="Jean de Reszke" label="Jean de Reszke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="10124" end="10132" title="Auvergne (province)" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697066" start="10413" end="10426" title="Lucien Fugère" label="Lucien Fugère"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="10604" end="10612" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="11091" end="11103" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="11108" end="11113" title="fugue" label="fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="11180" end="11187" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527664" start="11457" end="11482" title="Théâtre de l&amp;#x27;Athénée" label="Théâtre de l&amp;#x27;Athénée"/>
<link wikidata="Q872222" start="11604" end="11617" title="Opéra-Comique" label="Opéra-Comique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469315" start="11835" end="11854" title="Théâtre du Châtelet" label="Théâtre du Châtelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885528" start="12340" end="12353" title="Louis Mérante" label="Louis Mérante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885528" start="12431" end="12444" title="Louis Mérante" label="Louis Mérante"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="14317" end="14326" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579350" start="14881" end="14887" title="Heugel (music publisher)" label="Heugel"/>
<link wikidata="Q89852" start="15276" end="15300" title="Helga Schauerte-Maubouet" label="Helga Schauerte-Maubouet"/>
<link wikidata="Q87660" start="15308" end="15315" title="Joseph Merklin" label="Merklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q285585" start="15507" end="15524" title="Cédric Tiberghien" label="Cédric Tiberghien"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="16240" end="16243" title="Brigham Young University" label="BYU"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303318" wikidata="Q2103838" url="?curid=303318" title="Pontian">
<text>Pontian may refer to:
* Pope Pontian (died 235), 3rd-century Catholic Pope
* Pontian Greeks, a group of ethnic Greeks traditionally from the Pontus and Pontic Mountains regions in northern Turkey
* Pontian Islands, a group of islands on the coast of Italy
* Pontian District, a district and city in Johor, Malaysia
** Pontian (federal constituency)
** Pontian Kechil or Pontian Town
* Pontian stage (Pontian age), the uppermost Miocene Paratethys stage, coeval with the Messinian

==See also==
* Ponciano (disambiguation)
* Pons (disambiguation)
* Pontian Selatan (federal constituency) (1959–1974), Johor, Malaysia
* Pontian Utara (federal constituency) (1959–1974), Johor, Malaysia
* Pontianus (disambiguation)
* Pontic (disambiguation)
* Pontine (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2103838" start="0" end="7" title="Pontian" label="Pontian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132113" start="24" end="36" title="Pope Pontian" label="Pope Pontian"/>
<link wikidata="Q679524" start="77" end="91" title="Pontian Greeks" label="Pontian Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q844829" start="198" end="213" title="Pontian Islands" label="Pontian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452012" start="258" end="274" title="Pontian District" label="Pontian District"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241083" start="318" end="348" title="Pontian (federal constituency)" label="Pontian (federal constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12701208" start="352" end="366" title="Pontian Kechil" label="Pontian Kechil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="385" end="398" title="Pontian stage" label="Pontian stage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="400" end="411" title="Pontian age" label="Pontian age"/>
<link wikidata="Q508465" start="470" end="479" title="Messinian" label="Messinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227626" start="496" end="521" title="Ponciano (disambiguation)" label="Ponciano (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q346275" start="524" end="545" title="Pons (disambiguation)" label="Pons (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246427" start="548" end="586" title="Pontian Selatan (federal constituency)" label="Pontian Selatan (federal constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246426" start="618" end="654" title="Pontian Utara (federal constituency)" label="Pontian Utara (federal constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751463" start="686" end="712" title="Pontianus (disambiguation)" label="Pontianus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228250" start="715" end="738" title="Pontic (disambiguation)" label="Pontic (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228289" start="741" end="765" title="Pontine (disambiguation)" label="Pontine (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="303319" wikidata="Q336137" url="?curid=303319" title="Alessandro Marcello">
<text>Alessandro Ignazio Marcello (; 1 February 1673 – 19 June 1747) was an Italian nobleman and composer.

==Biography==
Born in Venice, Marcello was the son of a senator, and as a nobleman, enjoyed a comfortable life that gave him the freedom to pursue his interest in music. He held concerts in his hometown and composed and published several sets of concertos, including six under the title of &quot;La Cetra&quot; (The Lyre), as well as cantatas, arias, canzonetti, and violin sonatas.

A contemporary of Tomaso Albinoni, and a slightly older contemporary of Antonio Vivaldi, Marcello often composed under the pseudonym Eterio Stinfalico, his name as a member of the celebrated Arcadian Academy (&quot;Pontificia Accademia degli Arcadi&quot;). Marcello died in Venice in 1747 and was buried on his family&#x27;s countryside estate in Paviola near Padua.

Rosanna Scalfi, a singer and composer, was the widow of Alessandro&#x27;s better-known brother Benedetto Marcello. As their 1728 marriage had not been sanctioned by the state due to her being of common birth, she was unable to inherit his estate, and in 1742 filed suit against Alessandro seeking financial support.

==Works==
Although most of Marcello&#x27;s works are infrequently performed today, Marcello is regarded as a highly competent composer. His &quot;La Cetra&quot; concertos are &quot;unusual for their wind solo parts, concision and use of counterpoint within a broadly Vivaldian style&quot;, according to Grove, &quot;placing them as a last outpost of the classic Venetian Baroque concerto&quot;.

The Concerto for Oboe and Strings in D minor op. 1 is perhaps his best-known work. Its worth was affirmed by Johann Sebastian Bach, who transcribed it for harpsichord (BWV 974). A number of editions have been published, including an edition in C minor to accommodate the baroque oboe, which was played a whole tone lower than the modern oboe.

==Notes and references==
==Sources==
*&quot;The Grove Concise Dictionary of Music&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1994.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q336137" start="0" end="27" title="Alessandro Marcello" label="Alessandro Ignazio Marcello"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="70" end="77" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="124" end="130" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="348" end="356" title="concerto" label="concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798678" start="398" end="406" title="La Cetra" label="La Cetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="436" end="443" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q178122" start="446" end="450" title="aria" label="aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034045" start="453" end="461" title="canzonet" label="canzonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933385" start="469" end="482" title="violin sonata" label="violin sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q174606" start="504" end="519" title="Tomaso Albinoni" label="Tomaso Albinoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="558" end="573" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Antonio Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="677" end="693" title="Roman Academies#Pontificia Accademia degli Arcadi .281690.29" label="Arcadian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367340" start="854" end="868" title="Rosanna Scalfi Marcello" label="Rosanna Scalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312784" start="949" end="967" title="Benedetto Marcello" label="Benedetto Marcello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798678" start="1317" end="1325" title="La Cetra" label="La Cetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476734" start="1571" end="1611" title="Concerto for Oboe and Strings in D minor" label="Concerto for Oboe and Strings in D minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="1676" end="1697" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458203" start="1703" end="1713" title="Transcription (music)" label="transcribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="1722" end="1733" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q214203" start="1735" end="1738" title="BWV" label="BWV"/>
</links>
</doc>
