<doc id="343674" wikidata="Q162304" url="?curid=343674" title="Chinese space program">
<text>The space program of the People&#x27;s Republic of China is about the activities in outer space conducted and directed by the People&#x27;s Republic of China. The roots of the Chinese space program trace back to the 1950s, when, with the help of the newly allied Soviet Union, China began development of its first ballistic missile and rocket programs in response to the perceived American (and, later, Soviet) threats. Driven by the successes of Soviet Sputnik 1 and American Explorer 1 satellite launches in 1957 and 1958 respectively, China would launch its first satellite, Dong Fang Hong 1 in April 1970 aboard a Long March 1 rocket, making it the fifth nation to place a satellite in orbit.

China has one of the most active space programs in the world. With space launch capability provided by the Long March rocket family and four spaceports (Jiuquan, Taiyuan, Xichang, Wenchang) within its border, China conducts either the highest or the second highest number of orbital launches each year. It operates a satellite fleet consisting of a large number of communications, navigation, remote sensing and scientific research satellites. The scope of its activities has expanded from low Earth orbit to the Moon and Mars. China is one of the three countries, alongside the United States and Russia, with independent human spaceflight capability.

Currently, most of the space activities carried out by China are managed by the China National Space Administration (CNSA) and the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force, which directs the astronaut corps and the Chinese Deep Space Network. Major programs include China Manned Space Program, BeiDou Navigation Satellite System, Chinese Lunar Exploration Program, Gaofen Observation and Planetary Exploration of China. In recent years, China has conducted several missions, including Chang&#x27;e-4, Chang&#x27;e-5, Chang’e-6, Tianwen-1 and Tiangong space station.

==History==

===Early years (1950s to mid-1970s)===

The Chinese space program began in the form of missile research in the 1950s. After its birth in 1949, the newly founded People&#x27;s Republic of China was in pursuit of missile technology to build up the nation&#x27;s defense for the Cold War. In 1955, Qian Xuesen (), the world-class rocketry scientist, returned to China from the United States. In 1956, Qian submitted a proposal for the development of China&#x27;s missile program, which was approved in just a few months. On October 8, China&#x27;s first missile research institute, the Fifth Research Academy under the Ministry of National Defense, was established with less than 200 staff, most of which were recruited by Qian. The event was later recognized as the birth of China&#x27;s space program.

To fully utilize all available resources, China kick-started its missile development by manufacturing a licensed copy of two Soviet R-2 missiles, which were secretly shipped to China in December 1957 as part of the cooperative technology transfer program between the Soviet Union and China. The Chinese version of the missile was given the code name &quot;1059&quot; with the expectation of being launched in 1959. But the target date was soon postponed due to various difficulties arising from the sudden withdrawal of Soviet technical assistance due to the Sino-Soviet split. Meanwhile, China started constructing its first missile test site in the Gobi desert of Inner Mongolia, which later became the famous Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center (), China&#x27;s first spaceport.

After the launch of mankind&#x27;s first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, by the Soviet Union on October 4, 1957, Mao Zedong decided during the 8th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) on May 17, 1958, to make China an equal of the superpowers (), by adopting &quot;Project 581&quot; with the objective of placing a satellite in orbit by 1959 to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the PRC&#x27;s founding. This goal was soon proven unrealistic, and it was decided to focus on the development of sounding rockets first.
The first achievement of the program was the launch of T-7M, a sounding rocket that eventually reached the height of 8 km on February 19, 1960. It was the first rocket developed by Chinese engineers. The success was praised by Mao Zedong as a good beginning of an indigenous Chinese rocket development. However, all Soviet technological assistance was abruptly withdrawn after the 1960 Sino-Soviet split, and Chinese scientists continued on the program with extremely limited resources and knowledge. It was under these harsh conditions that China successfully launched the first &quot;missile 1059&quot;, fueled by alcohol and liquid oxygen, on December 5, 1960, marking a successful imitation of Soviet missile. The missile 1059 was later renamed as &quot;Dongfeng-1&quot; (DF-1, ).
While the imitation of Soviet missile was still in progress, the Fifth Academy led by Qian had begun the development of &quot;Dongfeng-2&quot; (DF-2), the first missile to be designed and built completely by the Chinese. After a failed attempt in March 1962, multiple improvements, and hundreds of engine firing tests, DF-2 achieved its first successful launch on its second attempt on Jun 29, 1964 in Jiuquan. It was considered as a major milestone in China&#x27;s indigenous missile development history.

In the next few years, &quot;Dongfeng-2&quot; conducted seven more launches, all ended in success. On October 27, 1966, as part of the &quot;Two Bombs, One Satellite&quot; project, &quot;Dongfeng-2A&quot;, an improved version of DF-2, successfully launched and detonated a nuclear warhead at its target. As China&#x27;s missile industry matures, a new plan of developing carrier rockets and launching satellites was proposed and approved in 1965 with the name &quot;Project 581&quot; changed to &quot;Project 651&quot;. On January 30, 1970, China successfully tested the newly developed two-stage &quot;Dongfeng-4&quot; (DF-4) missile, which demonstrated critical technologies like rocket staging, engine in-flight ignition, attitude control. The DF-4 was used to develop the Long March 1 (LM-1 or CZ-1, ), with a newly designed spin-up orbital insertion solid-propellant rocket motor third stage added to the two existing Nitric acid/UDMH liquid propellant stages.

China&#x27;s space program benefited from the Third Front campaign to develop basic industry and national defense industry in China&#x27;s rugged interior in preparation for potential invasion by the Soviet Union or the United States. Almost all of China&#x27;s new aerospace work units in the late 1960s and early 1970s were established as part of the Third Front and Third Front projects included expansion of Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center, building Xichang Satellite Launch Center, and building Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center.
On April 24, 1970, China successfully launched the 173 kg &quot;Dong Fang Hong I&quot; (, meaning The East Is Red I) atop a Long March 1 (CZ-1, ) rocket from Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center. It was the heaviest first satellite placed into orbit by a nation. The third stage of the Long March 1 was specially equipped with a 40 m2 solar reflector () deployed by the centrifugal force developed by the spin-up orbital insertion solid propellant stage. China&#x27;s second satellite was launched with the last Long March 1 on March 3, 1971. The 221 kg ShiJian-1 (SJ-1, ) was equipped with a magnetometer and cosmic-ray/x-ray detectors.

In addition to the satellite launch, China also made small progress in human spaceflight. The first successful launch and recovery of a T-7A(S1) sounding rocket carrying a biological experiment (it carried eight white mice) was on July 19, 1964, from Base 603 (). As the space race between the two superpowers reached its climax with the conquest of the Moon, Mao and Zhou Enlai decided on July 14, 1967, that China should not be left behind, and started China&#x27;s own crewed space program. China&#x27;s first spacecraft designed for human occupancy was named &quot;Shuguang-1&quot; () in January 1968. China&#x27;s Space Medical Institute () was founded on April 1, 1968, and the Central Military Commission issued the order to start the selection of astronauts. The first crewed space program, known as &quot;Project 714&quot;, was officially adopted in April 1971 with the goal of sending two astronauts into space by 1973 aboard the Shuguang spacecraft. The first screening process for astronauts had already ended on March 15, 1971, with 19 astronauts chosen. But the program was soon canceled in the same year due to political turmoil, ending China&#x27;s first human spaceflight attempt.
While CZ-1 was being developed, the development of China&#x27;s first long-range intercontinental ballistic missile, namely &quot;Dongfeng-5&quot; (DF-5), has started since 1965. The first test flight of DF-5 was conducted in 1971. After that, its technology was adopted by two different models of Chinese medium-lift launch vehicles being developed. One of the two was &quot;Feng Bao 1&quot; (FB-1, ) developed by Shanghai&#x27;s 2nd Bureau of Mechanic-Electrical Industry, the predecessor of Shanghai Academy of Spaceflight Technology (SAST). The other parallel medium-lift LV program, also based on the same DF-5 ICBM and known as &quot;Long March 2&quot; (CZ-2, ), was started in Beijing by the First Research Academy of the Seventh Ministry of Machine Building, which later became China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology (CALT). Both FB-1 and CZ-2 were fueled by N2O4 and UDMH, the same propellant used by DF-5.

On July 26, 1975, FB-1 made its first successful flight, placing the 1107-kilogram &quot;Changkong-1&quot; () satellite into orbit. It was the first time that China launched a payload heavier than 1 metric ton. Four months later, on November 26, CZ-2 successfully launched the FSW-0 No.1 () recoverable satellite into orbit. The satellite returned to earth and was successfully recovered three days later, making China the third country capable of recovering a satellite, after the Soviet Union and the United States. FB-1 and CZ-2, which were developed by two different institutes, were later evolved into two different branches of the classic Long March rocket family: Long March 4 and Long March 2.

As part of the Third Front effort to relocate critical defense infrastructure to the relatively remote interior (away from the Soviet border), it was decided to construct a new space center in the mountainous region of Xichang in the Sichuan province, code-named Base 27. After expansion, the Northern Missile Test Site was upgraded as a test base in January 1976 to become the Northern Missile Test Base () known as Base 25.

===New era (late 1970s to 1980s)===
After Mao died on September 9, 1976, his rival, Deng Xiaoping, denounced during the Cultural Revolution as reactionary and therefore forced to retire from all his offices, slowly re-emerged as China&#x27;s new leader in 1978. At first, the new development was slowed. Then, several key projects deemed unnecessary were simply cancelled—the Fanji ABM system, the Xianfeng Anti-Missile Super Gun, the ICBM Early Warning Network 7010 Tracking Radar and the land-based high-power anti-missile laser program. Nevertheless, some development did proceed. The first Yuanwang-class space tracking ship was commissioned in 1979. The first full-range test of the DF-5 ICBM was conducted on May 18, 1980. The payload reached its target located 9300 km away in the South Pacific () and retrieved five minutes later by helicopter. In 1982, Long March 2C (CZ-2C, ), an upgraded version of Long March 2 based on DF-5 with 2500 kg low Earth orbit (LEO) payload capacity, completed its maiden flight. Long March 2C, along with many of its derived models, eventually became the backbone of Chinese space program in the following decades.

As China changing its direction from political activities to economy development since late 1970s, the demand for communications satellites surged. As a result, the Chinese communications satellite program, code name &quot;Project 331&quot;, was started on March 31, 1975. The first generation of China&#x27;s own communication satellites was named &quot;Dong Fang Hong 2&quot; (DFH-2, ), whose development was led by the famous satellite expert Sun Jiadong. Since communications satellites works in the geostationary orbit much higher than what the existing carrier rockets could reach, the launching of communications satellites became the next big challenge for the Chinese space program.

The task was assigned to Long March 3 (CZ-3, ), the most advanced Chinese launch vehicle in the 1980s. Long March 3 was a derivative of Long March 2C with an additional third stage, designed to send payloads to geosynchronous transfer orbit (GTO). When the development of Long March 3 began in the early 1970s, the engineers had to make a choice between the two options for the third stage engine: either the traditional engine fueled by the same hypergolic fuels used by the first two stages, or the advanced cryogenic engine fueled by liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. Although the cryogenic engine plan was much more challenging than the other one, it was eventually chosen by Chief Designer Ren Xinmin (), who had foreseen the great potential of its use for the Chinese space program in the coming future. The development of cryogenic engine with in-flight re-ignition capability began in 1976 and wasn&#x27;t completed until 1983. At the same time, Xichang Satellite Launch Center () was chosen as the launch site of Long March 3 due to its low latitude, which provides better GTO launch capability.

On January 29, 1984, Long March 3 performed its maiden flight from Xichang, carrying the first experimental DFH-2 satellite. Unfortunately, because of the cryogenic third-stage engine failed to re-ignite during flight, the satellite was placed into a 400 km LEO instead of its intended GTO. Despite the rocket failure, the engineers managed to send the satellite into an elliptic orbit with an apoapsis of 6480 km using the satellite&#x27;s own propulsion system. A series of tests were then conducted to verify the performance the satellite. Thanks to the hard work by the engineers, the cause of the cryogenic engine failure was located quickly, followed by improvements applied on the second rocket awaiting launch.

On April 8, 1984, less than 70 days after the first failure, Long March 3 launched again from Xichang. It successfully inserted the second experimental DFH-2 satellite into target GTO on its second attempt. The satellite reached the final orbit location on April 16 and was handed over to the user on May 14, becoming China&#x27;s first geostationary communications satellite. The success made China the fifth country in the world with independent geostationary satellite development and launch capability. Less than two years later, on February 1, 1986, the first practical DFH-2 communications satellite was launched into orbit atop a Long March 3 rocket, ending China&#x27;s reliance on foreign communications satellite.

During the 1980s, human spaceflights in the world became significantly more active than before as the American Space Shuttle and Soviet space stations were put in service respectively. It was in the same period that the previously canceled Chinese human spaceflight program was quietly revived again. In March 1986, &quot;Project 863&quot; () was proposed by four scientists Wang Daheng, Wang Ganchang, Yang Jiachi, and Chen Fangyun. The goal of the project was to stimulate the development of advanced technologies, including human spaceflight. Followed by the approval of Project 863, the early study of Chinese human spaceflight program in the new era had begun.

===The rise and fall of commercial launches (1990s)===
After the initial success of Long March 3, further development of the Long March rocket series allowed China to announce a commercial launch program for international customers in 1985, which opened up a decade of commercial launches by Chinese launch vehicles in the 1990s. The launch service was provided by China Great Wall Industry Corporation (CGWIC) with support from CALT, SAST and China Satellite Launch and Tracking Control General (CLTC). The first contract was signed with AsiaSat in January 1989 to launch AsiaSat 1, a communications satellite manufactured by Hughes. It was previously a satellite owned by Westar but placed into a wrong orbit due to kick motor malfunction before being recovered in the STS-51-A mission in 1984.

On April 7, 1990, a Long March 3 rocket successfully launched AsiaSat 1 into target geosynchronous transfer orbit with high precision, fulfilling the contract. As its very first commercial launch ended in full success, the Chinese commercial launch program was introduced to the world with a good opening.

Although Long March 3 completed its first commercial mission as expected, its 1,500 kg payload capability was not capable of placing the new generation of communication satellites, which were usually over 2,500 kg, into geostationary transfer orbit. To deal with the problem, China introduced Long March 2E (CZ-2E, ), the first Chinese rocket with strap-on boosters that can place up to 3,000 kg payload into GTO. The development of Long March 2E began in November 1988 when CGWIC was awarded the contract of launching two Optus satellites by Hughes mostly due to its low price. At that time, neither the rocket nor the launch facility was anything more than concepts on paper. Yet the engineers of CALT eventually built all the hardware from scratch in a record-breaking period of 18 months, which impressed the American experts. On September 16, 1990, Long March 2E, carrying an Optus mass simulator, conducted its test flight and reached intended orbit as designed. The success of the test flight was a huge inspiration for all parties involved and brought optimism about the coming launch of actual Optus satellites.

However, an accident occurred during this highly anticipated launch on March 22, 1992, at Xichang Satellite Launch Center. After initial ignition, all engines shut down unexpectedly. The rocket was unable to lift off, resulting in a launch abort while being live-streamed to the world. The post-launch investigation revealed that some minor aluminum scraps caused a shortage in the control circuit, triggering an emergency shutdown of all engines. Although the huge vibration brought by the short-lived ignition had led to a rotation of the whole rocket by 1.5 degree clockwise and partial displacement of the supporting blocks, the rocket filled with propellant was still standing on the launch pad when the dust settled. After a rescue mission that lasted for 39 hours, the payload, rocket, and launch facilities were all preserved intact, avoiding huge losses. Less than five months later, on August 14, a new Long March 2E rocket successfully lifted off from Xichang, sending the Optus satellite into orbit.

In June 1993, the China Aerospace Corporation was founded in Beijing. It was also granted the title of China National Space Administration (CNSA). A improved version of Long March 3, namely Long March 3A (CZ-3A, ) with 2,600 kg payload capacity to GTO, was put into service in 1994. However, on February 15, 1996, during the first flight of the further improved Long March 3B (CZ-3B, ) rocket carrying Intelsat 708, the rocket veered off course immediately after clearing the launch platform, crashing 22 seconds later. The crash killed 6 people and injured 57, making it the most disastrous event in the history of Chinese space program. Although the Long March 3 rocket successfully launched APStar 1A communication satellites on July 3, it came across a third stage re-ignition malfunction during the launch of ChinaSat 7 on August 18, resulting in another launch failure.

The two launch failures within a few months dealt a severe blow to the reputation of the Long March rockets. As a consequence, the Chinese commercial launch service was facing canceled orders, refusal of insurance, or greatly increased insurance premium. Under such a harsh circumstance, the Chinese space industry initiated full-scale quality improving activities. A closed-loop quality management system was established to fix quality issues in both the technical and administrative aspects. The strict quality management system remarkably increased the success rate ever since. Within the next 15 years, from October 20, 1996, up until August 16, 2011, China had achieved 102 consecutive successful space launches. On August 20, 1997, Long March 3B accomplished its first successful flight on its second attempt, placing the 3,770 kg Agila-2 communications satellite into orbit. It offered a GTO payload capacity as high as 5,000 kg capable of putting different kinds of heavy satellites available on the international market into orbit. Ever since then, Long March 3B had become the backbone of China&#x27;s mid to high Earth orbit launches and been granted the title of most powerful rocket by China for nearly 20 years. In 1998, the administrative branch of China Aerospace Corporation was split and then merged into the newly founded Commission for Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense while retaining the title of CNSA. The remaining part was split again into China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASC) and China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation (CASIC) in 1999.

While the Long March rockets were trying to take back the commercial launch market it lost, the political suppression from the United States approached. In 1998, the United States accused Hughes and Loral of exporting technologies that inadvertently helped China&#x27;s ballistic missile program while resolving issues that caused the Long March rocket launch failures. The accusation ultimately led to the release of Cox Report, which further accused China of stealing sensitive technologies. In the next year, the U.S. Congress passed the act that put commercial satellites into the list restricted by International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) and prohibited launches of satellites containing U.S. made components onboard Chinese rockets. The regulation abruptly killed the commercial cooperation between China and the United States. The two Iridum satellites launched by Long March 2C on June 12, 1999, became the last batch of American satellites launched by Chinese rocket. Furthermore, due to the strict regulation applied and the U.S. dominance in space industry, the Long March rockets had been de facto excluded from the international commercial launch market, causing a stagnation of the Chinese commercial launch program in the next few years.
Despite the turmoil of commercial launches, the Chinese space program still made a huge breakthrough near the end of the decade. At 6:30 (China Standard Time) on November 20, 1999, &quot;Shenzhou-1&quot; (), the first uncrewed Shenzhou spacecraft () designed for human spaceflight, was successfully launched atop a Long March 2F (CZ-2F, ) rocket from Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center. The spacecraft was inserted into low earth orbit 10 minutes after lift off. After orbiting the Earth for 14 rounds, the spacecraft initiated the return procedure as planned and landed safely in Inner Mongolia at 03:41 on November 21, marking the full success of China&#x27;s first Shenzhou test flight. Following the announcement of the success of the mission, the previously secretive Chinese human spaceflight program, namely the China Manned Space Program (CMS, ), was formally made public. CMS, which was formally approved on September 21, 1992, by the CCP Politburo Standing Committee as Project 921, has been the most ambitious space program of China since its birth. Its goals can be described as &quot;Three Steps&quot;: Crewed spacecraft launch and return; Space laboratory for short-term missions; Long-term modular space station. Due to its complex nature, a series of advanced projects were introduced by the program, including Shenzhou spacecraft, Long March 2F rocket, human spaceflight launch site in Jiuquan, Beijing Aerospace Flight Control Center, and Astronaut Center of China in Beijing. In terms of astronauts, fourteen candidates were selected to form the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Astronaut Corps and started accepting spaceflight training.

===Breakthroughs by Shenzhou and Chang&#x27;e (2000s)===
Since the beginning of 21st century, China has been experiencing rapid economic growth, which led to higher investment into space programs and multiple major achievements in the following decades. In November 2000, the Chinese government released its first white paper entitled &quot;China&#x27;s Space Activities&quot;, which described its goals in the next decade as:
* To build up an earth observation system for long-term stable operation.
* To set up an independently operated satellite broadcasting and telecommunications system.
* To establish an independent satellite navigation and positioning system.
* To upgrade the overall level and capacity of China&#x27;s launch vehicles.
* To realize manned spaceflight and establish an initially complete R&amp;D and testing system for manned space projects.
* To establish a coordinated and complete national satellite remote-sensing application system.
* To develop space science and explore outer space.
The independent satellite navigation and positioning system mentioned by the white paper was &quot;Beidou&quot; (). The development of Beidou dates back to 1983 when academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Chen Fangyun designed a primitive satellite navigation systems consisting of two satellites in the geostationary orbit. Sun Jiadong, the famous satellite expert of China, later proposed a &quot;three-step&quot; strategy to develop China&#x27;s own satellite navigation system, whose service coverage expands from China to Asia then the globe. The two satellites of the &quot;first step&quot;, namely BeiDou-1, were launched in October and December 2000. As an experimental system, Beidou-1 offered basic positioning, navigation and timing services to limited areas in and around China. After a few years of experiment, China started the construction of BeiDou-2, a more advanced system to serve the Asia-Pacific region by launching the first two satellites in 2007 and 2009 respectively.

Another major goal specified by the white paper was to realize crewed spaceflight. The China Manned Space Program continued its steady evolvement in the 21st century after its initial success. From January 2001 to January 2003, China conducted three uncrewed Shenzhou spacecraft test flights, validating all systems required by human spaceflight. Among these missions, the Shenzhou-4 launched on December 30, 2002, was the last uncrewed rehearsal of Shenzhou. It flew for 6 days and 18 hours and orbited around the Earth for 108 circles before returning on January 5, 2003.

On October 15, 2003, the first Chinese astronaut Yang Liwei () was launched aboard Shenzhou-5 () spacecraft atop a Long March 2F rocket from Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center. The spacecraft was inserted into orbit ten minutes after launch, making Yang the first Chinese in space. After a flight of more than 21 hours and 14 orbits around the Earth, the spacecraft returned and landed safely in Inner Mongolia in the next morning, followed by Yang&#x27;s walking out of the return capsule by himself. The complete success of Shenzhou 5 mission was widely celebrated in China and received worldwide endorsements from different people and parties, including UN Secretary General Kofi Annan. The mission, officially recognized by China as the second milestone of its space program after the launch of Dongfanghong-1, marked China&#x27;s standing as the third country capable of completing independent human spaceflight, ending the over 40-year long duopoly by the Soviet Union/Russia and the United States.
The China Manned Space Program did not stop its footsteps after its historic first crewed spaceflight. In 2005, two Chinese astronauts, Fei Junlong () and Nie Haisheng (), safely completed China&#x27;s first &quot;multi-person and multi-day&quot; spaceflight mission aboard Shenzhou-6 () between October 12 and 17. On 25 September 2008, Shenzhou-7 () was launched into space with three astronauts, Zhai Zhigang (), Liu Boming () and Jing Haipeng (). During the flight, Zhai and Liu conducted China&#x27;s first spacewalk in orbit.
Around the same time, China began preparation for extraterrestrial exploration, starting with the Moon. The early research of Moon exploration of China dates back to 1994 when its necessity and feasibility were studied and discussed among Chinese scientists. As a result, the white paper of 2000 enlisted the Moon as the primary target of China&#x27;s deep space exploration within the decade. In January 2004, the year after China&#x27;s first human spaceflight mission, the Chinese Moon orbiting program was formally approved and was later transformed into Chinese Lunar Exploration Program (CLEP, ). Just like several other space programs of China, CLEP was divided into three phases, which were simplified as &quot;Orbiting, Landing, Returning&quot; (), all to be executed by robotic probes at the time of planning.

On October 24, 2007, the first lunar orbiter &quot;Chang&#x27;e-1&quot; () was successfully launched by a Long March 3A rocket, and was inserted into Moon orbit on November 7, becoming China&#x27;s first artificial satellite of the Moon. It then performed a series of surveys and produced China&#x27;s first lunar map. On March 1, 2009, Chang&#x27;e-1, which had been operating longer than its designed life span, performed a controlled hard landing on lunar surface, concluding the Chang&#x27;e-1 mission. Being China&#x27;s first deep space exploration mission, Chang&#x27;e-1 was recognized by China as the third milestone of the Chinese space program and the admission ticket to the world club of deep space explorations.

In others areas, despite the harsh sanction imposed by the United States since 1999, China still made some progress in terms of commercial launches within the first decade of the 21st century. In April 2005, China successfully conducted its first commercial launch since 1999 by launching the APStar 6 communications satellite manufactured by French company Alcatel atop a Long March 3B rocket. In May 2007, China launched NigComSat-1 satellite developed by China Academy of Space Technology. This was the first time China provided the full service from satellite manufacture to launch for international customers.
===Expansion and revolution (2010s)===
From 2000 to 2010, China had quadrupled its GDP and became the second largest economy in the world. Due to the rapid development of economy activities across the nation, the demand for high-resolution Earth observation systems increased in a remarkable manner. To end the reliance on foreign high-resolution remote sensing data, China initiated the China High-resolution Earth Observation System program (), most commonly known as &quot;Gaofen&quot; (), in May 2010. Its purpose is to establish an all-day, all-weather coverage Earth observation system for satisfying the requirements of social development as part of the Chinese space infrastructures. The first Gaofen satellite, Gaofen 1, was launched into orbit on April 26, 2013, followed by more satellites being launched into different orbits in the next few years to cover different spectra. As of today, more than 30 Gaofen satellites are being operated by China as the completion of the space-based section of Gaofen was announced in late 2022.

The Beidou Navigation Satellite System proceeded in extraordinary speed after the launch of first Beidou-2 satellite in 2007. As many as five Beidou-2 navigation satellites were launched in 2010 alone. In late 2012, the Beidou-2 navigation system consisting of 14 satellites was completed and started providing service to Asia-Pacific region. The construction of more advanced Beidou-3 started since November 2017. Its buildup speed was even more astonishing than before as China launched 24 satellites into medium Earth orbit, 3 into inclined geosynchronous orbit, and 3 into geostationary orbit within just three years. The final satellite of Beidou-3 was successfully launched by a Long March 3B rocket on June 23, 2020. On July 31, 2020, CCP general secretary Xi Jinping made the announcement on the Beidou-3 completion ceremony, declaring the commission of Beidou-3 system across the globe. The completed Beidou-3 navigation system integrates navigation and communication function, and possesses multiple service capabilities, including positioning, navigation and timing, short message communication, international search and rescue, satellite-based augmentation, ground augmentation and precise point positioning. It is now one of the four core system providers designated by the International Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems of the United Nations.

The China Manned Space Program continued to make breakthroughs in human spaceflight technologies in 2010s. In the early 2000s, the Chinese crewed space program continued to engage with Russia in technological exchanges regarding the development of a docking mechanism used for space stations. Deputy Chief Designer, Huang Weifen, stated that near the end of 2009, the China Manned Space Agency began to train astronauts on how to dock spacecraft. In order to practice space rendezvous and docking, China launched an target vehicle, &quot;Tiangong-1&quot; (), in 2011, followed by the uncrewed Shenzhou 8 (). The two spacecraft performed China&#x27;s first automatic rendezvous and docking on 3 November 2011, which verified the performance of docking procedures and mechanisms. About 9 months later, in June 2012, Tiangong 1 completed the first manual rendezvous and docking with Shenzhou 9 (), a crewed spacecraft carrying Jing Haipeng, Liu Wang () and China&#x27;s first female astronaut Liu Yang (). The successes of Shenzhou 8 and 9 missions, especially the automatic and manual docking experiments, marked China&#x27;s advancement in space rendezvous and docking. Tiangong 1 was later docked with crewed spacecraft Shenzhou 10 () carrying astronauts Nie Haisheng, Zhang Xiaoguang () and Wang Yaping (), who conducted multiple scientific experiments, gave lectures to over 60 million students in China, and performed more docking tests before returning to the Earth safely after 15 days in space. The completion of missions from Shenzhou 7 to 10 demonstrated China&#x27;s mastery of all basic human spaceflight technologies, ending phase 1 of &quot;Second Step&quot;.
Although Tiangong 1 was considered as a space station prototype, its functionality was still remarkably weaker than decent space laboratories. &quot;Tiangong-2&quot; (), the first real space laboratory of China, was launched into orbit on September 15, 2016. It was visited by Shenzhou 11 crew a month later. Two astronauts, Jing Haipeng and Chen Dong () entered Tiangong 2 and were stationed for about 30 days, breaking China&#x27;s record for the longest human spaceflight mission while carrying out different types of human-attended experiments. In April 2017, China&#x27;s first cargo spacecraft, &quot;Tianzhou-1&quot; (), docked with Tiangong 2 and completed multiple in-orbit propellant refueling tests.

In terms of deep space explorations, after completing the objective of &quot;Orbiting&quot; in 2007, the Chinese Lunar Exploration Program started preparing for the &quot;Landing&quot; phase. China&#x27;s second lunar probe, &quot;Chang&#x27;e-2&quot; (), was launched on October 1, 2010. It used trans-lunar injection orbit to reach the Moon for the first time and imaged the Sinus Iridum region where future landing missions were expected to occur. On December 2, 2013, a Long March 3B rocket launched &quot;Chang&#x27;e-3&quot; (), China&#x27;s first lunar lander, to the Moon. On December 14, Chang&#x27;e 3 successfully landed on the Sinus Iridum region, making China the third country that made soft-landing on an extraterrestrial body. A day later, the &quot;Yutu&quot; rover () was deployed to the lunar surface and started its survey, achieving the goal of &quot;landing and roving&quot; for the second phase of CLEP.

In addition to lunar exploration, it is worth noting that China made its first attempt of interplanetary exploration during the same period. &quot;Yinghuo-1&quot; (), China&#x27;s first Mars orbiter, was launched on board the Russian Fobos-Grunt spacecraft as an additional payload in November 2011. Yinghuo-1 was a mission in cooperation with Russian Space Agency. It was a relatively small project initiated by National Space Science Center of Chinese Academy of Sciences instead of a major space program managed by the state space agency. The Yinghuo-1 orbiter weighed about 100 kg and was carried by the Fobos-Grunt probe. It was expected to detach from the Fobos-Grunt probe and injected into Mars orbit after reaching Mars. However, due to an error of the onboard computer, the Fobos-Grunt probe failed to start its main engine and was stranded in the low Earth orbit after launch. Two months later, Fobos-Grunt, along with the Yinghuo-1 orbiter, re-entered and eventually burned up in the Earth atmosphere, resulting in a mission failure. Although the Yinghuo-1 mission did not achieve its original goal due to factors not controlled by China, it led to the dawn of the Chinese interplanetary explorations by gathering a group of talents dedicated to interplanetary research for the first time. On December 13, 2012, the Chinese lunar probe Chang&#x27;e 2, which was in an extended mission after the conclusion of its primary tasks in lunar orbit, made a flyby of asteroid Toutatis with closest approach being 3.2 kilometers, making it China&#x27;s first interplanetary probe. In 2016, the first Chinese independent Mars mission was formally approved and listed as one of the major tasks in &quot;White Paper on China&#x27;s Space Activities in 2016&quot;. The mission, which was planned in an unprecedented manner, aimed to achieve Mars orbiting, landing and roving in one single attempt in 2020.

While China was making remarkable progress in all areas above, the Long March rockets, the absolute foundation of Chinese space program, were also experiencing a crucial revolution. Ever since 1970s, the Long March rocket family had been using dinitrogen tetroxide and UDMH as propellant for liquid engines. Although this hypergolic propellant is simple, cheap and reliable, its disadvantages, including toxicity, environmental damages, and low specific impulse, hindered Chinese carrier rockets from being competitive against other space powers since the mid-1980s. To get rid of such unsatisfying situation, China commenced the study of new propellant selection since the introduction of Project 863 in 1986. After an early study that lasted for over a decade, the development of a 120-ton rocket engine burning LOX and kerosene in staged combustion cycle were formally approved in 2000. Despite setbacks like engine explosions during initial firing tests, the development team still made breakthroughs in key technologies like superalloy production and engine ignition and completed its first long duration firing test in 2006. The engine, which was named YF-100, was eventually certified in 2012, and the first engine for actual flight was ready in 2014. On September 20, 2015, the Long March 6 (), a small rocket using one YF-100 engine on its first stage, successfully conducted its maiden flight. On June 25, 2016, the medium-lift Long March 7 (), which was equipped with six YF-100 engines, completed its maiden flight in full success, increasing the maximum LEO payload capacity by Chinese rockets to 13.5 tons. The successes of Long March 6 and 7 signified the introduction of the &quot;new generation of Long March rockets&quot; powered by clean and more efficient engines.
The maiden launch of Long March 7 was also the very first launch from Wenchang Space Launch Site () located in Wenchang, Hainan Province. It marked the inauguration of Wenchang on the world stage of space activities. Compared with the old Jiuquan, Taiyuan, and Xichang, the Wenchang Space Launch Site, whose construction began in September 2009, is China&#x27;s latest and most advanced spaceport. Rockets launched from Wenchang can send ten to fifteen percent more payloads in mass to orbit thanks to its low latitude. Additionally, due to its geographic location, the drop zones of rocket debris produced by rocket launches are in the ocean, eliminating threats posed to people and facilities on the ground. Wenchang&#x27;s coastal location also allows larger rockets to be delivered to launch site by sea, which is difficult, if not impossible, for inland launch sites due to the size limits of tunnels needed to be passed through during transportations.

The biggest breakthrough within the decade, if not decades, were brought by Long March 5 (), the leading role of the new generation of Long March rockets and China&#x27;s first heavy-lift launch vehicle. The early study of Long March 5 can be traced back to 1986, and the project was formally approved in mid-2000s. It applied 247 new technologies during its development while over 90% of its components were newly developed and applied for the first time. Instead of using the classic 3.35-meter-diameter core stage and 2.25-meter-diameter side boosters, the 57-meter tall Long March 5 consists of one 5-meter-diameter core stage burning LH2/LOX and four 3.35-meter-diameter side boosters burning kerosene/LOX. With a launch mass as high as 869 metric tons and 10,573 kN lift-off thrust, the Long March 5, being China&#x27;s most powerful rocket, is capable of lifting up to 25 tons of payload to LEO and 14 tons to GTO, making it more than 2.5 times as much as the previous record holder (Long March 3B) and nearly as equal as the most powerful rocket in the world at that time (Delta IV Heavy). Due to its unprecedented capability, the Long March 5 was expected as the keystone for the Chinese space program in the early 21st century. However, after a successful maiden flight in late 2016, the second launch of the Long March 5 on July 2, 2017 suffered a failure, which was considered as the biggest setback for Chinese space program in nearly two decades. Because of the failure, the Long March 5 was grounded indefinitely until the problem was located and resolved, and multiple planned major space missions were either postponed or facing the risk of being postponed in the next few years.

Despite the uncertain future of Long March 5, China managed to make history in space explorations with existing hardware in the next two years. Due to tidal locking, the Moon has been orbiting the Earth as the only natural satellite by facing it with the same side. Humans had never seen the far side of the Moon until the Space Age. Although humans have already got quite an amount of knowledge about the overall condition of the far side of the Moon in early 21st century with the help of numerous visits by lunar orbiters since the 1960s, no country had ever explored the area in close distance due to lack of communications on the far side. This missing piece was eventually filled by China&#x27;s &quot;Chang&#x27;e-4&quot; () mission in 2019. To solve the communications problem, China launched &quot;Queqiao&quot; (), a relay satellite orbiting around the Earth–Moon L2 Lagrangian point, in May 2018 to enable communications between the far side of the Moon and the Earth. On December 8, 2018, the Chang&#x27;e 4, which was originally built as the backup of Chang&#x27;e 3, was launched by a Long March 3B rocket from Xichang and entered lunar orbit on December 12. On January 3, 2019, Chang&#x27;e 4 successfully soft-landed at the Von Kármán (lunar crater) on the far side of the Moon, and returned the first close-up image of the lunar surface on the far side. A rover named &quot;Yutu-2&quot; () was deployed onto the lunar surface a few hours later, leaving the first trial on the far side. The accomplishment of a series of tasks by Chang&#x27;e-4 made China the first country to successfully achieved soft-landing and roving on the far side of the Moon. Because of its great success, the project team received IAF World Space Award of 2020.

Aside from Chang&#x27;e 4, there were some other events worth noting during this period. In August 2016, China launched world&#x27;s first quantum communications satellite &quot;Mozi&quot; (). In June 2017, the first Chinese X-ray astronomy satellite named &quot;Huiyan&quot; () was launched into space. In August of the same year, the Astronaut Center of China organized a joint training in which sixteen Chinese and two ESA astronauts participated. It was the first time that foreign astronauts took part in astronaut training organized by China. In 2018, China performed more orbital launches than any other countries on the planet for the first time in history. On June 5, 2019, China conducted its first Sea Launch with Long March 11 () in the Yellow Sea. On July 25, Chinese company i-Space became the first Chinese private company to successfully conduct an orbital launch with its Hyperbola-1 small solid rocket.

As the 2010s came to an end, the Chinese space program was poised to conclude the decade with an inspiring event. On December 27, 2019, after a grounding and fixture that lasted for 908 days, the Long March 5 rocket conducted a highly anticipated return-to-flight mission from Wenchang. The mission ended in full success by placing &quot;Shijian-20&quot;, the heaviest satellite China had ever built, into the intended supersynchronous orbit. The flawless return of Long March 5 swept away all the depressions brought by its last failure since 2017. With its great power, the Long March 5 cleared the paths to multiple world-class space projects, allowing China to make great strides toward its ambitions in the coming 2020s.

===2020-present===


Being the product of latest technology and engineering by Chinese space industry in the early 21st century, the flight-proven Long March 5 unleashed the potential of Chinese space program to a great extent. Various projects previously restricted by the mass and size limits of the payloads were now offered a chance of realization. Ever since 2020, with the help of Long March 5, the Chinese space program has made tremendous progress in multiple areas by completing some of the most challenging missions ever conducted in history of space explorations, impressing the world like never before.

The &quot;Third Step&quot; of China Manned Space Program kicked off in 2020. Long March 5B, a variant of Long March 5, conducted its maiden flight successfully on May 5, 2020. Its high payload capacity and large payload fairing space enabled the delivery of Chinese space station modules to low Earth orbit. On April 29, 2021, &quot;Tianhe&quot; core module (), the 22-tonne core module of the space station, was successfully launched into Low Earth orbit by a Long March 5B rocket, marking the beginning of the construction of the China Space Station, also known as &quot;Tiangong&quot; (), followed by unprecedented high frequency of human spaceflight missions. A month later, China launched Tianzhou-2, the first cargo mission to the space station. On June 17, Shenzhou-12, the first crewed mission to the Chinese Space Station consisting of Nie Haisheng, Liu Boming and Tang Hongbo, was launched from Jiuquan. The crew docked with Tianhe and entered the core module about 9 hours after launch, becoming the first residents of the station. The crew lived and worked on the space station for three months, conducted two spacewalks, and returned to Earth safely on September 17, 2021. breaking the record of longest Chinese human spaceflight mission (33 days) previously made by Shenzhou-11. Roughly a month later, the Shenzhou-13 crewed was launched to the station. Astronauts Zhai Zhigang, Wang Yaping and Ye Guangfu completed the first long-duration spaceflight mission of China that lasted for over 180 days before returning to Earth safely on April 16, 2022. Astronaut Wang Yaping became the first Chinese female to perform a spacewalk during the mission.

Starting from May 2022, the China Manned Space Program had entered the space station assembly and construction phase. On June 5, 2022, Shenzhou-13 was launched and docked to Tianhe core module. The crew, including Chen Dong, Liu Yang and Cai Xuzhe, were expected to welcome the arrival of two space station modules during the six-month mission. On July 24, the third Long March 5B rocket lifted off from Wenchang, carrying the 23.2 t &quot;Wentian&quot; laboratory module (), the largest and heaviest spacecraft ever built and launched by China, into orbit. The module docked with the space station less than 20 hours later, adding the second module and the first laboratory module to it. On September 30, the new Wentian module was rotated from the forward docking port to starboard parking port. On October 31, the &quot;Mengtian&quot; laboratory module (), the third and final module of China Space Station, was launched by another Long March 5B rocket into orbit and docked with the space station in less than 13 hours later. On November 3, the &#x27;T-shape&#x27; China Space Station was completed after the successful transposition of the Mengtian module. On November 29, Shenzhou-15 was launched and later docked with China Space Station. Astronauts Fei Junlong, Deng Qingming, and Zhang Lu were welcomed by the Shenzhou-14 crew on board the station, completing the first crew gathering and handover in space by Chinese astronauts and starting the era of continuous Chinese astronaut presence in space.
The third phase of Chinese Lunar Exploration Program was also allowed to proceed in 2020. As preparation, China conducted Chang&#x27;e 5-T1 mission in 2014. By completing its main task on November 1, 2014, China demonstrated the capability of returning a spacecraft from the lunar orbit back to Earth safely, paving the way for the lunar sample return mission to be conducted in 2017. However, the failure of the second Long March 5 mission disrupted the original plan. Despite the readiness of the spacecraft, the mission had to be postponed due to the unavailability of its launch vehicle, until the successful return-to-flight of Long March 5 in late 2019. On November 24, 2020, the sample return mission, entitled Chang&#x27;e-5 (), kicked off as the Long March 5 rocket launched the 8.2 t spacecraft stack into space. The spacecraft entered lunar orbit on November 28, followed by a separation of the stack into two parts. The lander landed near Mons Rümker in Oceanus Procellarum on December 1 and started the sample collection process the next day. Two days after the landing, on December 3, the ascent vehicle attached to the lander took off from lunar surface and entered lunar orbit, carrying the container with collected samples. This was the first time that China launched a spacecraft from an extraterrestrial body. On December 6, the ascent vehicle successfully docked with the orbiter in lunar orbit and transferred the sample container to the return capsule, accomplishing the first robotic rendezvous and docking in lunar orbit in history. On December 13, the orbiter, along with the return module, entered the orbit back to Earth after main engine burns. The return capsule eventually landed intact in Inner Mongolia on December 17, sealing the perfect completion of the mission.
On December 19, 2020, CNSA hosted the Chang&#x27;e-5 lunar sample handover ceremony in Beijing. By weighing the sample container taken out from the return capsule, CNSA announced that Chang&#x27;e-5 retrieved 1,731 grams of samples from the Moon. Being the most complex mission completed by China at the time, the Chang&#x27;e-5 mission achieved multiple remarkable milestones, including China&#x27;s first lunar sampling, first liftoff from an extraterrestrial body, first automated rendezvous and docking in lunar orbit (by any nation) and the first spacecraft carrying samples to re-enter Earth&#x27;s atmosphere at high speed. Its success also marked the completion of the goal of &quot;Orbiting, Landing, Returning&quot; planned by CLEP since 2004.
Prior to the launch of Chang&#x27;e-5, which targeted the Moon 380,000 km away from the Earth, China&#x27;s first Mars probe had departed, heading to the Mars 400 million kilometers away. Ever since the approval of the Mars mission in 2016, China had developed various technologies required, including deep space network, atmospheric entry, lander hovering and obstacle avoidance. Long March 5, the only launch vehicle capable of delivering the spacecraft, was back to service after its critical return-to-flight in December 2019. As a result, all things were ready when the launch windows of July 2020 arrived. On April 24, 2020, CNSA officially announced the program of Planetary Exploration of China and named China&#x27;s first independent Mars mission as &quot;Tianwen-1&quot; (). On July 23, 2020, Tianwen-1 was successfully launched atop a Long March 5 rocket into Trans-Mars injection orbit. The spacecraft, consisting of an orbiter, a lander, and a rover, aimed to achieve the goals of orbiting, landing, and roving on Mars in one single mission on the nation&#x27;s first attempt. Due to its highly complex and risky nature, the mission was widely described as &quot;ambitious&quot; by international observers.

After a seven-month journey, on February 10, 2021, Tianwen-1 entered Mars orbit and became China&#x27;s first operational Mars probe. The payloads on the orbiter were subsequently activated and started surveying Mars in preparation for the landing. In the following few months, CNSA released a series of images captured by the orbiter. On April 24, CNSA announced that the first Chinese Mars rover carried by Tianwen-1 probe had been named &quot;Zhurong&quot;, the god of fire in ancient Chinese mythology.

On May 15, 2020, around 1 am (Beijing time), Tianwen-1 initiated its landing process by igniting its main engines and lowering its orbit, followed by the separation of landing module at 4 am. The orbiter then returned to the parking orbit while the lander moved toward Mars atmosphere. Three hours later, the landing experienced the most dangerous atmospheric entry process that lasted for nine minutes. At 7:18 am, the lander successfully landed on the preselected southern Utopia Planitia. On May 25, the &quot;Zhurong&quot; rover drove onto the Martian surface from the lander. On June 11, CNSA released the first batch of high-resolution images of landing sites captured by &quot;Zhurong&quot; rovers, marking the success of the Mars landing mission. Being China&#x27;s first independent Mars mission, Tianwen-1 completed the daunting process involving the orbiting, landing, and roving in highly sophisticated manner on one single attempt, making China the second nation to land and drive a Mars rover on the Martian surface after the United States. It drew the attention of the world as another example of China&#x27;s rapidly expanding presence in outer space. Because of its huge difficulty and inspiring success, the Tianwen-1 development team received IAF World Space Award of 2022. It was the second time that a Chinese team awarded with this honor after the Chang&#x27;e-4 mission in 2019.

On 13 March, China attempted to launch two spacecrafts, DRO-A and DRO-B, into distant retrograde orbit around the Moon. As an independent project, the mission was managed by Chinese Academy of Sciences instead of Chinese Lunar Exploration Program. However, the mission failed to reach the strived for orbit due to an upper stage malfunction, remaining stranded in low Earth orbit. Rescue attempts had been made as its orbit had been observed being significantly raised to a highly elliptical orbit since its launch, yet the following status remains unknown to the public. They appear to have succeeded in reaching their desired orbit.

On 20 March 2024 China launched its relay satellite, Queqiao-2, in the orbit of the Moon, along with two mini satellites Tiandu 1 and 2. Queqiao-2 will relay communications for the Chang&#x27;e 6 (far side of the Moon), Chang&#x27;e 7 and Chang&#x27;e 8 (Lunar south pole region) spacecrafts. Tiandu 1 and 2 will test technologies for a future lunar navigation and positioning constellation. All the three probes entered lunar orbit successfully on 24 March 2024 (Tiandu-1 and 2 were attached to each other and separated in lunar orbit on 3 April 2024).

China sent Chang&#x27;e 6 on 3 May 2024, which conducted the first lunar sample return from Apollo Basin on the far side of the Moon. This is China&#x27;s second lunar sample return mission, the first was achieved by Chang&#x27;e 5 from the lunar near side four years earlier. It also carried the Chinese &quot;Jinchan&quot; rover to conduct infrared spectroscopy of lunar surface and imaged Chang&#x27;e 6 lander on lunar surface. The lander-ascender-rover combination was separated with the orbiter and returner before landing on 1 June 2024 at 22:23 UTC. It landed on the Moon&#x27;s surface on 1 June 2024. The ascender was launched back to lunar orbit on 3 June 2024 at 23:38 UTC, carrying samples collected by the lander, and later completed another robotic rendezvous and docking in lunar orbit. The sample container was then transferred to the returner, which landed in Inner Mongolia on 25 June 2024, completing China&#x27;s far side extraterrestrial sample return mission. After dropping off the return samples for Earth, the Chang&#x27;e 6 (CE-6) orbiter was successfully captured by the Sun-Earth L2 Lagrange point on 9 September 2024.
====Near future development====
According to a 2022 government white paper, China will conduct more human spaceflight, lunar and planetary exploration missions, including:
* Xuntian Space Telescope launch.
* Chang&#x27;e-7 mission to perform a precise landing in the Moon&#x27;s polar region that includes a &quot;hopping detector&quot; to explore permanently-shadowed areas.
* Chang&#x27;e-8 lunar polar mission to test in-situ resource utilization and establish the predicate for the International Lunar Research Station.
* Tianwen-2 mission to sample near-Earth asteroids and probe main-belt comets.
* Tianwen-3 mission using two launches to return samples from Mars.
* Tianwen-4 mission to explore the Jupiter system and Callisto; a probe to fly-by Uranus will be attached to the Jupiter probe.

In addition to these, China has also initiated the crewed lunar landing phase of its lunar exploration program, which aims to land Chinese astronauts on the Moon by 2030. A new crewed carrier rocket (Long March 10), new generation crew spacecraft, crewed lunar lander, lunar EVA spacesuit, lunar rover and other equipment are under development.

==Chinese space program and the international community==

=== Belt and Road Initiative ===
One of China&#x27;s priorities in its Belt and Road Initiative is to improve satellite information pathways.

=== Bilateral space cooperation ===
China is an attractive partner for space cooperation for other developing countries because it launches their satellites at a reduced cost and often provides financing in the form of policy loans.

With respect to the African countries, the 2022-2024 action plan for the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation commits China to using space technology to enhance cooperation with African countries and to create centers for Africa-China cooperation on satellite remote sensing application. African countries are increasingly cooperating with China on satellite launches and specialized training. As of 2022, China has launched two satellites for Ethiopia, two for Nigeria, one for Algeria, one for Sudan, and one for Egypt.

China and Namibia jointly operate the China Telemetry, Tracking, and Command Station which was established in 2001 in Swakopmund, Namibia. This station tracks Chinese satellites and space missions.

China and Brazil have successfully cooperated in the field of space. Among the most successful space cooperation projects were the development and launch of earth monitoring satellites. As of 2023, the two countries have jointly developed six China-Brazil Earth Resource Satellites. These projects have helped both Brazil and China develop their access to satellite imagery and promoted remote sending research. Brazil and China&#x27;s cooperation is a unique example of South-South cooperation between two developing countries in the field of space.

===Dual-use technologies and outer space===
The PRC is a member of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and a signatory to all United Nations treaties and conventions on space, with the exception of the 1979 Moon Treaty. The United States government has long been resistant to the use of PRC launch services by American industry due to concerns over alleged civilian technology transfer that could have dual-use military applications to countries such as North Korea, Iran or Syria. Thus, financial retaliatory measures have been taken on many occasions against several Chinese space companies.

=== NASA&#x27;s policy excluding Chinese state affiliates ===

The Cox Report, released in 1999, alleged that following decades of intelligence operations against U.S. weapons laboratories conducted by the Ministry of State Security, China stole design information regarding advanced thermonuclear weapons. In 2011, Congress passed a law prohibiting NASA researchers from working with Chinese citizens affiliated with a Chinese state enterprise or entity without FBI certification or using NASA funds to host Chinese visitors. In March 2013, the U.S. Congress passed legislation barring Chinese nationals from entering NASA facilities without a waiver from NASA.

The history of the U.S. exclusion policy can be traced back to the Cox Report&#x27;s allegations that the technical information that American companies provided China for its commercial satellite ended up improving Chinese intercontinental ballistic missile technology. This was further aggravated in 2007 when China blew up a defunct meteorological satellite in low Earth orbit to test a ground-based anti-satellite (ASAT) missile. The debris created by the explosion contributed to the space junk that litter Earth&#x27;s orbit, exposing other nations&#x27; space assets to the risk of accidental collision. The United States also fears the Chinese application of dual-use space technology for nefarious purposes.

The Chinese response to the exclusion policy involved its own space policy of opening up its space station to the outside world, welcoming scientists coming from all countries. American scientists have also boycotted NASA conferences due to its rejection of Chinese nationals in these events.

==Organization==
Initially, the space program of the PRC was organized under the People&#x27;s Liberation Army, particularly the Second Artillery Corps (now the PLA Rocket Force, PLARF). In the 1990s, the PRC reorganized the space program as part of a general reorganization of the defense industry to make it resemble Western defense procurement.

The China National Space Administration, an agency within the  State Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense, is now responsible for launches. The Long March rocket is produced by the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology, and satellites are produced by the China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation. The latter organizations are state-owned enterprises; however, it is the intent of the PRC government that they should not be actively state-managed and that they should behave as independent design bureaus.

===Universities and institutes===
The space program also has close links with:
* College of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology
* School of Astronautics, Beihang University
* School of Aerospace, Tsinghua University
* School of Astronautics, Northwestern Polytechnical University
* School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Zhejiang University
* Institute of Aerospace Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiaotong University
* College of Aeronautics, Harbin Institute of Technology
* School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University

===Space cities===
*Dongfeng Space City (), also known as &quot;Base 20&quot; () or &quot;Dongfeng base&quot; ()
*Beijing Space City ()
*Wenchang Space City ()
*Shanghai Space City ()
*Yantai Space City ()
*Guizhou Aerospace Industrial Park (), also known as &quot;Base 061&quot; (), founded in 2002 after approval of &quot;Project 863&quot; for industrialization of aerospace research centers ().

===Suborbital launch sites===
*Nanhui () First successful launch of a T-7M sounding rocket on February 19, 1960.
*Base 603 () Also known as &quot;Guangde Launch Site&quot; (). The first successful flight of a biological experimental sounding rocket transporting eight white mice was launched and recovered on July 19, 1964.

=== Satellite launch centers ===
The PRC has 6 satellite launch centers/sites:
* Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center (JSLC)
* Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center (TSLC)
* Xichang Satellite Launch Center (XSLC)
* Wenchang Spacecraft Launch Site (administered by Xichang SLC)
* Wenchang Commercial Space Launch Site (administered by HICAL)
* Haiyang Oriental Aerospace Port (administered by Taiyuan SLC)

===Monitoring and control centers===
*Beijing Aerospace Command and Control Center (BACCC)
*Xi&#x27;an Satellite Control Center (XSCC) also known as &quot;Base 26&quot;()
*Fleet of six Yuanwang-class space tracking ships.
*Data relay satellite () Tianlian I (), specially developed to decrease the communication time between the Shenzhou 7 spaceship and the ground; it will also improve the amount of data that can be transferred. The current orbit coverage of 12 percent will thus be increased to a total of about 60 percent.
*Deep Space Tracking Network composed with radio antennas in Beijing, Shanghai, Kunming and Ürümqi, forming a 3000 km VLBI ().

====Domestic tracking stations====
*New integrated land-based space monitoring and control network stations, forming a large triangle with Kashi in the north-west of China, Jiamusi in the north-east and Sanya in the south.
*Weinan Station
*Changchun Station
*Qingdao Station
*Zhanyi Station
*Nanhai Station
*Tianshan Station
*Xiamen Station
*Lushan Station
*Jiamusi Station
*Dongfeng Station
*Hetian Station

====Overseas tracking stations====
* Tarawa Station, Kiribati
* Malindi Station, Kenya
* Swakopmund tracking station, Namibia
* China Satellite Launch and Tracking Control General tracking hub at Espacio Lejano Station in Neuquén Province, Argentina. 

Plus shared space tracking facilities with France, Brazil, Sweden, and Australia.

===Crewed landing sites===
*Siziwang Banner

==Notable spaceflight programs==

===Project 714===
As the Space Race between the two superpowers reached its climax with humans landing on the Moon, Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai decided on July 14, 1967, that the PRC should not be left behind, and therefore initiated China&#x27;s own crewed space program. The top-secret Project 714 aimed to put two people into space by 1973 with the Shuguang spacecraft. Nineteen PLAAF pilots were selected for this goal in March 1971. The Shuguang-1 spacecraft to be launched with the CZ-2A rocket was designed to carry a crew of two. The program was officially cancelled on May 13, 1972, for economic reasons, though the internal politics of the Cultural Revolution likely motivated the closure.

The short-lived second crewed program was based on the successful implementation of landing technology (third in the World after USSR and United States) by FSW satellites. It was announced a few times in 1978 with the open publishing of some details including photos, but then was abruptly canceled in 1980. It has been argued that the second crewed program was created solely for propaganda purposes, and was never intended to produce results.

===Project 863===
A new crewed space program was proposed by the Chinese Academy of Sciences in March 1986, as &quot;Astronautics plan 863-2&quot;. This consisted of a crewed spacecraft (Project 863–204) used to ferry astronaut crews to a space station (Project 863–205). In September of that year, astronauts in training were presented by the Chinese media. The various proposed crewed spacecraft were mostly spaceplanes. Project 863 ultimately evolved into the 1992 &quot;Project 921&quot;.

===China Manned Space Program (Project 921)===
====Spacecraft====

In 1992, authorization and funding were given for the first phase of Project 921, which was a plan to launch a crewed spacecraft. The Shenzhou program had four uncrewed test flights and two crewed missions. The first one was Shenzhou 1 on November 20, 1999. On January 9, 2001 Shenzhou 2 launched carrying test animals. Shenzhou 3 and Shenzhou 4 were launched in 2002, carrying test dummies. Following these was the successful Shenzhou 5, China&#x27;s first crewed mission in space on October 15, 2003, which carried Yang Liwei in orbit for 21 hours and made China the third nation to launch a human into orbit. Shenzhou 6 followed two years later ending the first phase of Project 921. Missions are launched on the Long March 2F rocket from the Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center. The China Manned Space Agency (CMSA) of the Equipment Development Department of the Central Military Commission provides engineering and administrative support for the crewed Shenzhou missions.

====Space laboratory====

The second phase of the Project 921 started with Shenzhou 7, China&#x27;s first spacewalk mission. Then, two crewed missions were planned to the first Chinese space laboratory. The PRC initially designed the Shenzhou spacecraft with docking technologies imported from Russia, therefore compatible with the International Space Station (ISS). On September 29, 2011, China launched Tiangong 1. This target module is intended to be the first step to testing the technology required for a planned space station.

On October 31, 2011, a Long March 2F rocket lifted the Shenzhou 8 uncrewed spacecraft which docked twice with the Tiangong 1 module. The Shenzhou 9 craft took off on 16 June 2012 with a crew of 3. It successfully docked with the Tiangong-1 laboratory on 18 June 2012, at 06:07 UTC, marking China&#x27;s first crewed spacecraft docking. Another crewed mission, Shenzhou 10, launched on 11 June 2013. The Tiangong 1 target module is then expected to be deorbited.

A second space lab, Tiangong 2, launched on 15 September 2016, 22:04:09 (UTC+8). The launch mass was 8,600 kg, with a length of 10.4m and a width of 3.35m, much like the Tiangong 1. Shenzhou 11 launched and rendezvoused with Tiangong 2 in October 2016, with an unconfirmed further mission Shenzhou 12 in the future. The Tiangong 2 brings with it the POLAR gamma ray burst detector, a space-Earth quantum key distribution, and laser communications experiment to be used in conjunction with the Mozi &#x27;Quantum Science Satellite&#x27;, a liquid bridge thermocapillary convection experiment, and a space material experiment. Also included is a stereoscopic microwave altimeter, a space plant growth experiment, and a multi-angle wide-spectral imager and multi-spectral limb imaging spectrometer. Onboard TG-2 there will also be the world&#x27;s first-ever in-space cold atomic fountain clock.

====Space station====
A larger basic permanent space station (基本型空间站) would be the third and last phase of Project 921. This will be a modular design with an eventual weight of around 60 tons, to be completed sometime before 2022. The first section, designated Tiangong 3, was scheduled for launch after Tiangong 2, but ultimately not ordered after its goals were merged with Tiangong 2.

This could also be the beginning of China&#x27;s crewed international cooperation, the existence of which was officially disclosed for the first time after the launch of Shenzhou 7.

The first module of Tiangong space station, &quot;Tianhe&quot; core module, was launched on 29 April 2021, from Wenchang Space Launch Site. It was first visited by Shenzhou 12 crew on 17 June 2021. The Chinese space station is scheduled to be completed in 2022 and fully operational by 2023.

===Lunar exploration===


In January 2004, the PRC formally started the implementation phase of its uncrewed Moon exploration project. According to Sun Laiyan, administrator of the China National Space Administration, the project will involve three phases: orbiting the Moon; landing; and returning samples.

On December 14, 2005, it was reported &quot;an effort to launch lunar orbiting satellites will be supplanted in 2007 by a program aimed at accomplishing an uncrewed lunar landing. A program to return uncrewed space vehicles from the Moon will begin in 2012 and last for five years, until the crewed program gets underway&quot; in 2017, with a crewed Moon landing planned after that.

The decision to develop a new Moon rocket in the 1962 Soviet UR-700M-class (Project Aelita) able to launch a 500-ton payload in LTO and a more modest 50 tons LTO payload LV has been discussed in a 2006 conference by academician Zhang Guitian (), a liquid propellant rocket engine specialist, who developed the CZ-2 and CZ-4A rockets engines.

On June 22, 2006, Long Lehao, deputy chief architect of the lunar probe project, laid out a schedule for China&#x27;s lunar exploration. He set 2024 as the date of China&#x27;s first moonwalk.

In September 2010, it was announced that the country is planning to carry out explorations in deep space by sending a man to the Moon by 2025. China also hoped to bring a Moon rock sample back to Earth in 2017, and subsequently build an observatory on the Moon&#x27;s surface. Ye Peijian, Commander in Chief of the Chang&#x27;e program and an academic at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, added that China has the &quot;full capacity to accomplish Mars exploration by 2013.&quot;

On December 14, 2013 China&#x27;s Chang&#x27;e 3 became the first object to soft-land on the Moon since Luna 24 in 1976.

On 20 May 2018, several months before the Chang&#x27;e 4 mission, the Queqiao was launched from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China, on a Long March 4C rocket. The spacecraft took 24 days to reach L2, using a gravity assist at the Moon to save propellant. On 14 June 2018, Queqiao finished its final adjustment burn and entered the mission orbit, about from the Moon. This is the first lunar relay satellite ever placed in this location.

On January 3, 2019, Chang&#x27;e 4, the China National Space Administration&#x27;s lunar rover, made the first-ever soft landing on the Moon&#x27;s far side. The rover was able to transmit data back to Earth despite the lack of radio frequencies on the far side, via a dedicated satellite sent earlier to orbit the Moon. Landing and data transmission are considered landmark achievements for human space exploration.

Yang Liwei declared at the 16th Human in Space Symposium of International Academy of Astronautics (IAA) in Beijing, on May 22, 2007, that building a lunar base was a crucial step to realize a flight to Mars and farther planets.

According to practice, since the whole project is only at a very early preparatory research phase, no official crewed Moon program has been announced yet by the authorities. But its existence is nonetheless revealed by regular intentional leaks in the media. A typical example is the Lunar Roving Vehicle () that was shown on a Chinese TV channel () during the 2008 May Day celebrations.

On 23 November 2020, China launched the new Moon mission Chang&#x27;e 5, which returned to Earth carrying lunar samples on 16 December 2020. Only two nations, the United States and the former Soviet Union have ever returned materials from the Moon, thus making China the third country to have ever achieved the feat.

China sent Chang&#x27;e 6 on 3 May, which conducted the first lunar sample return from the far side of the Moon. This is China&#x27;s second lunar sample return mission, the first was achieved by Chang&#x27;e 5 from the lunar near side 4 years ago.

===Mission to Mars and beyond===

In 2006, the Chief Designer of the Shenzhou spacecraft stated in an interview that:

Sun Laiyan, administrator of the China National Space Administration, said on July 20, 2006, that China would start deep space exploration focusing on Mars over the next five years, during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan (2006–2010) Program period. In April 2020, the Planetary Exploration of China program was announced. The program aims to explore planets of the Solar System, starting with Mars, then expanded to include asteroids and comets, Jupiter and more in the future.

The first mission of the program, Tianwen-1 Mars exploration mission, began on July 23, 2020. A spacecraft, which consisted of an orbiter, a lander, a rover, a remote and a deployable camera, was launched by a Long March 5 rocket from Wenchang. The Tianwen-1 was inserted into Mars orbit in February 2021 after a seven-month journey, followed by a successful soft landing of the lander and Zhurong rover on May 14, 2021.

=== Space-based solar power ===
According to the China Academy of Space Technology (CAST) presentation at the 2015 International Space Development Congress in Toronto, Canada, Chinese interest in space-based solar power began in the period 1990–1995. By 2013, there was a national goal, that &quot;the state has decided that power coming from outside of the earth, such as solar power and development of other space energy resources, is to be China&#x27;s future direction&quot; and the following roadmap was identified: &quot;In 2010, CAST will finish the concept design; in 2020, we will finish the industrial level testing of in-orbit construction and wireless transmissions. In 2025, we will complete the first 100kW SPS demonstration at LEO; and in 2035, the 100MW SPS will have an electric generating capacity. Finally in 2050, the first commercial level SPS system will be in operation at GEO.&quot; The article went on to state that &quot;Since SPS development will be a huge project, it will be considered the equivalent of an Apollo program for energy. In the last century, America&#x27;s leading position in science and technology worldwide was inextricably linked with technological advances associated with the implementation of the Apollo program. Likewise, as China&#x27;s current achievements in aerospace technology are built upon with its successive generations of satellite projects in space, China will use its capabilities in space science to assure sustainable development of energy from space.&quot;

In 2015, the CAST team won the International SunSat Design Competition with their video of a Multi-Rotary Joint concept. The design was presented in detail in a paper for the Online Journal of Space Communication.

In 2016, Lt Gen. Zhang Yulin, deputy chief of the PLA armament development department of the Central Military Commission, suggested that China would next begin to exploit Earth-Moon space for industrial development. The goal would be the construction of space-based solar power satellites that would beam energy back to Earth.

In June 2021, Chinese officials confirmed the continuation of plans for a geostationary solar power station by 2050. The updated schedule anticipates a small-scale electricity generation test in 2022, followed by a megawatt-level orbital power station by 2030. The gigawatt-level geostationary station will require over 10,000 tonnes of infrastructure, delivered using over 100 Long March 9 launches.

==List of launchers and projects==

===Launch vehicles===

==== Active/under research ====
* Air-Launched SLV able to place a 50 kilogram plus payload to 500 km SSO
* Ceres-1 small-lift solid-fueled launch vehicle from private firm (relatively high launch cadence)
* Gravity-1 medium-lift sea-launched solid fuel launch vehicle under development 
* Hyperbola-1 small-lift solid-fueled launch vehicle from private firm
* Hyperbola-3 medium-lift liquid-fueled (methalox) launch vehicle with reusable first stage (VTVL) from private firm currently under development
* Jielong 3 small to medium-lift solid fueled launch vehicle currently in service
*Kaituozhe-1A ()
* Kuaizhou quick-reaction small-lift solid fuel launch vehicle
* Lijian-1 small to medium-lift solid fuel launch vehicle currently in service (by the commercial spin-off of the Chinese Academy of Sciences)
* Lijian-2 medium-lift launch vehicle utilizing liquid fuel (kerolox) with reusable first stage under development
* CZ-2E(A) Intended for launch of Chinese space station modules. Payload capacity up to 14 tons in LEO and 9000 (kN) liftoff thrust developed by 12 rocket engines, with enlarged fairing of 5.20 m in diameter and length of 12.39 m to accommodate large spacecraft
* CZ-2F/G Modified CZ-2F without escape tower, specially used for launching robotic missions such as Shenzhou cargo and space laboratory module with payload capacity up to 11.2 tons in LEO
* CZ-3B(A) More powerful Long March rockets using larger-size liquid propellant strap-on motors, with payload capacity up to 13 tons in LEO
* CZ-3C Launch vehicle combining CZ-3B core with two boosters from CZ-2E
* Long March 4C
* CZ-5 heavy-lift hydrolox launch vehicle (with kerolox boosters)
* CZ-5B variant of the CZ-5 for low Earth orbit payloads (up to 25 tonnes to LEO)
* CZ-6 or Small Launch Vehicle; small-lift kerolox LV with short launch preparation period, low cost and high reliability, to meet the launch need of small satellites up to 500 kg to 700 km SSO, first flight for 2010; with Fan Ruixiang () as Chief designer of the project
* CZ-7 medium-lift kerolox launch vehicle for launching resupply missions to the Tiangong space station
* CZ-8 medium-lift launch vehicle mainly for launching payloads to SSO orbits
* CZ-9 super heavy-lift launch vehicle with a LEO lift capability of 150 tonnes currently under development (planned to be fully reusable in time)
* CZ-10 crew-rated super-heavy launch vehicle for crewed lunar missions under development
* CZ-10A crew-rated medium-lift launch vehicle for launching the next-generation crewed spacecraft to LEOs with reusable first stage currently under development
* CZ-11 small-lift solid fuel quick-response launch vehicle
* Pallas-1 reusable (1st stage) medium-lift liquid fuel (kerolox) launch vehicle by private firm currently under development
* Project 921-3 Reusable launch vehicle current project of the reusable shuttle system.
* Tengyun another current project of two wing-staged reusable shuttle system
* Reusable spaceplane reusable vertically-launched spaceplane with wings that lands on a runway and currently in service (speculated to be similar to the US X-37B in form and function)
* Tianlong 2 medium-lift kerolox launch vehicle from private firm (in service)
* Tianlong 3 medium to heavy-lift kerolox launch vehicle with reusable first stage from private firm currently under development
* Zhuque-2 medium-lift liquid fuel (methalox) launch vehicle by private firm currently in service (first methane fueled rocket in the world to reach space and to reach orbit with payload)
* Zhuque-3 medium to heavy-lift methalox launch vehicle by private firm with reusable first stage currently under development

==== Cancelled/retired ====

* CZ-1D based on a CZ-1 but with a new N2O4/UDMH second stage.
* Project 869 reusable shuttle system with Tianjiao-1 or Chang Cheng-1 (Great Wall-1) orbiters. Project of 1980s-1990s.

===Satellites and science mission===
*Space-Based ASAT System small and nano-satellites developed by the Small Satellite Research Institute of the Chinese Academy of Space Technology.
* The Double Star Mission comprised two satellites launched in 2003 and 2004, jointly with ESA, to study the Earth&#x27;s magnetosphere.
* Earth observation, remote sensing or reconnaissance satellites series: CBERS, Dongfanghong program, Fanhui Shi Weixing, Yaogan and Ziyuan 3.
* Tianlian I telecommunication satellite
* Tianlian II () Next generation data relay satellite (DRS) system, based on the DFH-4 satellite bus, with two satellites providing up to 85% coverage.
* Beidou navigation system or Compass Navigation Satellite System, composed of 60 to 70 satellites, during the &quot;Eleventh Five-Year Plan&quot; period (2006–2010).
* Astrophysics research, with the launch of the world&#x27;s largest Solar Space Telescope in 2008, and &quot;Project 973&quot; Space Hard X-Ray Modulation Telescope () by 2010.
* Chinese Deep Space Network with the completion of the FAST, the world&#x27;s largest single dish radio antenna of 500 m in Guizhou, and a 3000 km VLBI radio antenna.
* A &quot;Deep Impact&quot;-style mission to test process of re-directing the direction of an asteroid or comet.

===Space exploration===
==== Crewed LEO Program ====
* Project 921-1 – Shenzhou spacecraft.
* Tiangong - first three crewed Chinese Space Laboratories.
* Project 921-2 – permanent crewed modular Chinese Space Station
* Tianzhou – robotic cargo vessel to resupply the Chinese Space Station, based on the design of Tiangong-1, not meant for reentry, but usable for garbage disposal.
* Next-generation crewed spacecraft () – upgrade version of the Shenzhou spacecraft to resupply the Chinese Space Station and return cargo back to Earth.
* Project 921-11 – X-11 reusable spacecraft for Project 921-2 Space Station.
* Tianjiao-1 or Chang Cheng-1 (Great Wall-1) - winged spaceplane orbiters of Project 869 reusable shuttle system. Project of 1980s-1990s.
* Shenlong - winged spaceplane orbiter of current Project 921-3 reusable shuttle system.
* Tengyun - winged spaceplane orbiter in another current project of two wing-staged reusable shuttle system.
* HTS Maglev Launch Assist Space Shuttle - winged spaceplane orbiter in another current shuttle project.

==== Chinese Lunar Exploration Program ====
* First phase, Chang&#x27;e 1 and Chang&#x27;e 2 – launched in 2007 and 2010
* Second phase, Chang&#x27;e 3 and Chang&#x27;e 4 – launched in 2013 and 2018
* Third phase, Chang&#x27;e 5-T1 (completed in 2014) and Chang&#x27;e 5 – (completed in 2020)
* Fourth phase, Chang&#x27;e 6 (sample-return from lunar far-side in May-June 2024), Chang&#x27;e 7 and Chang&#x27;e 8 – will explore the south pole for natural resources; may 3D-print a structure using regolith. 
* Crewed mission: by the year 2030, – crewed lunar missions employing the next-generation crewed spacecraft and the crewed lunar lander

==== Deep Space Exploration Program ====

China&#x27;s first deep space probe, the Yinghuo-1 orbiter, was launched in November 2011 along with the joint Fobos-Grunt mission with Russia, but the rocket failed to leave Earth orbit and both probes underwent destructive re-entry on 15 January 2012.

In 2018, Chinese researchers proposed a deep space exploration roadmap to explore Mars, an asteroid, Jupiter, and further targets, within the 2020–2030 timeframe. Current and upcoming robotic missions include:
* Chinese Deep Space Network relay satellites, for deep-space communication and exploration support network.
* Tianwen-1, launched on 23 July 2020 with arrival at Mars on 10 February 2021. Mission includes an orbiter, a deployable and remote camera, a lander, and the &quot;Zhurong&quot; rover.
* Tianwen-2, formerly &quot;ZhengHe&quot;, targeted for launch in 2025. Mission goals include asteroid flyby observations, global remote sensing, robotic landing, and sample return. &quot;Tianwen-2&quot; is now in active development.
* Interstellar Express, targeting for launch around 2024–2025 for &quot;Interstellar Heliosphere Probe-1&quot; (IHP-1) and around 2025–2026 for &quot;Interstellar Heliosphere Probe-2&quot; (IHP-2). Mission objectives include exploration of the heliosphere and interstellar space. Also to become the first non-NASA probes to leave the Solar System.
* Mars Sample Return Mission, planned for launch around 2028–2030. Mission goals include in-situ topography and soil composition analysis, deep interior investigations to probe the planet&#x27;s origins and geologic evolution, and sample return. As of December 2019, the plan is for two launches to be conducted during the November 2028 Earth-to-Mars launch window: a sample collection lander with Mars ascent vehicle on a Long March 3B, and an Earth Return Orbiter on a Long March 5, with samples returning to Earth in September 2031. Earlier plans implemented the mission in a single launch using the Long March 9.
* Jupiter System orbiter, mission goals include orbital exploration of Jupiter and its four largest moons (with a focus on Callisto by orbiting this Jovian moon), study of the magnetohydrodynamics in the Jupiter system, and investigation of the internal composition of Jupiter&#x27;s atmosphere and moons,
* A fly-by of Uranus is planned as part of the 2029-2030 Tianwen-4 mission. The Uranus fly-by probe will detach from the Jupiter orbiter while in interplanetary space and proceed to a separate encounter with Uranus during the 2040s.

== See also ==
* Beihang University
* China and weapons of mass destruction
* Two Bombs, One Satellite
* Chinese women in space
* Harbin Institute of Technology
* French space program
* List of human spaceflights to the Tiangong space station

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162304" start="4" end="56" title="Chinese space program" label="space program of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="84" end="95" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="126" end="157" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208440" start="250" end="262" title="Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance and Mutual Assistance" label="newly allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="263" end="275" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="314" end="331" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="336" end="342" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="396" end="401" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="later"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="454" end="463" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q49901" start="477" end="487" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q49678" start="578" end="594" title="Dong Fang Hong 1" label="Dong Fang Hong 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q53698" start="618" end="630" title="Long March 1" label="Long March 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="690" end="695" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q53665" start="805" end="829" title="Long March rocket family" label="Long March rocket family"/>
<link wikidata="Q692677" start="851" end="858" title="Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center" label="Jiuquan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194479" start="860" end="867" title="Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center" label="Taiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q734306" start="869" end="876" title="Xichang Satellite Launch Center" label="Xichang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246624" start="878" end="886" title="Wenchang Spacecraft Launch Site" label="Wenchang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="922" end="989" title="Timeline of spaceflight#Orbital launches by year" label="either the highest or the second highest number of orbital launches"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="1188" end="1203" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="1211" end="1215" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="1220" end="1224" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="1320" end="1337" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q320644" start="1431" end="1466" title="China National Space Administration" label="China National Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075693" start="1482" end="1535" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q28413587" start="1555" end="1570" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Astronaut Corps" label="astronaut corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100436" start="1579" end="1605" title="Chinese Deep Space Network" label="Chinese Deep Space Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143454" start="1630" end="1656" title="China Manned Space Program" label="China Manned Space Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q857141" start="1658" end="1692" title="Beidou" label="BeiDou Navigation Satellite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q860037" start="1694" end="1727" title="Chinese Lunar Exploration Program" label="Chinese Lunar Exploration Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q18669407" start="1729" end="1747" title="Gaofen" label="Gaofen Observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97300910" start="1752" end="1782" title="Planetary Exploration of China" label="Planetary Exploration of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q723045" start="1849" end="1863" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 4" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="1865" end="1879" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346001" start="1881" end="1890" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6" label="Chang’e-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580572" start="1892" end="1901" title="Tianwen-1" label="Tianwen-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100935" start="1906" end="1928" title="Tiangong space station" label="Tiangong space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2220" end="2228" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q333500" start="2239" end="2250" title="Qian Xuesen" label="Qian Xuesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539263" start="2878" end="2890" title="R-2 (missile)" label="R-2 missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3013" end="3025" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="3305" end="3322" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="3412" end="3426" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q692677" start="3458" end="3489" title="Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center" label="Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="3588" end="3597" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q986719" start="3669" end="3721" title="8th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="8th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q579036" start="4037" end="4052" title="sounding rocket" label="sounding rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375756" start="4116" end="4120" title="T-7 (rocket)" label="T-7M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024412" start="4819" end="4829" title="Dongfeng-1" label="Dongfeng-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10891829" start="5494" end="5518" title="Two Bombs, One Satellite" label="Two Bombs, One Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q697175" start="5724" end="5738" title="carrier rocket" label="carrier rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024410" start="5956" end="5966" title="Dongfeng-4" label="Dongfeng-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161829" start="6035" end="6049" title="Multistage rocket" label="rocket staging"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="6078" end="6094" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q53698" start="6129" end="6141" title="Long March 1" label="Long March 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="6276" end="6287" title="Nitric acid" label="Nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161296" start="6288" end="6292" title="UDMH" label="UDMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q10866590" start="6366" end="6377" title="Third Front (China)" label="Third Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165188" start="6596" end="6605" title="work unit" label="work unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q734306" start="6774" end="6805" title="Xichang Satellite Launch Center" label="Xichang Satellite Launch Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194479" start="6820" end="6851" title="Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center" label="Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49678" start="6917" end="6933" title="Dong Fang Hong I" label="Dong Fang Hong I"/>
<link wikidata="Q818918" start="6951" end="6966" title="The East Is Red (song)" label="The East Is Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q53698" start="6977" end="6989" title="Long March 1" label="Long March 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q178733" start="7218" end="7235" title="centrifugal force" label="centrifugal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452851" start="7402" end="7411" title="Shijian" label="ShiJian-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="7441" end="7453" title="magnetometer" label="magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="7458" end="7468" title="cosmic-ray" label="cosmic-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="7469" end="7474" title="x-ray" label="x-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="7558" end="7575" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375756" start="7623" end="7631" title="T-7 Sounding rocket" label="T-7A(S1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q380195" start="7738" end="7746" title="Base 603" label="Base 603"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="7758" end="7768" title="space race" label="space race"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="7855" end="7865" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8093" end="8129" title="China&amp;#x27;s Space Medical Institute" label="China&amp;#x27;s Space Medical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="8171" end="8198" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073938" start="8427" end="8446" title="Shuguang spacecraft" label="Shuguang spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="8766" end="8800" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024415" start="8815" end="8825" title="Dongfeng-5" label="Dongfeng-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906832" start="8991" end="9017" title="medium-lift launch vehicle" label="medium-lift launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q999788" start="9061" end="9071" title="Feng Bao 1" label="Feng Bao 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018970" start="9100" end="9158" title="Shanghai Academy of Spaceflight Technology" label="Shanghai&amp;#x27;s 2nd Bureau of Mechanic-Electrical Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q174706" start="9325" end="9337" title="Long March 2" label="Long March 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099556" start="9471" end="9513" title="China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology" label="China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q382984" start="9556" end="9560" title="dinitrogen tetroxide" label="N2O4"/>
<link wikidata="Q161296" start="9565" end="9569" title="UDMH" label="UDMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981398" start="9883" end="9893" title="Fanhui Shi Weixing-0" label="FSW-0 No.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q53665" start="10251" end="10275" title="Long March rocket family" label="Long March rocket family"/>
<link wikidata="Q224603" start="10528" end="10535" title="Xichang" label="Xichang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="10543" end="10550" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q734306" start="10572" end="10579" title="Xichang Satellite Launch Center" label="Base 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194479" start="10726" end="10733" title="Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center" label="Base 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="10820" end="10833" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="10856" end="10875" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="10879" end="10890" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11112" end="11128" title="Fanji ABM system" label="Fanji ABM system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11134" end="11165" title="Xianfeng Anti-Missile Super Gun" label="Xianfeng Anti-Missile Super Gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11198" end="11217" title="7010 Tracking Radar" label="7010 Tracking Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q858987" start="11330" end="11338" title="Yuanwang" label="Yuanwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q53702" start="11598" end="11611" title="Long March 2C" label="Long March 2C"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="11686" end="11701" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="12006" end="12030" title="communications satellite" label="communications satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q837858" start="12247" end="12263" title="Dong Fang Hong 2" label="Dong Fang Hong 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q986597" start="12338" end="12349" title="Sun Jiadong" label="Sun Jiadong"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="12396" end="12415" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q53734" start="12610" end="12622" title="Long March 3" label="Long March 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138649" start="12796" end="12825" title="geosynchronous transfer orbit" label="geosynchronous transfer orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q622779" start="13122" end="13137" title="liquid hydrogen" label="liquid hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q618153" start="13142" end="13155" title="liquid oxygen" label="liquid oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9029579" start="13281" end="13291" title="Ren Xinmin" label="Ren Xinmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="14063" end="14077" title="elliptic orbit" label="elliptic orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="14086" end="14094" title="apoapsis" label="apoapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="15248" end="15261" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207933" start="15273" end="15287" title="Salyut programme" label="space stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668388" start="15459" end="15470" title="Project 863" label="Project 863"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914417" start="15512" end="15523" title="Wang Daheng" label="Wang Daheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q709878" start="15525" end="15538" title="Wang Ganchang" label="Wang Ganchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11100487" start="15540" end="15551" title="Yang Jiachi" label="Yang Jiachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024477" start="15557" end="15569" title="Chen Fangyun" label="Chen Fangyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q53665" start="15929" end="15946" title="Long March rocket" label="Long March rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777589" start="16169" end="16206" title="China Great Wall Industry Corporation" label="China Great Wall Industry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q726812" start="16343" end="16350" title="AsiaSat" label="AsiaSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14907172" start="16377" end="16386" title="AsiaSat 1" label="AsiaSat 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="16431" end="16437" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567455" start="16478" end="16484" title="Westar" label="Westar"/>
<link wikidata="Q703042" start="16575" end="16583" title="STS-51-A" label="STS-51-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q53708" start="17202" end="17215" title="Long March 2E" label="Long March 2E"/>
<link wikidata="Q15943633" start="17432" end="17448" title="Optus (satellite)" label="Optus satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777589" start="19062" end="19089" title="China Aerospace Corporation" label="China Aerospace Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q320644" start="19147" end="19182" title="China National Space Administration" label="China National Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q54162" start="19234" end="19247" title="Long March 3A" label="Long March 3A"/>
<link wikidata="Q54164" start="19406" end="19419" title="Long March 3B" label="Long March 3B"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044253" start="19446" end="19458" title="Intelsat 708" label="Intelsat 708"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692529" start="20758" end="20765" title="Agila-2" label="Agila-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q218056" start="21040" end="21056" title="high Earth orbit" label="high Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q837569" start="21262" end="21330" title="Commission for Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense" label="Commission for Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777589" start="21406" end="21456" title="China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation" label="China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874081" start="21468" end="21516" title="China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation" label="China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259355" start="21734" end="21739" title="Loral Space &amp;amp; Communications" label="Loral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419647" start="21953" end="21963" title="Cox Report" label="Cox Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144012" start="22139" end="22180" title="International Traffic in Arms Regulations" label="International Traffic in Arms Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672736" start="22386" end="22403" title="Iridium satellite constellation" label="Iridum satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q187189" start="22935" end="22954" title="China Standard Time" label="China Standard Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q921557" start="22978" end="23000" title="Shenzhou 1" label="&amp;quot;Shenzhou-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138653" start="23024" end="23043" title="Shenzhou spacecraft" label="Shenzhou spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q53710" start="23112" end="23125" title="Long March 2F" label="Long March 2F"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143454" start="23613" end="23639" title="China Manned Space Program" label="China Manned Space Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="23738" end="23770" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138653" start="24121" end="24140" title="Shenzhou spacecraft" label="Shenzhou spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q53710" start="24142" end="24155" title="Long March 2F" label="Long March 2F"/>
<link wikidata="Q692677" start="24197" end="24204" title="Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center" label="Jiuquan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664824" start="24206" end="24245" title="Beijing Aerospace Flight Control Center" label="Beijing Aerospace Flight Control Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q28413587" start="24359" end="24404" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Astronaut Corps" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Astronaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="25481" end="25524" title="Satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation and positioning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q857141" start="25564" end="25570" title="Beidou" label="Beidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="25650" end="25677" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26331" end="26339" title="BeiDou#BeiDou-2" label="BeiDou-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="26377" end="26389" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q726583" start="26840" end="26850" title="Shenzhou 4" label="Shenzhou-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="27696" end="27716" title="UN Secretary General" label="UN Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="27717" end="27727" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="27938" end="27955" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q344892" start="28180" end="28191" title="Fei Junlong" label="Fei Junlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q472683" start="28199" end="28211" title="Nie Haisheng" label="Nie Haisheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q331310" start="28318" end="28328" title="Shenzhou-6" label="Shenzhou-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q318646" start="28381" end="28391" title="Shenzhou-7" label="Shenzhou-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q197135" start="28442" end="28454" title="Zhai Zhigang" label="Zhai Zhigang"/>
<link wikidata="Q557082" start="28459" end="28469" title="Liu Boming (astronaut)" label="Liu Boming"/>
<link wikidata="Q461840" start="28477" end="28489" title="Jing Haipeng" label="Jing Haipeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q860037" start="29134" end="29167" title="Chinese Lunar Exploration Program" label="Chinese Lunar Exploration Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49044" start="29441" end="29467" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 1" label="&amp;quot;Chang&amp;#x27;e-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="30481" end="30488" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788851" start="30546" end="30557" title="NigComSat-1" label="NigComSat-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099557" start="30581" end="30614" title="China Academy of Space Technology" label="China Academy of Space Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="30821" end="30824" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18669407" start="31214" end="31220" title="Gaofen" label="Gaofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12230697" start="31458" end="31466" title="Gaofen 1" label="Gaofen 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q218414" start="32290" end="32308" title="medium Earth orbit" label="medium Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q472251" start="32317" end="32346" title="inclined geosynchronous orbit" label="inclined geosynchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="32359" end="32378" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q54164" start="32467" end="32480" title="Long March 3B" label="Long March 3B"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="32524" end="32545" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="32546" end="32556" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="33139" end="33153" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099768" start="33524" end="33549" title="China Manned Space Agency" label="China Manned Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q131500" start="33688" end="33710" title="Tiangong 1" label="&amp;quot;Tiangong-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q733761" start="33749" end="33759" title="Shenzhou 8" label="Shenzhou 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q581712" start="34036" end="34046" title="Shenzhou 9" label="Shenzhou 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q470059" start="34094" end="34102" title="Liu Wang" label="Liu Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q235266" start="34146" end="34154" title="Liu Yang (astronaut)" label="Liu Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850788" start="34376" end="34387" title="Shenzhou 10" label="Shenzhou 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070347" start="34425" end="34440" title="Zhang Xiaoguang" label="Zhang Xiaoguang"/>
<link wikidata="Q705626" start="34448" end="34459" title="Wang Yaping" label="Wang Yaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122598" start="34971" end="34993" title="Tiangong 2" label="&amp;quot;Tiangong-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9335995" start="35105" end="35116" title="Shenzhou 11" label="Shenzhou 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q27336250" start="35170" end="35179" title="Chen Dong (astronaut)" label="Chen Dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208012" start="35429" end="35451" title="Tianzhou 1" label="&amp;quot;Tianzhou-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q831345" start="35765" end="35791" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 2" label="&amp;quot;Chang&amp;#x27;e-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="35837" end="35858" title="trans-lunar injection" label="trans-lunar injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q487941" start="35917" end="35929" title="Sinus Iridum" label="Sinus Iridum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061879" start="36044" end="36070" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 3" label="&amp;quot;Chang&amp;#x27;e-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273284" start="36300" end="36322" title="Yutu rover" label="&amp;quot;Yutu&amp;quot; rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q177852" start="36615" end="36624" title="Yinghuo-1" label="Yinghuo-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q210020" start="36702" end="36713" title="Fobos-Grunt" label="Fobos-Grunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="36812" end="36832" title="Russian Space Agency" label="Russian Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q152907" start="37939" end="37956" title="4179 Toutatis" label="asteroid Toutatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q382984" start="38618" end="38638" title="dinitrogen tetroxide" label="dinitrogen tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q161296" start="38643" end="38647" title="UDMH" label="UDMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q51504" start="38819" end="38835" title="specific impulse" label="specific impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q618153" start="39188" end="39191" title="LOX" label="LOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="39196" end="39204" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q519432" start="39208" end="39231" title="staged combustion cycle" label="staged combustion cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q637345" start="39404" end="39414" title="superalloy" label="superalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255036" start="39533" end="39539" title="YF-100" label="YF-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090965" start="39660" end="39672" title="Long March 6" label="Long March 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544124" start="39812" end="39824" title="Long March 7" label="Long March 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q997767" start="40270" end="40278" title="Wenchang" label="Wenchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="40280" end="40295" title="Hainan Province" label="Hainan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q11222716" start="41295" end="41320" title="heavy-lift launch vehicle" label="heavy-lift launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q622779" start="41757" end="41760" title="liquid hydrogen" label="LH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q54164" start="42109" end="42122" title="Long March 3B" label="Long March 3B"/>
<link wikidata="Q249492" start="42199" end="42213" title="Delta IV Heavy" label="Delta IV Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109144" start="42967" end="42980" title="tidal locking" label="tidal locking"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="43108" end="43128" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q938328" start="43139" end="43148" title="Space Age" label="Space Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q723045" start="43518" end="43544" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 4" label="&amp;quot;Chang&amp;#x27;e-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q53829976" start="43617" end="43636" title="Queqiao relay satellite" label="&amp;quot;Queqiao&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="43690" end="43709" title="Lagrangian points" label="L2 Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q892295" start="44056" end="44081" title="Von Kármán (lunar crater)" label="Von Kármán (lunar crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60407805" start="44207" end="44213" title="Yutu-2" label="Yutu-2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44540" end="44561" title="International Astronautical Federation#World Space Award" label="IAF World Space Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122216" start="44711" end="44733" title="quantum communications" label="quantum communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852" start="44797" end="44812" title="X-ray astronomy" label="X-ray astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125220" start="44829" end="44847" title="Hard X-ray Modulation Telescope" label="&amp;quot;Huiyan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="44994" end="44997" title="European Space Agency" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672962" start="45297" end="45310" title="Long March 11" label="Long March 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q37960" start="45321" end="45331" title="Yellow Sea" label="Yellow Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q56692271" start="45361" end="45368" title="i-Space (Chinese company)" label="i-Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147657" start="45913" end="45935" title="supersynchronous orbit" label="supersynchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q787531" start="46914" end="46927" title="Long March 5B" label="Long March 5B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170154" start="47164" end="47194" title="Tianhe core module" label="&amp;quot;Tianhe&amp;quot; core module"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100935" start="47369" end="47388" title="China Space Station" label="China Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100935" start="47404" end="47424" title="Tiangong Space Station" label="&amp;quot;Tiangong&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q106823153" start="47531" end="47541" title="Tianzhou 2" label="Tianzhou-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223990" start="47601" end="47612" title="Shenzhou 12" label="Shenzhou-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q472683" start="47682" end="47694" title="Nie Haisheng" label="Nie Haisheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q557082" start="47696" end="47706" title="Liu Boming (astronaut)" label="Liu Boming"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258209" start="47711" end="47722" title="Tang Hongbo" label="Tang Hongbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106691867" start="48157" end="48168" title="Shenzhou 13" label="Shenzhou-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q197135" start="48216" end="48228" title="Zhai Zhigang" label="Zhai Zhigang"/>
<link wikidata="Q705626" start="48230" end="48241" title="Wang Yaping" label="Wang Yaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q28413601" start="48246" end="48256" title="Ye Guangfu" label="Ye Guangfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q705626" start="48412" end="48423" title="Wang Yaping" label="Wang Yaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258411" start="48635" end="48646" title="Shenzhou 14" label="Shenzhou-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q27336250" start="48714" end="48723" title="Chen Dong (taikonaut)" label="Chen Dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q235266" start="48725" end="48733" title="Liu Yang (taikonaut)" label="Liu Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q112206264" start="48738" end="48747" title="Cai Xuzhe" label="Cai Xuzhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106658038" start="48934" end="48971" title="Wentian module" label="&amp;quot;Wentian&amp;quot; laboratory module"/>
<link wikidata="Q28671166" start="49317" end="49355" title="Mengtian module" label="&amp;quot;Mengtian&amp;quot; laboratory module"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155911" start="49678" end="49689" title="Shenzhou 15" label="Shenzhou-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q344892" start="49757" end="49768" title="Fei Junlong" label="Fei Junlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256924" start="49770" end="49783" title="Deng Qingming" label="Deng Qingming"/>
<link wikidata="Q114690441" start="49789" end="49797" title="Zhang Lu (taikonaut)" label="Zhang Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18328127" start="50132" end="50149" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5-T1" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5-T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093833" start="50348" end="50369" title="sample return mission" label="sample return mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="50728" end="50742" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q501042" start="50961" end="50972" title="Mons Rümker" label="Mons Rümker"/>
<link wikidata="Q488299" start="50976" end="50995" title="Oceanus Procellarum" label="Oceanus Procellarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100436" start="52864" end="52882" title="Chinese Deep Space Network" label="deep space network"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="52884" end="52901" title="atmospheric entry" label="atmospheric entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q97300910" start="53234" end="53264" title="Planetary Exploration of China" label="Planetary Exploration of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580572" start="53328" end="53337" title="Tianwen-1" label="Tianwen-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q737809" start="53434" end="53454" title="Trans-Mars injection" label="Trans-Mars injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q106614244" start="54224" end="54243" title="Zhurong (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Zhurong&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q187189" start="54322" end="54334" title="Beijing time" label="Beijing time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412602" start="54767" end="54782" title="Utopia Planitia" label="Utopia Planitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098886" start="55773" end="55797" title="distant retrograde orbit" label="distant retrograde orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="55869" end="55896" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q38982" start="56169" end="56192" title="highly elliptical orbit" label="highly elliptical orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030509" start="56384" end="56393" title="Queqiao-2" label="Queqiao-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q125187276" start="56452" end="56466" title="Tiandu" label="Tiandu 1 and 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346001" start="56897" end="56911" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q618975" start="56978" end="56990" title="Apollo (crater)" label="Apollo Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="56998" end="57018" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="57103" end="57117" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="57228" end="57249" title="Absorption spectroscopy" label="infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="57764" end="57778" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="57985" end="57997" title="Sun-Earth L2" label="Sun-Earth L2"/>
<link wikidata="Q26270214" start="58208" end="58231" title="Xuntian" label="Xuntian Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q103093905" start="58242" end="58256" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 7" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q110589990" start="58412" end="58426" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 8" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915971" start="58455" end="58483" title="in-situ resource utilization" label="in-situ resource utilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q106237681" start="58520" end="58556" title="International Lunar Research Station" label="International Lunar Research Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q65005927" start="58560" end="58569" title="Tianwen-2" label="Tianwen-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q111904802" start="58639" end="58648" title="Tianwen-3" label="Tianwen-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q107209924" start="58707" end="58716" title="Tianwen-4" label="Tianwen-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="58740" end="58747" title="Jupiter (planet)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134" start="58759" end="58767" title="Callisto (moon)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="58787" end="58793" title="Uranus (planet)" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105834902" start="59034" end="59047" title="Long March 10" label="Long March 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661840" start="59050" end="59080" title="next-generation crewed spacecraft" label="new generation crew spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q121037382" start="59082" end="59101" title="Chinese crewed lunar lander" label="crewed lunar lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="59109" end="59112" title="extravehicular activity" label="EVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="59310" end="59334" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q947379" start="59689" end="59722" title="Forum on China–Africa Cooperation" label="Forum on China-Africa Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100247" start="60136" end="60153" title="China–Namibia relations" label="China and Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59698" start="60254" end="60264" title="Swakopmund" label="Swakopmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359073" start="60335" end="60351" title="Brazil–China relations" label="China and Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073185" start="60578" end="60616" title="China–Brazil Earth Resources Satellite program" label="China-Brazil Earth Resource Satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q210519" start="60806" end="60829" title="South–South cooperation" label="South-South cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q681447" start="60958" end="61018" title="United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space" label="United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="61042" end="61056" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q281140" start="61123" end="61134" title="Moon Treaty" label="Moon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="61370" end="61381" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="61383" end="61387" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="61391" end="61396" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419647" start="61578" end="61588" title="Cox Report" label="Cox Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068951" start="61717" end="61743" title="Ministry of State Security of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100822" start="61745" end="61756" title="Chinese espionage in the United States" label="China stole"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="61795" end="61815" title="thermonuclear weapon" label="thermonuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="61861" end="61865" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="61896" end="61903" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419647" start="62242" end="62252" title="Cox Report" label="Cox Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="62538" end="62553" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385916" start="62577" end="62606" title="Anti-satellite weapon" label="anti-satellite (ASAT) missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q275450" start="62663" end="62673" title="Space debris" label="space junk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="63267" end="63296" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364097" start="63315" end="63337" title="Second Artillery Corps" label="Second Artillery Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364097" start="63347" end="63363" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Rocket Force" label="PLA Rocket Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63597" end="63675" title=" State Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense" label=" State Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="63911" end="63933" title="state-owned enterprise" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q831227" start="64218" end="64259" title="National University of Defense Technology" label="National University of Defense Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299797" start="64286" end="64304" title="Beihang University" label="Beihang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="64328" end="64347" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q832550" start="64374" end="64411" title="Northwestern Polytechnical University" label="Northwestern Polytechnical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q197543" start="64454" end="64473" title="Zhejiang University" label="Zhejiang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q525169" start="64523" end="64551" title="Shanghai Jiaotong University" label="Shanghai Jiaotong University"/>
<link wikidata="Q632558" start="64578" end="64608" title="Harbin Institute of Technology" label="Harbin Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299797" start="64668" end="64686" title="Beihang University" label="Beihang University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64708" end="64727" title="Dongfeng space city" label="Dongfeng Space City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64802" end="64820" title="Beijing space city" label="Beijing Space City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64825" end="64844" title="Wenchang space city" label="Wenchang Space City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64849" end="64868" title="Shanghai space city" label="Shanghai Space City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64873" end="64890" title="Yantai space city" label="Yantai Space City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64895" end="64928" title="Guizhou Aerospace Industrial Park" label="Guizhou Aerospace Industrial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264015" start="65118" end="65124" title="Nanhui" label="Nanhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375756" start="65157" end="65161" title="T-7M" label="T-7M"/>
<link wikidata="Q380195" start="65201" end="65209" title="Base 603" label="Base 603"/>
<link wikidata="Q692677" start="65493" end="65524" title="Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center" label="Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194479" start="65534" end="65565" title="Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center" label="Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q734306" start="65575" end="65606" title="Xichang Satellite Launch Center" label="Xichang Satellite Launch Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246624" start="65616" end="65647" title="Wenchang Spacecraft Launch Site" label="Wenchang Spacecraft Launch Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q125225487" start="65680" end="65717" title="Wenchang Commercial Space Launch Site" label="Wenchang Commercial Space Launch Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q125225487" start="65735" end="65740" title="HICAL" label="HICAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337641" start="65744" end="65775" title="Haiyang" label="Haiyang Oriental Aerospace Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664824" start="65845" end="65889" title="Beijing Aerospace Command and Control Center" label="Beijing Aerospace Command and Control Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q15927367" start="65899" end="65934" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Satellite Control Center" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Satellite Control Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q858987" start="65992" end="66000" title="Yuanwang" label="Yuanwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="66030" end="66050" title="Data relay satellite" label="Data relay satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800236" start="66054" end="66064" title="Tianlian I" label="Tianlian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q318646" start="66136" end="66146" title="Shenzhou 7" label="Shenzhou 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100436" start="66335" end="66362" title="Chinese Deep Space Network" label="Deep Space Tracking Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="66395" end="66402" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="66404" end="66412" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q182852" start="66414" end="66421" title="Kunming" label="Kunming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959" start="66426" end="66432" title="Ürümqi" label="Ürümqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170521" start="66601" end="66606" title="Kashgar" label="Kashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29003" start="66635" end="66642" title="Jiamusi" label="Jiamusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319804" start="66665" end="66670" title="Sanya" label="Sanya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66686" end="66700" title="Weinan Tracking Station" label="Weinan Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66702" end="66719" title="Changchun Tracking Station" label="Changchun Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66721" end="66736" title="Qingdao Tracking Station" label="Qingdao Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66738" end="66752" title="Zhanyi Tracking Station" label="Zhanyi Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66754" end="66768" title="Nanhai Tracking Station" label="Nanhai Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66770" end="66786" title="Tianshan Tracking Station" label="Tianshan Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66788" end="66802" title="Xiamen Tracking Station" label="Xiamen Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66804" end="66818" title="Lushan Tracking Station" label="Lushan Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66820" end="66835" title="Jiamusi Tracking Station" label="Jiamusi Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66837" end="66853" title="Dongfeng Tracking Station" label="Dongfeng Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66855" end="66869" title="Hetian Tracking Station" label="Hetian Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="66908" end="66914" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271411" start="66935" end="66942" title="Malindi" label="Malindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653059" start="66960" end="66987" title="Swakopmund tracking station" label="Swakopmund tracking station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20014921" start="67067" end="67089" title="Espacio Lejano Station" label="Espacio Lejano Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q44800" start="67093" end="67109" title="Neuquén Province" label="Neuquén Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="67111" end="67120" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342442" start="67235" end="67250" title="Siziwang Banner" label="Siziwang Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="67311" end="67321" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073938" start="67636" end="67655" title="Shuguang spacecraft" label="Shuguang spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="67666" end="67671" title="PLAAF" label="PLAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700" start="67772" end="67777" title="CZ-2A" label="CZ-2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="67934" end="67953" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="68114" end="68118" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981398" start="68141" end="68154" title="Fanhui Shi Weixing" label="FSW satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q921557" start="69217" end="69227" title="Shenzhou 1" label="Shenzhou 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063891" start="69269" end="69279" title="Shenzhou 2" label="Shenzhou 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q677820" start="69312" end="69322" title="Shenzhou 3" label="Shenzhou 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q726583" start="69327" end="69337" title="Shenzhou 4" label="Shenzhou 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q378417" start="69419" end="69429" title="Shenzhou 5" label="Shenzhou 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q147581" start="69509" end="69519" title="Yang Liwei" label="Yang Liwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q331310" start="69604" end="69614" title="Shenzhou 6" label="Shenzhou 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q53710" start="69708" end="69721" title="Long March 2F" label="Long March 2F"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094673" start="69815" end="69882" title="Equipment Development Department of the Central Military Commission" label="Equipment Development Department of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q318646" start="70041" end="70051" title="Shenzhou 7" label="Shenzhou 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="70298" end="70325" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q131500" start="70371" end="70381" title="Tiangong 1" label="Tiangong 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q733761" start="70555" end="70565" title="Shenzhou 8" label="Shenzhou 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q581712" start="70637" end="70647" title="Shenzhou 9" label="Shenzhou 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850788" start="70860" end="70871" title="Shenzhou 10" label="Shenzhou 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122598" start="70983" end="70993" title="Tiangong 2" label="Tiangong 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q9335995" start="71145" end="71156" title="Shenzhou 11" label="Shenzhou 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559297" start="72118" end="72128" title="Tiangong 3" label="Tiangong 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100935" start="72449" end="72471" title="Tiangong space station" label="Tiangong space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170154" start="72473" end="72503" title="Tianhe (space station module)" label="&amp;quot;Tianhe&amp;quot; core module"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223990" start="72593" end="72604" title="Shenzhou 12" label="Shenzhou 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="72831" end="72835" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121188" start="72870" end="72880" title="Sun Laiyan" label="Sun Laiyan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73476" end="73483" title="Universal Rocket#UR=700" label="UR-700M"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73491" end="73505" title="Project Aelita" label="Project Aelita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73543" end="73546" title="Lunar transfer orbit#Application to interplanetary travel" label="LTO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73643" end="73656" title="Zhang Guitian" label="Zhang Guitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174706" start="73725" end="73729" title="CZ-2" label="CZ-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q54178" start="73734" end="73739" title="CZ-4A" label="CZ-4A"/>
<link wikidata="Q47671070" start="73776" end="73786" title="Long Lehao" label="Long Lehao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120769" start="74229" end="74239" title="Ye Peijian" label="Ye Peijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044984" start="74508" end="74517" title="Soft landing (rocketry)" label="soft-land"/>
<link wikidata="Q657771" start="74536" end="74543" title="Luna 24" label="Luna 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q54190" start="74697" end="74710" title="Long March 4C" label="Long March 4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="74768" end="74782" title="gravity assist" label="gravity assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47499" start="76011" end="76018" title="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day" label="May Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346001" start="76363" end="76377" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="76443" end="76463" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="76548" end="76562" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121188" start="76721" end="76731" title="Sun Laiyan" label="Sun Laiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="76872" end="76876" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11602414" start="76914" end="76937" title="Eleventh Five-Year Plan (People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China)" label="Eleventh Five-Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q97300910" start="76985" end="77015" title="Planetary Exploration of China" label="Planetary Exploration of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q65005927" start="77141" end="77161" title="ZhengHe (spacecraft)" label="asteroids and comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q107209924" start="77163" end="77170" title="Chinese Jupiter probe" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q106614244" start="77347" end="77352" title="Zhurong (rover)" label="rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q787531" start="77406" end="77418" title="Long March 5" label="Long March 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246624" start="77431" end="77439" title="Wenchang Spacecraft Launch Site" label="Wenchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981843" start="77814" end="77837" title="space-based solar power" label="space-based solar power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79173" end="79212" title="International SunSat Design Competition" label="International SunSat Design Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q22094673" start="79407" end="79477" title="Equipment Development Department of the Central Military Commission" label="PLA armament development department of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80180" end="80196" title="Air-Launched SLV" label="Air-Launched SLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="80248" end="80251" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="SSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q104635667" start="80254" end="80261" title="Galactic Energy" label="Ceres-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q110921195" start="80354" end="80363" title="Orienspace" label="Gravity-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80436" end="80447" title="i-Space (Chinese company)#Hyperbola-1" label="Hyperbola-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q56692271" start="80507" end="80518" title="i-Space (Chinese company)" label="Hyperbola-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q115555344" start="80652" end="80661" title="Jielong 3" label="Jielong 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80733" end="80745" title="Kaituozhe (rocket family)#Kaituozhe-1" label="Kaituozhe-1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q15049837" start="80751" end="80759" title="Kuaizhou" label="Kuaizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q111745426" start="80814" end="80822" title="CAS Space" label="Lijian-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="80926" end="80953" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q111745426" start="80957" end="80965" title="CAS Space" label="Lijian-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q174706" start="81071" end="81079" title="Long March 2 rocket family" label="CZ-2E(A)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174706" start="81333" end="81340" title="Long March 2 rocket family" label="CZ-2F/G"/>
<link wikidata="Q53710" start="81350" end="81355" title="CZ-2F" label="CZ-2F"/>
<link wikidata="Q53665" start="81522" end="81530" title="Long March 3 rocket family" label="CZ-3B(A)"/>
<link wikidata="Q54167" start="81662" end="81667" title="Long March 3C" label="CZ-3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q53665" start="81693" end="81698" title="Long March 3 rocket family" label="CZ-3B"/>
<link wikidata="Q174706" start="81727" end="81732" title="Long March 2 rocket family" label="CZ-2E"/>
<link wikidata="Q54190" start="81735" end="81748" title="Long March 4C" label="Long March 4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q787531" start="81751" end="81755" title="Long March 5 rocket family" label="CZ-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q787531" start="81817" end="81822" title="Long March 5" label="CZ-5B"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="81892" end="81895" title="low Earth orbit" label="LEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090965" start="81899" end="81903" title="Chang Zheng 6" label="CZ-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="82087" end="82090" title="Sun synchronous orbit" label="SSO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82120" end="82132" title="Fan Ruixiang" label="Fan Ruixiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544124" start="82171" end="82175" title="Chang Zheng 7" label="CZ-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100935" start="82250" end="82272" title="Tiangong space station" label="Tiangong space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q22099169" start="82275" end="82279" title="Long March 8" label="CZ-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="82340" end="82343" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="SSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672975" start="82353" end="82357" title="Long March 9" label="CZ-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q105834902" start="82500" end="82505" title="Long March 10" label="CZ-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q105834902" start="82590" end="82596" title="Long March 10" label="CZ-10A"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661840" start="82653" end="82686" title="next-generation crewed spacecraft" label="next-generation crewed spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="82690" end="82693" title="low Earth orbit" label="LEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672962" start="82751" end="82756" title="Long March 11" label="CZ-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398258" start="82811" end="82819" title="Pallas-1" label="Pallas-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82936" end="82973" title="Project 921-3#Reusable launch vehicle" label="Project 921-3 Reusable launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83024" end="83031" title="Project 921-3#Tengyun" label="Tengyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q98923448" start="83101" end="83120" title="Chinese reusable experimental spacecraft" label="Reusable spaceplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q333859" start="83256" end="83261" title="X-37" label="X-37B"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83286" end="83296" title="Space Pioneer#Rockets" label="Tianlong 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83365" end="83375" title="Space Pioneer#Rockets" label="Tianlong 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q65151444" start="83494" end="83502" title="Zhuque-2" label="Zhuque-2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83682" end="83690" title="LandSpace Technology Corporation#Zhuque-3" label="Zhuque-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q53665" start="83838" end="83843" title="Long March 1 rocket family" label="CZ-1D"/>
<link wikidata="Q53665" start="83855" end="83859" title="Long March 1 rocket family" label="CZ-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83901" end="83912" title="Project 921-3#869 Project" label="Project 869"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385916" start="84058" end="84081" title="Space-Based ASAT System" label="Space-Based ASAT System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84125" end="84159" title="Small Satellite Research Institute" label="Small Satellite Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099557" start="84167" end="84202" title="Chinese Academy of Space Technology" label="Chinese Academy of Space Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q909335" start="84210" end="84229" title="Double Star Mission" label="Double Star Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="84295" end="84298" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348989" start="84343" end="84360" title="Earth observation" label="Earth observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="84362" end="84376" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="84380" end="84405" title="reconnaissance satellites" label="reconnaissance satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073185" start="84414" end="84419" title="CBERS" label="CBERS"/>
<link wikidata="Q443245" start="84421" end="84441" title="Dongfanghong program" label="Dongfanghong program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981398" start="84443" end="84461" title="Fanhui Shi Weixing" label="Fanhui Shi Weixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q589786" start="84463" end="84469" title="Yaogan" label="Yaogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207045" start="84474" end="84482" title="Ziyuan 3" label="Ziyuan 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800236" start="84486" end="84496" title="Tianlian I" label="Tianlian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800236" start="84527" end="84538" title="Tianlian II" label="Tianlian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="84558" end="84578" title="data relay satellite" label="data relay satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q857141" start="84679" end="84703" title="Beidou navigation system" label="Beidou navigation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11602414" start="84794" end="84817" title="Eleventh Five-Year Plan (People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China)" label="Eleventh Five-Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="84846" end="84858" title="Astrophysics" label="Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572501" start="84913" end="84934" title="Solar Space Telescope" label="Solar Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125220" start="84972" end="85009" title="Space Hard X-Ray Modulation Telescope" label="Space Hard X-Ray Modulation Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100436" start="85024" end="85050" title="Chinese Deep Space Network" label="Chinese Deep Space Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827255" start="85078" end="85082" title="Five hundred meter Aperture Spherical Telescope" label="FAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="85121" end="85134" title="radio antenna" label="radio antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148351" start="85170" end="85174" title="VLBI" label="VLBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q208231" start="85200" end="85211" title="Deep Impact (spacecraft)" label="Deep Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138653" start="85359" end="85372" title="Project 921-1" label="Project 921-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138653" start="85375" end="85394" title="Shenzhou spacecraft" label="Shenzhou spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654374" start="85398" end="85406" title="Tiangong program" label="Tiangong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654374" start="85458" end="85471" title="Project 921-2" label="Project 921-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100935" start="85499" end="85520" title="Chinese Space Station" label="Chinese Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15905312" start="85523" end="85531" title="Tianzhou (spacecraft)" label="Tianzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q131500" start="85617" end="85627" title="Tiangong-1" label="Tiangong-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661840" start="85687" end="85720" title="Next-generation crewed spacecraft" label="Next-generation crewed spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661840" start="85841" end="85882" title="Next-generation crewed spacecraft" label="Project 921-11 – X-11 reusable spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85993" end="86004" title="Project 921-3#869 Project" label="Project 869"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084962" start="86056" end="86064" title="Shenlong (spacecraft)" label="Shenlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248983" start="86104" end="86117" title="Project 921-3" label="Project 921-3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86145" end="86152" title="Project 921-3#Tengyun" label="Tengyun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86254" end="86292" title="Project 921-3#HTS Maglev Launch Assist Technology" label="HTS Maglev Launch Assist Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49044" start="86417" end="86431" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 1" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q831345" start="86436" end="86450" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 2" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061879" start="86495" end="86509" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 3" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q723045" start="86514" end="86528" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 4" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q18328127" start="86572" end="86589" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5-T1" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5-T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944018" start="86614" end="86628" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346001" start="86667" end="86681" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q103093905" start="86736" end="86750" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 7" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q110589990" start="86755" end="86769" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 8" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86903" end="86924" title="Chinese Lunar Exploration Program#Crewed mission phase" label="crewed lunar missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661840" start="86939" end="86972" title="next-generation crewed spacecraft" label="next-generation crewed spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q121037382" start="86981" end="87000" title="Chinese crewed lunar lander" label="crewed lunar lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q177852" start="87085" end="87094" title="Yinghuo-1" label="Yinghuo-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q210020" start="87155" end="87166" title="Fobos-Grunt" label="Fobos-Grunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100436" start="87511" end="87537" title="Chinese Deep Space Network" label="Chinese Deep Space Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580572" start="87620" end="87629" title="Tianwen-1" label="Tianwen-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q106614244" start="87777" end="87802" title="Zhurong (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Zhurong&amp;quot; rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q65005927" start="87806" end="87815" title="Tianwen-2" label="Tianwen-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q828032" start="87907" end="87925" title="Planetary flyby" label="flyby observations"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="87927" end="87948" title="Remote sensing" label="global remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q763288" start="87950" end="87965" title="Lander (spacecraft)" label="robotic landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093833" start="87971" end="87984" title="Sample-return mission" label="sample return"/>
<link wikidata="Q106818458" start="88040" end="88060" title="Interstellar Express" label="Interstellar Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527884" start="88362" end="88384" title="List of artificial objects leaving the Solar System" label="leave the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q111904802" start="88388" end="88414" title="Tianwen-3" label="Mars Sample Return Mission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88475" end="88482" title="In situ#Space-related" label="in-situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q54164" start="88809" end="88822" title="Long March 3B" label="Long March 3B"/>
<link wikidata="Q787531" start="88857" end="88869" title="Long March 5" label="Long March 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672975" start="88989" end="89001" title="Long March 9" label="Long March 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q107209924" start="89005" end="89027" title="Tianwen-4" label="Jupiter System orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276" start="89059" end="89081" title="exploration of Jupiter" label="exploration of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203" start="89090" end="89108" title="Galilean moons" label="four largest moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134" start="89126" end="89134" title="Callisto (moon)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="89179" end="89199" title="magnetohydrodynamics" label="magnetohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107209924" start="89313" end="89329" title="Tianwen-4" label="fly-by of Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107209924" start="89366" end="89375" title="Tianwen-4" label="Tianwen-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299797" start="89560" end="89578" title="Beihang University" label="Beihang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196651" start="89581" end="89618" title="China and weapons of mass destruction" label="China and weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q10891829" start="89621" end="89645" title="Two Bombs, One Satellite" label="Two Bombs, One Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100964" start="89648" end="89670" title="Chinese women in space" label="Chinese women in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q632558" start="89673" end="89703" title="Harbin Institute of Technology" label="Harbin Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407053" start="89706" end="89726" title="French space program" label="French space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q106739769" start="89729" end="89785" title="List of human spaceflights to the Tiangong space station" label="List of human spaceflights to the Tiangong space station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343678" wikidata="Q718074" url="?curid=343678" title="Aryl group">
<text>In organic chemistry, an aryl is any functional group or substituent derived from an aromatic ring, usually an aromatic hydrocarbon, such as phenyl and naphthyl. &quot;Aryl&quot; is used for the sake of abbreviation or generalization, and &quot;Ar&quot; is used as a placeholder for the aryl group in chemical structure diagrams, analogous to “R” used for any organic substituent. “Ar” is not to be confused with the elemental symbol for argon.

A simple aryl group is phenyl (), a group derived from benzene. Examples of other aryl groups consist of:
* The tolyl group () which is derived from toluene (methylbenzene)
* The xylyl group (), which is derived from xylene (dimethylbenzene)
* The naphthyl group (), which is derived from naphthalene

Arylation is the process in which an aryl group is attached to a substituent. It is typically achieved by cross-coupling reactions.

== Nomenclature ==

The simplest aryl group is phenyl, which is made up of a benzene ring with one of its hydrogen atom replaced by some substituent, and has the molecular formula . Note that a phenyl group is not the same as a benzyl group, the latter consisting of a phenyl group attached to a methyl group and a molecular formula of .
To name compounds containing phenyl groups, the phenyl group can be taken to be the parent hydrocarbon and be represented by the suffix Alternatively, the phenyl group could be treated as the substituent, being described within the name as &quot;phenyl&quot;. This is usually done when the group attached to the phenyl group consists of six or more carbon atoms.

As an example, consider a hydroxyl group connected to a phenyl group. In this case, if the phenyl group were taken to be the parent hydrocarbon, the compound would be named hydroxybenzene. Alternatively, and more commonly, the hydroxyl group could be taken as the parent group and the phenyl group treated as the substituent, resulting in the more familiar name phenol.

== Reactions ==
==See also==
* Alkyl
* Aryl hydrocarbon receptor, a bodily target for dioxins
* Aryloxy group
* Arene compound

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="3" end="20" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q718074" start="25" end="29" title="Aryl group" label="aryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="37" end="53" title="functional group" label="functional group"/>
<link wikidata="Q898422" start="57" end="68" title="substituent" label="substituent"/>
<link wikidata="Q210390" start="85" end="98" title="aromaticity" label="aromatic ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="111" end="131" title="aromatic hydrocarbon" label="aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43413" start="141" end="147" title="phenyl" label="phenyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="152" end="160" title="naphthyl" label="naphthyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="438" end="443" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43413" start="469" end="475" title="phenyl" label="phenyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="501" end="508" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891759" start="558" end="563" title="Tolyl groups" label="tolyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="595" end="602" title="toluene" label="toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q208366" start="625" end="630" title="xylyl" label="xylyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q208366" start="663" end="669" title="xylene" label="xylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="694" end="702" title="naphthyl" label="naphthyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="735" end="746" title="naphthalene" label="naphthalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127709" start="748" end="757" title="Arylation" label="Arylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127709" start="854" end="877" title="cross-coupling reaction" label="cross-coupling reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q43413" start="928" end="934" title="phenyl" label="phenyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q818534" start="1109" end="1121" title="benzyl" label="benzyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="1945" end="1951" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q335268" start="1985" end="1990" title="Alkyl" label="Alkyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q155750" start="1993" end="2018" title="Aryl hydrocarbon receptor" label="Aryl hydrocarbon receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522" start="2040" end="2046" title="Dioxins and dioxin-like compounds" label="dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39513" start="2050" end="2057" title="Aryloxy" label="Aryloxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="2066" end="2080" title="Arene compound" label="Arene compound"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343679" wikidata="Q304399" url="?curid=343679" title="Levis">
<text>Lévis or Levis may be:

==Places==
===Canada===
* Lévis, Quebec, a city
* Lévis (federal electoral district) (1967–2004), a federal electoral district in Quebec
* Lévis (provincial electoral district), a provincial electoral district in the Chaudière-Appalaches region of Quebec

===France===
* Levis, Yonne, a commune in Bourgogne-Franche-Comté

===United States===
* Levis, Wisconsin, a town
* Levis, Jackson County, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community

==People==
* Levis (surname), a list of people
* Levis (given name), a list of people with the given name Levis or Lévis
* House of Lévis, a French noble family, including a list of people

==Military==
* Fort Lévis, a former French fortification, now submerged in the St. Lawrence River, in what is now New York state, United States
* Lévis Forts, a series of three forts in Lévis, Quebec
* HMCS &quot;Lévis&quot; (K115), a 190 Royal Canadian Navy Flower-class corvette
* HMCS &quot;Lévis&quot; (K400), a 190 Royal Canadian Navy River-class frigate

==Other uses==
* Levis (motorcycle), a now defunct British motorcycle manufacturer
* Lévis station, a ferry terminal and former railway station serving Lévis, Quebec
* Levis Formation, a geologic formation in Quebec

==See also==
* Levis-Lauzon, a former city in Quebec
* Lévis—Lotbinière, a federal electoral district in Quebec
* Lévis-Saint-Nom, a commune in the Yvelines &quot;département&quot;
* Lurcy-Lévis, a commune in Auvergne
* Levi&#x27;s, a brand of denim clothing
* Levi&#x27;s Stadium, a stadium in Santa Clara, California, U.S.
* Leavis, a surname
* Levi (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q304399" start="0" end="5" title="Levis" label="Lévis"/>
<link wikidata="Q304399" start="9" end="14" title="Levis" label="Levis"/>
<link wikidata="Q139208" start="50" end="63" title="Lévis, Quebec" label="Lévis, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272017" start="74" end="108" title="Lévis (federal electoral district)" label="Lévis (federal electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q286850" start="163" end="200" title="Lévis (provincial electoral district)" label="Lévis (provincial electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q583101" start="295" end="307" title="Levis, Yonne" label="Levis, Yonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659346" start="369" end="385" title="Levis, Wisconsin" label="Levis, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523035" start="396" end="428" title="Levis, Jackson County, Wisconsin" label="Levis, Jackson County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179226" start="472" end="487" title="Levis (surname)" label="Levis (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119398131" start="508" end="526" title="Levis (given name)" label="Levis (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065881" start="582" end="596" title="House of Lévis" label="House of Lévis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077931" start="664" end="674" title="Fort Lévis" label="Fort Lévis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078530" start="795" end="806" title="Lévis Forts" label="Lévis Forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630835" start="851" end="880" title="HMCS Lévis (K115)" label="HMCS &amp;quot;Lévis&amp;quot; (K115)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996217" start="932" end="961" title="HMCS Lévis (K400)" label="HMCS &amp;quot;Lévis&amp;quot; (K400)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909938" start="1027" end="1045" title="Levis (motorcycle)" label="Levis (motorcycle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619250" start="1095" end="1108" title="Lévis station" label="Lévis station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508531" start="1178" end="1193" title="Levis Formation" label="Levis Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q139208" start="1242" end="1254" title="Levis-Lauzon" label="Levis-Lauzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259970" start="1282" end="1298" title="Lévis—Lotbinière" label="Lévis—Lotbinière"/>
<link wikidata="Q94709" start="1341" end="1356" title="Lévis-Saint-Nom" label="Lévis-Saint-Nom"/>
<link wikidata="Q271996" start="1410" end="1421" title="Lurcy-Lévis" label="Lurcy-Lévis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962" start="1447" end="1458" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s" label="Levi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419343" start="1488" end="1507" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862631" start="1554" end="1560" title="Leavis" label="Leavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q230572" start="1574" end="1595" title="Levi (disambiguation)" label="Levi (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343682" wikidata="Q221423" url="?curid=343682" title="Pine bunting">
<text>The pine bunting (Emberiza leucocephalos) is a passerine bird in the bunting family Emberizidae, a group most modern authors now separate from the finches, Fringillidae. It lives in Eurosiberia east of the Urals.

==Etymology==
The genus name &quot;Emberiza&quot; is from Old German &quot;Embritz&quot;, a bunting. The specific &quot;leucocephalos&quot; is from Ancient Greek &quot;leukos&quot;, &quot;whites&quot;, and &quot;kephalos&quot;, &quot;headed&quot;.

==Description and song==
The pine bunting is a robust 16–17.5-centimetre bird, with a thick seed-eater&#x27;s bill. The male has a white crown and cheeks, and a chestnut forehead and throat, and a heavily streaked brown back. The female is much duller and is more streaked on its undersides. Non-breeding plumage is like that of a yellowhammer, but with all the yellow replaced by white. Its song and calls are like those of the yellowhammer.

==Breeding and habitat==
The pine bunting breeds across much of temperate Asia, migrating south to central Asia, north India and southern China in winter. It is common in all sorts of open land with some scrub or trees, including cultivation, but has a greater preference for open forest (usually pines) than the closely related yellowhammer. It is a rare vagrant to western Europe, but often winters in north-east Italy and Tuscany.

===Appearance of pine bunting × yellowhammer hybrids===

Hybrids between pine bunting and yellowhammer show a mixture of characters. One such bird, a vagrant in Suffolk, England in 1982, the &quot;Sizewell bunting&quot;, is documented and illustrated with photographs in &quot;British Birds&quot; 

Some doubt has been cast upon male birds which appear to be pure pine buntings, but show yellow primary fringes. Previously, in Britain, these were regarded as potentially hybrid birds, and not accepted by the British Birds Rarities Committee. However, since 2004, BBRC has regarded these birds as acceptable if they also meet the following conditions:
* the lores must be chestnut, not black or grey
* the throat must be extensively chestnut coloured, without a dark malar line or pale submoustachial line
* the supercilium should be chestnut or grey, but not white
* there should be no yellow on the head, or anywhere else except the primary fringes

==Diet==
The pine bunting&#x27;s natural food consists of seeds, and when feeding its young, insects. The nest is on the ground. Four to six eggs are laid, which show the hair-like markings characteristic of buntings.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
*OBC Six photographs (see pulldown menu at page bottom).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221423" start="4" end="16" title="Pine bunting" label="pine bunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="47" end="56" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="57" end="61" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q614481" start="69" end="76" title="Emberiza" label="bunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q160835" start="147" end="152" title="finch" label="finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="206" end="211" title="Ural Mountains" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="272" end="282" title="Old High German" label="Old German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="362" end="375" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="555" end="559" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="573" end="577" title="beak" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="768" end="775" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="971" end="985" title="Palearctic" label="temperate Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="987" end="996" title="bird migration" label="migrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="1204" end="1208" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26205" start="1236" end="1248" title="yellowhammer" label="yellowhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="1332" end="1339" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279329" start="1492" end="1499" title="vagrancy in birds" label="vagrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="1503" end="1510" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1512" end="1519" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749344" start="1619" end="1632" title="British Birds (magazine)" label="British Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969572" start="1851" end="1883" title="British Birds Rarities Committee" label="British Birds Rarities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q659503" start="2435" end="2439" title="bird egg" label="eggs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343684" wikidata="Q1214972" url="?curid=343684" title="In the Mouth of Madness">
<text>In the Mouth of Madness is a 1994 American supernatural horror film directed and scored by John Carpenter and written by Michael De Luca. It stars Sam Neill, Julie Carmen, Jürgen Prochnow, David Warner and Charlton Heston. Neill stars as John Trent, an insurance investigator who visits a small town while looking into the disappearance of a successful author of horror novels, and begins to question his sanity as the lines between reality and fiction seem to blur. Informally, the film is the third installment in what Carpenter refers to as his &quot;Apocalypse Trilogy&quot;, preceded by &quot;The Thing&quot; (1982) and &quot;Prince of Darkness&quot; (1987).

&quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot; pays tribute to the works of author H. P. Lovecraft in its exploration of insanity, and its title is derived from the Lovecraft novella &quot;At the Mountains of Madness&quot;. Distributed by New Line Cinema, &quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot; received mixed reviews upon release.

==Plot==

In New York City, insurance investigator John Trent narrowly survives an attack by an axe-wielding man with deformed pupils. John investigates a claim by book publisher Arcane regarding the disappearance of acclaimed horror author Sutter Cane, whose latest novel, &quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot;, is due for release. Arcane&#x27;s director, Jackson Harglow, assigns Sutter&#x27;s editor, Linda Styles, to assist John, who believes their claim is an elaborate publicity stunt.

John realizes Sutter&#x27;s book covers form a map to the fictional town of Hobb&#x27;s End, New Hampshire, the setting of Sutter&#x27;s stories. John and Linda set out to find the location. While he sleeps during the drive, Linda experiences surreal phenomena, including passing a young cyclist who later appears as an elderly man, and the road disappearing. After abruptly arriving in Hobb&#x27;s End, the pair encounter landmarks from Sutter&#x27;s novels, and check in at the local hotel run by Mrs. Pickner, one of his characters. John suspects the experience is staged, but Linda admits that while Sutter&#x27;s disappearance was a hoax, the current events are not. The pair visit the church, which Sutter&#x27;s books describe as built on a site of ancient evil predating humanity, filled with unimaginable pain and suffering. Linda seemingly predicts the arrival of enraged townspeople demanding the return of their missing children.

At the hotel, Linda claims that events are unfolding as described in Sutter&#x27;s new novel, which depicts the end of everything. Linda returns to the church and confronts Sutter, who exposes her to his unfinished manuscript, which drives her insane. Sutter confesses that he believed his stories were fictional, but later realized &quot;they&quot; had been guiding him. Disoriented, Linda returns to the hotel, where she and Mrs. Pickner transform into monsters, forcing John to flee. Outside, he is confronted by a mob of mutated townsfolk and seeks refuge in a bar, where one of the residents commits suicide, stating he was written to do so. John attempts to escape Hobb&#x27;s End, but is repeatedly teleported back to the town&#x27;s center. After crashing his car in frustration, he awakens inside the church, where he is met by Linda and Sutter.

Sutter explains that the sheer number of people who believe in his work has made his narratives real, dissolving the boundaries between reality and fantasy and enabling the return of the &quot;old ones&quot;. He claims to have written into existence both Hobb&#x27;s End and John who is written to deliver the completed manuscript to Arcane. John rejects the idea that he is a fictional creation, but Sutter instructs him to follow a tunnel back to reality. Sutter then tears himself apart, creating a portal through which the old ones begin to emerge. Linda refuses to escape with John, explaining that she has already read the ending. John flees, pursued by monstrous entities, and suddenly finds himself waking up on a country road.

John destroys the manuscript and returns to Arcane, where Jackson denies any knowledge of Linda. To his horror, Jackson reveals that John delivered the manuscript months earlier, and &quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot; has since been published, with a film adaptation in production. Sometime later, a disheveled John encounters a Sutter fan with mutated eyes and kills him with an axe, leading to John&#x27;s confinement in a mental asylum.

After recounting his story to a doctor, John concludes that humanity will soon be reduced to a myth &quot;they&quot; will tell their children. That night, inhuman screams echo through the asylum before his cell door is torn open. John discovers the facility abandoned and overhears a radio broadcast reporting an epidemic of extreme violence and mutations spreading worldwide, with entire cities lost. Wandering into a cinema, he watches the film adaptation of &quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot;. As scenes of his past actions unfold on screen—including his affirmation, &quot;this is reality&quot;—John breaks down laughing hysterically, consumed by the surreal realization.
== Cast ==
* Sam Neill as John Trent
* Julie Carmen as Linda Styles
* Jürgen Prochnow as Sutter Cane
* David Warner as Dr. Wrenn
* John Glover as Saperstein
* Bernie Casey as Robinson
* Peter Jason as Mr. Paul
* Charlton Heston as Jackson Harglow

In addition, Frances Bay plays Mrs. Pickman, while Wilhelm von Homburg appears as Simon. Hayden Christensen makes his film debut, briefly seen as a paper boy.

== Production ==

Michael De Luca wrote the script in the late 1980s and one of the first directors he offered it to was John Carpenter, who initially passed on the project. New Line Cinema later announced production in 1989 with director Tony Randel to direct. Later, Mary Lambert was also attached to direct. Finally, Carpenter signed on as director in December 1992, and filming took place from August to October 1993. The film had a budget of approximately $8 million.

The town scenes in Hobb&#x27;s End were filmed on Main Street Unionville, and the exterior of the Black Church is actually the Cathedral of the Transfiguration. Both are located in Markham, Ontario. The rest of the film was shot on location in Toronto due to its unique mix of &quot;New York skyscrapers and New England remoteness&quot; according to Carpenter.

The visual effects for the film were done by Industrial Light &amp; Magic, and the practical effects (including creature prosthetics and animatronics) were done by the KNB EFX Group. It took seven weeks for KNB to create all the practical effects for the film, the biggest of which was an &quot;eighteen-foot Wall of Monsters&quot; that was mounted on rollers and operated by a crew of twenty-five people. &quot;We had under seven million [dollars] to spend on the picture&quot;, Carpenter said in 2001. &quot;It was tough. The monsters had to be outrageous Lovecraftian demons, but in H.P. Lovecraft&#x27;s novels, they are always so horrible that they are beyond description, that they are too terrifying to see. So how do you visualize something like that? Well, very, very quickly. They also had to be slightly cartoonish since Sam Neill spends most of the movie ridiculing horror only to discover it&#x27;s all too real.&quot;

=== Influences ===
&quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot; pays tribute to the work of seminal horror writer H. P. Lovecraft, with many references to his stories and themes. Its title is a play on Lovecraft&#x27;s novella, &quot;At the Mountains of Madness,&quot; and insanity plays as great a role in the film as it does in Lovecraft&#x27;s fiction. The opening scene depicts Trent&#x27;s confinement in an asylum, with the bulk of the story told in flashback, a common technique of Lovecraft. Reference is made to Lovecraftian settings and details (such as a character who shares the name of Lovecraft&#x27;s Pickman family). Sutter Cane&#x27;s novels have similar titles to H.P. Lovecraft stories: &quot;The Whisperer of the Dark&quot; (&quot;The Whisperer in Darkness&quot;), &quot;The Thing in the Basement&quot; (&quot;The Thing on the Doorstep&quot;), &quot;Haunter out of Time&quot; (&quot;The Haunter of the Dark&quot;/&quot;The Shadow Out of Time&quot;), and &quot;The Hobbs End Horror&quot; (&quot;The Dunwich Horror&quot;), the latter also referencing Hobbs End underground station from Nigel Kneale&#x27;s &quot;Quatermass and the Pit.&quot;

The film also can be seen as referencing Stephen King, who, like Lovecraft, writes horror fiction set in New England hamlets. In fact, the characters even directly compare King (unfavorably) to Sutter Cane within the film itself.
Linda Styles tells Trent early in the film, &quot;You can forget about Stephen King, Cane outsells them all!&quot;

The film&#x27;s main theme, heard during the opening credits, was inspired by the Metallica song &quot;Enter Sandman&quot;. Carpenter had originally wanted to use the song, but was unable to secure the rights and instead composed his own theme, with the help of composer Jim Lang and guitarist Dave Davies of The Kinks.

==Release==
===Box office===
&quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot; premiered at Germany&#x27;s Fantasy FilmFest on August 10, 1994 and was released in the United States on February 3, 1995. For its worldwide release, the film opened at the #4 spot and grossed $3,441,807 in 1,510 theaters in its first weekend. It fell to #7 in its second week before leaving the top 10 in week three. The film ended up grossing $8,924,549 on a budget ranging from $8 million to $14 million, making it a box-office failure.

===Critical reception===

On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, &quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot; holds an approval rating of 60% based on , with a weighted average rating of 5.8/10. The website&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;If it fails to make the most of its intriguing premise, &quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot; remains a decent enough diversion for horror fans and John Carpenter completists.&quot; On Metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 53 out of 100 based on 17 critics, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;.

Critics generally commended the film on its technical aspects, particularly its special effects, acting, and directing, but perceived it as being too complicated, confusing, pretentious, and underwhelming. Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars, saying that the film has an intriguing premise, but squanders it by relying on hackneyed jump scares and gore, taking the form of &quot;a horror house movie, in which the protagonists creep along while creatures leap at them.&quot; Gene Siskel gave the film the same rating, as did James Berardinelli, who said the film &quot;comes close to doing something interesting but gets cold feet&quot; and is &quot;confusing, weird, and not very involving&quot;, comparing the film to buying an exotic sports car only to drive it slowly. Lisa Schwarzbaum, writing in &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;, gave the film a C rating, remarking that &quot;much of it [is] bloatedly self-indulgent and a small part wicked funny&quot;, with only a smattering of successful moments.

In fully positive reviews from the time period, Kevin Thomas of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; called it &quot;a thinking person&#x27;s horror picture that dares to be as cerebral as it is visceral&quot;. John Hartl of the Seattle Times also gave the film a positive review, saying it&#x27;s &quot;a stylized collection of well-timed shockers, helped along by the contributions of its capable cast.&quot; &quot;The Chicago Reader&quot; gave it three stars, calling it &quot;a must see&quot;. In a later review, Chris Stuckmann also awarded the film with an &quot;A,&quot; noting its ambition, creativity, and originality alongside Carpenter&#x27;s direction. Reel Film Reviews gave the film three out of four stars.

French magazine &quot;Cahiers du Cinéma&quot; listed the film as #10 on its 1995 Top 10 List.

== Awards ==
==Home media==
Following the early VHS releases, a Blu-ray version of the film by New Line Cinema was released in 2013. In 2016, the film was re-released on DVD by Warner Archive Collection. In 2018, Shout! Factory re-released the film under its Scream Factory sub-label as a Collector&#x27;s Edition Blu-ray.

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* &quot;In the Mouth of Madness&quot; at theofficialjohncarpenter.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="43" end="67" title="horror film" label="supernatural horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="91" end="105" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q920273" start="121" end="136" title="Michael De Luca" label="Michael De Luca"/>
<link wikidata="Q214309" start="147" end="156" title="Sam Neill" label="Sam Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q508681" start="158" end="170" title="Julie Carmen" label="Julie Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61356" start="172" end="187" title="Jürgen Prochnow" label="Jürgen Prochnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q363271" start="189" end="201" title="David Warner (actor)" label="David Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="206" end="221" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443513" start="253" end="275" title="insurance investigator" label="insurance investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="363" end="375" title="horror novel" label="horror novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q210756" start="598" end="607" title="The Thing (1982 film)" label="The Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q601013" start="631" end="649" title="Prince of Darkness (film)" label="Prince of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="737" end="752" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="775" end="783" title="insanity" label="insanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q786586" start="843" end="870" title="At the Mountains of Madness" label="At the Mountains of Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="893" end="908" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443513" start="1012" end="1034" title="insurance investigator" label="insurance investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999003" start="1457" end="1472" title="publicity stunt" label="publicity stunt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3467" end="3475" title="Cthulhu Mythos deities#Great Old Ones" label="old ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q214309" start="5143" end="5152" title="Sam Neill" label="Sam Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q508681" start="5169" end="5181" title="Julie Carmen" label="Julie Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61356" start="5200" end="5215" title="Jürgen Prochnow" label="Jürgen Prochnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q363271" start="5233" end="5245" title="David Warner (actor)" label="David Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q281621" start="5261" end="5272" title="John Glover (actor)" label="John Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q372497" start="5289" end="5301" title="Bernie Casey" label="Bernie Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076016" start="5316" end="5327" title="Peter Jason" label="Peter Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="5342" end="5357" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q292446" start="5391" end="5402" title="Frances Bay" label="Frances Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q71412" start="5429" end="5448" title="Wilhelm von Homburg" label="Wilhelm von Homburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192812" start="5467" end="5485" title="Hayden Christensen" label="Hayden Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305150" start="5777" end="5788" title="Tony Randel" label="Tony Randel"/>
<link wikidata="Q272678" start="5807" end="5819" title="Mary Lambert (director)" label="Mary Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109097" start="6062" end="6084" title="Main Street Unionville" label="Main Street Unionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052473" start="6139" end="6171" title="Cathedral of the Transfiguration (Markham)" label="Cathedral of the Transfiguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q44016" start="6193" end="6209" title="Markham, Ontario" label="Markham, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="6256" end="6263" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="6419" end="6447" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29415020" start="6542" end="6555" title="KNB EFX Group" label="KNB EFX Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="7367" end="7374" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="7412" end="7427" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q786586" start="7532" end="7559" title="At the Mountains of Madness" label="At the Mountains of Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="7571" end="7579" title="insanity" label="insanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="7711" end="7717" title="psychiatric hospital" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="7754" end="7763" title="flashback (literary technique)" label="flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317316" start="7914" end="7921" title="Pickman&amp;#x27;s Model" label="Pickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278904" start="8402" end="8414" title="Nigel Kneale" label="Nigel Kneale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248690" start="8428" end="8450" title="Quatermass and the Pit" label="Quatermass and the Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="8500" end="8512" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="8887" end="8896" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q66057605" start="8908" end="8921" title="Enter Sandman" label="Enter Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178866" start="9076" end="9084" title="Jim Lang (composer)" label="Jim Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q364890" start="9099" end="9110" title="Dave Davies" label="Dave Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="9114" end="9123" title="The Kinks" label="The Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="9679" end="9694" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="9782" end="9798" title="weighted average" label="weighted average"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="10051" end="10061" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="10394" end="10405" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="10675" end="10686" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q711909" start="10725" end="10743" title="James Berardinelli" label="James Berardinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558398" start="10973" end="10989" title="Lisa Schwarzbaum" label="Lisa Schwarzbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="11008" end="11028" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104561" start="11256" end="11268" title="Kevin Thomas (film critic)" label="Kevin Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="11282" end="11299" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="11434" end="11447" title="Seattle Times" label="Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076422" start="11622" end="11640" title="The Chicago Reader" label="The Chicago Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q53820435" start="11722" end="11737" title="Chris Stuckmann" label="Chris Stuckmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q909176" start="11950" end="11967" title="Cahiers du Cinéma" label="Cahiers du Cinéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="12071" end="12074" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="12087" end="12094" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969697" start="12200" end="12225" title="Warner Archive Collection" label="Warner Archive Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="12236" end="12250" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343691" wikidata="Q4905753" url="?curid=343691" title="Big Game (American football)">
<text>The Big Game is the name given to the California–Stanford football rivalry. It is an American college football rivalry game played by the California Golden Bears football team of the University of California, Berkeley, and the Stanford Cardinal football team of Stanford University. Both institutions are located in the San Francisco Bay Area. First played in 1892, it remains one of the oldest college rivalries in the United States. The game is usually played in late November or early December and its location alternates between the two universities every year. In even-numbered years, the game is played in Berkeley while odd-numbered years are played at Stanford.

==Series history==

=== First years ===
The Big Game is the oldest college football rivalry in the West. While an undergraduate at Stanford, future U.S. President Herbert Hoover was the student manager of both the baseball and football teams. He helped organize the inaugural Big Game, along with his friend Cal manager Herbert Lang. Only 10,000 tickets were printed for the game but 20,000 people showed up. Hoover and Lang scrambled to find pots, bowls and any other available receptacles to collect the admission fees.

By 1900 the match was already referred to as the &quot;Big Game&quot;. In 1898, Berkeley alumnus and San Francisco Mayor James D. Phelan purchased a casting of Douglas Tilden&#x27;s &quot;The Football Players&quot; bronze sculpture and offered it as a prize to the school that could win the football game two years in a row. Berkeley responded by shutting Stanford out in 1898 and 1899, and the sculpture was installed on the Berkeley campus atop a stone pedestal engraved with the names of the players and the donor during a dedication ceremony held May 12, 1900.
During the 1900 Big Game, played at the Recreation Park stadium on Thanksgiving Day in San Francisco, a large group of fans were observing from the roof of the nearby S.F. and Pacific Glass Works factory. With somewhere between 600 and 1,000 spectators atop it, the rooftop collapsed, resulting in well over 100 men falling to the factory&#x27;s floor and more than 60 directly onto the massive, blazing furnace. In total 23 men and boys were killed, and more than 100 severely injured. To this day, the &quot;Thanksgiving Day Disaster&quot; remains the deadliest accident to kill spectators at a U.S. sporting event.

=== Violence and switch to rugby ===
In 1906, citing concerns about the violence in football, both schools dropped football in favor of Rugby, which was played for the Big Games of 1906–1918. During that time the matches were played under Union rules of rugby per an agreement between Stanford and Cal coaches along with other West coast teams, including Nevada, St. Mary&#x27;s, Santa Clara, and USC (in 1911) 

The first incidence of card stunts was performed by Cal fans at the halftime of the 1910 Big Game.
In 1915, Cal switched back to American football. Its official reason for withdrawal from its 1915 rugby match against Stanford was the disagreement over Stanford&#x27;s play of freshmen on their varsity team, however it was apparent that Cal intended to withdraw from the agreement to play rugby and instead play football against western schools that continued playing football or switched back several years earlier. Cal&#x27;s Big Game was played in the years 1915–17, against Washington, games which aren&#x27;t listed in Big Game records. Cal lost its 1915, home Big Game to University of Washington 72–0, while Stanford played rugby against its new Big Game opponent Santa Clara University, which would take Cal&#x27;s place for three successive seasons.

California resumed playing football in 1915, but Stanford&#x27;s rugby teams continued until 1917. From 1915 to 1917, California&#x27;s &quot;Big Game&quot; was their game against Washington, while Stanford played Santa Clara as their rugby &quot;Big Game&quot;.

The 1918 game, in which Cal prevailed 67–0, is not considered an official game because Stanford&#x27;s football team was composed of volunteers from the Student Army Training Corps stationed at Stanford, some of whom were not Stanford students. In 1919, Stanford officially switched back to playing football.

=== Football again (1919) ===
The game resumed as football in 1919, and has been played as such every year since, except from 1943 to 1945, when Stanford shut down its football program due to World War II. A handful of Stanford starters—including guards Jim Cox, Bill Hachten and Fred Boensch, running back George Quist and halfback Billy Agnew—shifted to Cal in order to continue playing. Quist returned to Stanford, playing against Cal in the 1946 Big Game.

Scenes for the Harold Lloyd silent classic &quot;The Freshman&quot; were filmed at California Memorial Stadium during halftime of the 1924 Big Game.

Since 1933, the victor of the game has been awarded possession of the Stanford Axe. If a game ended in a tie, the Axe stayed on the side that already possessed it; this rule became obsolete in 1996 when the NCAA instituted overtime. The Axe is a key part of the rivalry&#x27;s history, having been stolen on several occasions by both sides, starting in 1899, when the Axe was introduced when Stanford yell leader Billy Erb used it at a baseball game between the two schools.

In March 2007, the National Football League announced that it intended to trademark the phrase &quot;The Big Game&quot; in reference to the Super Bowl, but soon dropped the plan after being faced with opposition from Cal and Stanford.

In 2013, the new Levi&#x27;s Stadium in Santa Clara was proposed as the site of the 2014 Big Game, which according to the traditional rotation should be played at Cal&#x27;s Memorial Stadium. The 2015 game would then be held in Berkeley, reversing the current rotation of odd-numbered years at Stanford and even-numbered years at Cal. However, several days later Cal declined the offer.

==Pregame traditions==

In the week before the game, both schools celebrate the occasion with rallies, reunions, and luncheons. Early in the week, Cal celebrates in San Francisco with an annual cable car rally, usually held on the Monday of Big Game Week by the UC Rally Committee. Various other rallies and celebrations take place at Cal throughout the week, including noon rallies, night rallies that go to all the dorms, singing competitions, and alumni reunions. The highlight of the week is when Cal students hold a traditional pep rally and bonfire at the Hearst Greek Theatre on the eve of the game, known as the Big Game Bonfire Rally. 

Stanford students stage the Gaieties, a theatrical production that both celebrates and pokes fun at the rivalry. The week also includes various other athletic events including &quot;The Big Splash&quot; (water polo), &quot;The Big Spike&quot; (volleyball), &quot;The Big Sweep&quot; (Quidditch), &quot;The Big Freeze&quot; (ice hockey), &quot;The Big Sail&quot; (sailing), and the Ink Bowl, a touch football game between the members of the two schools&#x27; newspapers.
===Cal===

The Big Game Bonfire Rally is a pep and bonfire rally that takes place at University of California, Berkeley in Hearst Greek Theatre on the eve of Big Game. More than 10,000 students gather to hear the history about The Stanford Axe and Big Game. The University of California Rally Committee is in charge of the planning and setting up the bonfire, as well as refueling it during the rally. Specifically, freshman members of the UC Rally Committee, as well as freshman band members are sent out with pallets to the chanting of &quot;freshmen, more wood.&quot; Several alumni show up to perform traditional rituals. A tradition unique to Cal is the performance of the Haka, a traditional Maori war dance/chant. Traditionally performed by an alumni Yell Leader, the Haka performed was written in the 1960s by a Cal rugby player of Maori descent. The traditional Axe Yell is also made and visits from the UC Men&#x27;s Octet and Golden Overtones are always expected. The University of California Marching Band is also present, playing traditional Cal songs throughout the duration of the Rally. The highlight of the Rally is the lighting of Big Game Bonfire itself, with the fire reaching its zenith at over eight stories.

The Big Game Bonfire Rally always ends with the reciting of a speech known as the &quot;Andy Smith Eulogy&quot; or &quot;The Spirit of California&quot;. Written by Garff Wilson in remembrance of the fabled Cal football coach, who led the Bears to five straight undefeated seasons starting in 1919 before tragically dying of pneumonia in 1925, the speech closes the Rally annually since 1949. During the speech, candles are passed out among the attendants and are lit for the singing of the campus alma mater, &quot;All Hail Blue and Gold.&quot;

In 2012, the Big Game Bonfire Rally was moved to Edwards Stadium and the bonfire was cancelled due to a scheduling conflict with a Bob Dylan concert. Due to TV contracts, the Pac-12 Conference rescheduled the Big Game from its traditional season-ending slot to October 20, and the Greek Theatre was already booked for the Bob Dylan concert. This was the first time the bonfire had not been held since 1892. The bonfire portion of the rally was cancelled again in 2015 due to the ongoing drought. In 2016, the Fiat Lux torch was added as a symbol of light, with, &quot;For the flames of the past, spirit of the present, and light of the future&quot; engraved on it. In 2018, the big game was rescheduled due to the unhealthy air quality caused by the Camp Fire. All fire/pyrotechnical elements were cut from the rally. The UC Rally Committee immediately began preparations to re-invent the traditional wood burning structure, as they did not want the fire to extinguish like it had almost 30 years earlier at Stanford. In November 2019, a new sheet metal bonfire structure was unveiled. The 2024 edition of the Big Game Bonfire Rally was cancelled due to excessive rain and flooding.
===Stanford===
For decades, Stanford also has held a bonfire on the dry lakebed of Lake Lagunita, but this was discontinued in the 1990s due to the lake being a habitat for the vulnerable California tiger salamander. Stanford now holds a Big Game Rally on Angell Field organized by the Stanford Axe Committee. With appearances from the senior football players and various performance groups, it serves to kick off Big Game Week. The story of The Stanford Axe is told by Hal Mickelson, and the Axe Yell is performed by the Yell Leaders of The Stanford Axe Committee. The rally ends with a performance by the Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band and a fireworks show. A student-produced play called &quot;Gaieties,&quot; an annual Big Game week tradition since 1911, pokes fun at Cal and serves to pump students up for the Big Game. Another part of Stanford&#x27;s tradition was the annual hanging of the substantial &quot;Beat Cal&quot; banner upon the four story Meyer Library building. This tradition came to an end in 2014 before the building was demolished. Since 2015, the banner has been hung over the western entrance to Green Library.

==Notable games==

===1924===
Both teams came into the game unbeaten with a berth in the 1925 Rose Bowl on the line. With its star Ernie Nevers sidelined due to injuries, Stanford trailed 20–6 with under 5 minutes to go, but rallied to score twice to force a 20–20 tie and earn the Rose Bowl bid.

===1947===
In the 50th Big Game, winless Stanford led the 8–1 Bears with less than three minutes left in the game, but Cal scored on an 80-yard touchdown pass to clinch a 21–18 victory.

===1959===
Stanford quarterback Dick Norman threw for 401 yards (then an NCAA record, and still a Big Game record), but it was not enough to hold off the Bears, who won 20–17.

===1972===
Cal drove 62 yards in the final 1:13, culminating in a Vince Ferragamo touchdown pass to Steve Sweeney for a last-second 24–22 Cal victory.

===1974===
Mike Langford nailed a 50-yard field goal on the final play for a 22–20 Stanford triumph over the 19th-ranked Bears.

===1982: The Play===

The conclusion of the 85th Big Game on November 20, 1982, would go down as perhaps the most remarkable play in college football history. Cal held a lead late in the game, but Stanford, led by John Elway, drove down the field to retake the lead, and seemingly elevate Elway to the first bowl game of his college career, since a Stanford victory would have resulted in an invitation to the Hall of Fame Bowl.

In what is now known simply as &quot;The Play,&quot; four Cal players lateraled the ball five times on a kickoff return with four seconds left on the clock. Kevin Moen, who was also the initial ball carrier, ran for a touchdown while knocking down the final Stanford &quot;defender,&quot; trombone player Gary Tyrrell, who had run onto the field with the rest of the band to celebrate prematurely.

The Play is often recounted with KGO radio announcer Joe Starkey&#x27;s emotional call of The Play, which he hailed as &quot;the most amazing, sensational, dramatic, heartrending, exciting, thrilling finish in the history of college football!&quot; The legitimacy of The Play has remained controversial among some Stanford fans. The final outcome was a Cal victory by a score of 25–20. There is contention as to whether the play was correctly officiated, however. 

In 2007, as part of the buildup to The Play&#x27;s 25th anniversary, the Bay Area News Group asked Verle Sorgen, the Pac-10 Conference&#x27;s supervisor of instant replay, to review the two disputed laterals according to modern NCAA instant replay review rules. After watching enhanced footage on a modern, large-screen monitor, Sorgen opined that the fifth lateral from Ford to Moen &quot;was released at the 22 and touched at the 20-1/2. From that, it clearly appears forward.&quot; Asked for his &quot;ultimate call,&quot; Sorgen replied, &quot;I would be tempted to reverse it...then go out and get the motor running in my car.&quot;

=== 1986 ===
Cal was 1–9 in the conference, while Stanford was 7–2 and ranked 16th in the nation. Cal&#x27;s defense dominated the game – Stanford&#x27;s quarterback John Paye was sacked seven times, while Stanford&#x27;s running game was held to 41 yards. Cal won the game 17–11. It was the last game of Cal&#x27;s coach Joe Kapp, who also coached the Golden Bears in 1982, his first season, when Cal won the Big Game following The Play.

===1988===
With the score tied, Cal marched to the Stanford 3-yard line with 4 seconds remaining in the game. Called &quot;the Cadillac of kickers in college football&quot; by Cal coach Bruce Snyder, all Pac-10 and future all-American Robbie Keen lined up for a 21-yard field goal attempt to win the game on the final play. When the ball was snapped, Stanford redshirt freshman Tuan Van Le raced from the left end of the defensive line to block the kick and preserve a 19–19 tie. As Stanford was the holder of the Axe going into the game, the tie meant the Axe returned to the Farm for another year. The result was celebrated in the stadium as a victory by Stanford as the Axe was paraded by the Stanford Axe Committee and football players before jubilant Cardinal fans, with stunned Bears fans looking on. This was the only Big Game to end in a tie after 1953 and, under current overtime rules, may be the last Big Game to end tied.

===1990===
This game had echoes of the 1982 game due to late seesaw scoring, the critical role of fans on the field, and the winning points being scored as time expired. It has been called &quot;The Payback&quot; or &quot;The Revenge of the Play&quot; by Stanford fans.

After trailing since the first quarter, left-footed Stanford kicker John Hopkins kicked his fourth field goal of the game with 9:56 left to give Stanford its first lead at 18–17. Cal responded with a touchdown, and added a two-point conversion to lead 25–18 with 6:03 left. Stanford stopped Cal on a third and 6 on the Stanford 46 with 2:06 left to play. After Cal&#x27;s punt, Stanford took its final possession on its own 13 with 1:54 left. Escaping two near interceptions and converting a 4th and 6, Stanford moved the ball to the Cal 19 with seventeen seconds left. After quarterback Jason Palumbis threw a touchdown pass to Ed McCaffrey in the end zone to make it 25–24, Cardinal coach Dennis Green quickly went for a two-point conversion, with no overtime, and despite the fact that a tie would keep the Axe at Stanford for another year.

After Palumbis&#x27; pass into the end zone was intercepted by John Hardy, Cal fans, players and team officials – believing they had won the game and the Axe – invaded the field and caused a lengthy delay before police, stadium security and officials restored order, with officials assessing Cal a 15-yard delay of game penalty.

Now kicking from the 50-yard line with twelve seconds left, Hopkins bounced the ensuing onside kick off a Cal player and, after being touched by seven players, the ball was recovered by Stanford&#x27;s Dan Byers on the Cal 37. With nine seconds left and no time outs remaining, a pass attempt to McCaffrey to set up a field goal fell short, but officials assessed Cal a 15-yard penalty after Palumbis was roughed on the play, moving the ball to the 22-yard line. With five seconds remaining, Hopkins kicked a 39-yard field goal into the wind, giving Stanford a 27–25 victory as time expired, with Stanford fans, players and team officials invading the field in celebration.

The roughing the passer penalty was contested by Cal team coaches and Cal fans alike. 

The late passing and kicking excitement overshadowed two excellent running performances by Cal&#x27;s Russell White (177 yards and 2 TD&#x27;s) and Stanford&#x27;s Glyn Milburn (196 yards and 1 TD). Milburn also led Stanford receiving with 9 receptions for 66 yards and had 117 return yards: His 379 all-purpose yards set a Pac-10 record at the time and remained Stanford&#x27;s record until it was eclipsed by Christian McCaffrey&#x27;s 389 all-purpose yards in the 2015 edition of the Big Game.

===2000===
Stanford&#x27;s Casey Moore caught the winning touchdown on the final play of the first-ever Big Game to go into overtime.

===2009===
Cal&#x27;s Michael Mohamed intercepted an Andrew Luck pass at the Cal 3-yard line with 1:36 left to preserve a Cal win over #14 Stanford, 34–28. It was also a rare Big Game where both teams were nationally ranked.

===2010===

Sixth-ranked Stanford, in a 48–14 victory, ties Cal&#x27;s 1975 record for most points scored in a Big Game.

===2013===
Winning 63–13, #10 Stanford set the record for most points scored in a Big Game, shattering the previous record of 48 shared by Cal in 1975 and Stanford in 2010. The 50-point victory margin also set a Big Game record, breaking the previous record that had stood for 83 years when Stanford beat Cal 41–0 in 1930. The 76 total points scored by both teams broke the record of 66 set in 2000. With the victory, Stanford clinched the Pac-12 North Division Championship while Cal ended its season at 1–11, the most losses in one season in Cal football history.

=== 2018 ===
The 2018 Big Game was originally scheduled to be played on November 17, but was rescheduled to December 1 at 12:00 noon, because of unhealthy air quality in the Bay Area caused by the Camp Fire. Stanford continued its streak, winning for the ninth time in a row, beating Cal 23–13.

=== 2019 ===
Down 20–17 with 2:23 remaining, the Cal offense engineered a six-play, 75-yard drive culminating in a 16-yard touchdown run from quarterback Chase Garbers to give the Bears their first lead of the game. Cal linebacker Evan Weaver sealed the 24–20 victory for the Bears with a dramatic fourth-and-one stop on Cardinal running back Cameron Scarlett on the subsequent possession, setting off a raucous celebration on Stanford&#x27;s home turf as the Axe returned to Berkeley after nearly a decade away.

=== 2020 ===
In the COVID-19 pandemic-shortened 2020 season, both Cal and Stanford entered the game with 0–2 records on the season, with each team previously having a game cancelled due to COVID infections. Cal opened scrimmage with a dominant 8 play, 75-yard touchdown drive. However, three punts each by both teams, a muffed punt recovered by Stanford at Cal&#x27;s 16 (resulting in a touchdown), and a last-second blocked field goal attempt by Cal from the Stanford 32 as time expired left the game tied at 10–10 to enter halftime. A third-quarter fumble at Cal&#x27;s 41 provided Stanford with good scoring position, leading to a touchdown three plays later and giving Stanford their first lead of the game, 17–10. Trailing 24–17 with 4:28 left in the fourth, Cal completed a 14 play, 90-yard drive starting from their own 10 yard-line to score a touchdown with 58 seconds remaining in regulation. Now trailing by just one point with the score at 24–23, Cal coach Justin Wilcox signaled for a 2-pt PAT, which was blocked by Stanford&#x27;s Thomas Booker, in a play forever immortalized by Stanford Axe Committee members as &quot;The Block.&quot; Cal attempted an unsuccessful onside kick, and Stanford recovered the Axe four plays and 11 yards later, taking it back to the Farm for the 10th time in 11 seasons.

=== 2024=== 
Cal and Stanford met in Berkeley in their first Big Game as members of the Atlantic Coast Conference. Stanford came out strong with two first quarter touchdowns by Justin Lamson to build a 14-point lead. Trailing 21–7 towards the end of the third quarter, Cal scored 17 unanswered points to rally back to a 24–21 win. Following a field goal by Ryan Coe, Fernando Mendoza found receiver Jonathan Brady for a 30-yard touchdown to cut the lead to 21–16. A Stanford punt pushed the Golden Bears back to their own 2-yard line, requiring them to drive 98 yards to take the lead. Mendoza connected with Nyziah Hunter for a 36 yard gain, found tight end Jack Endries on a pivotal fourth-down conversion and later, on third-and-11, he found Jonathan Brady again for a 22-yard score and a 2-point conversion by Jaydn Ott pushed the lead to 3 with 2:40 to play. The drive is referred to by Cal fans as “98 Yards With My Boys” because of Mendoza’s emotional postgame interview. Cal&#x27;s defense forced a sack on quarterback Ashton Daniels and turnover on downs on the Cardinal&#x27;s following possession, and the Bears retained possession of the Stanford Axe for the fourth consecutive season, a feat which has only been accomplished 4 times.

==Game results==
* = Rugby football game.
* = As California resumed football in 1915, Santa Clara was Stanford&#x27;s rival during that period.
* = No games played from 1943 through 1945 as Stanford shut down its football program due to World War II.

==Rivalry in other sports==

In other sports, matchups between Cal and Stanford feature their own nicknames based on the word &quot;big.&quot; Examples include:

*Men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s soccer – The &quot;Big Clasico&quot;.
*Men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s rowing – The &quot;Big Row&quot; now in honor of Cal coxswain Jill Costello who died of stage 4 lung cancer in 2010. The men’s rowing teams have held more than 95 duel races since 1902.
*Men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s track and field – The &quot;Big Meet&quot;
*Volleyball – The &quot;Big Spike&quot;
*Men&#x27;s basketball – The &quot;Big Dunk&quot;
*Water polo – The &quot;Big Splash&quot;
*Ice hockey – The &quot;Big Freeze&quot;
*Sailing – The “Big Sail”, held at St. Francis Yacht Club in San Francisco
*Quidditch – The &quot;Big Sweep&quot;

In rugby, the two schools have a trophy of their own called the &quot;Scrum Axe&quot;. In men&#x27;s basketball the semiannual matchups are sometimes labeled the &quot;Big Game&quot; but it is not official. In women&#x27;s basketball, the meetings are simply called the &quot;Battle of the Bay.&quot;

==Naming Convention==
&quot;The Big Game&quot; is the common term when used as a standalone noun: &quot;I am going to The Big Game next week.&quot; In all other uses, &quot;The&quot; is dropped: &quot;We are happy to report that the 2024 Big Game was won by Cal.&quot; &quot;Cal defeated Stanford&#x27;s Hall of Fame Big Game quarterback John Elway three out of four years.&quot;

Stanford University and its fans drop the article &quot;The&quot; in opposition to the normal three-word usage.

The full three word term was used in both schools&#x27; opposing the NFL&#x27;s attempt to copyright the term &quot;The Big Game&quot; 

== See also ==

* List of NCAA college football rivalry games
* List of most-played college football series in NCAA Division I
*Stanford Axe
*1906–17 Stanford rugby teams
*California Golden Bears rugby
*Kings–Warriors rivalry
*Bay Bridge Series

==References==
==External links==

*Stanford Magazine feature on Big Game
*The Play
*Transcript of Joe Starkey&#x27;s call of the Play
*Discussion about the filming of 1925 film, &quot;The Freshman&quot; at Big Game
*Stanford Daily article on the history of Big Game
*Big Game Videos Summary of the entire 1982 game on mReplay.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4905753" start="0" end="12" title="Big Game (American football)" label="The Big Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905753" start="38" end="74" title="Big Game (American football)" label="California–Stanford football rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="94" end="110" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146910" start="111" end="118" title="college rivalry" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650742" start="138" end="170" title="California Golden Bears football" label="California Golden Bears football"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="183" end="217" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598725" start="227" end="253" title="Stanford Cardinal football" label="Stanford Cardinal football"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="262" end="281" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="320" end="342" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="834" end="848" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680239" start="1315" end="1330" title="James D. Phelan" label="James D. Phelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302032" start="1354" end="1368" title="Douglas Tilden" label="Douglas Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303057" start="1799" end="1822" title="Recreation Park (San Francisco)" label="Recreation Park stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q111459288" start="2021" end="2042" title="Thanksgiving Day Disaster" label="the rooftop collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="2514" end="2519" title="rugby union" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185955" start="2733" end="2739" title="University of Nevada, Reno" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401829" start="2741" end="2756" title="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s College of California" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q992830" start="2758" end="2769" title="Santa Clara University" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="2775" end="2778" title="University of Southern California" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920023" start="2814" end="2824" title="card stunt" label="card stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971948" start="3369" end="3379" title="Washington Huskies football" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419313" start="3562" end="3584" title="Santa Clara Broncos football" label="Santa Clara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558639" start="3700" end="3727" title="1906–17 Stanford rugby teams" label="Stanford&amp;#x27;s rugby teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971948" start="3831" end="3841" title="Washington Huskies football" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419312" start="3865" end="3876" title="Santa Clara Broncos" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="4068" end="4095" title="ROTC" label="Student Army Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194387" start="4479" end="4486" title="Jim Cox (guard)" label="Jim Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867381" start="4488" end="4500" title="Bill Hachten" label="Bill Hachten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494657" start="4505" end="4517" title="Fred Boensch" label="Fred Boensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q104340" start="4701" end="4713" title="Harold Lloyd" label="Harold Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482628" start="4735" end="4747" title="The Freshman (1925 film)" label="The Freshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026837" start="4769" end="4796" title="California Memorial Stadium" label="California Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598717" start="4906" end="4918" title="Stanford Axe" label="Stanford Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="5331" end="5355" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="5452" end="5462" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419343" start="5565" end="5584" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q159260" start="5588" end="5599" title="Santa Clara, California" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q671266" start="6498" end="6518" title="Hearst Greek Theatre" label="Hearst Greek Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="6786" end="6796" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="6826" end="6836" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q305561" start="6866" end="6875" title="Quidditch" label="Quidditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="6906" end="6916" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14085739" start="6945" end="6952" title="sailing (sport)" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q970584" start="6975" end="6989" title="Touch football (American)" label="touch football"/>
<link wikidata="Q671266" start="7175" end="7195" title="Hearst Greek Theatre" label="Hearst Greek Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598717" start="7279" end="7295" title="The Stanford Axe" label="The Stanford Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640287" start="7730" end="7734" title="Haka performed by non-New Zealand sports teams" label="Haka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020510" start="7872" end="7881" title="California Golden Bears rugby" label="Cal rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q634416" start="7965" end="7984" title="University of California Men&amp;#x27;s Octet" label="UC Men&amp;#x27;s Octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020514" start="7989" end="8005" title="California Golden Overtones" label="Golden Overtones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895199" start="8031" end="8069" title="University of California Marching Band" label="University of California Marching Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761327" start="8372" end="8382" title="Andy Smith (American football)" label="Andy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728778" start="8799" end="8821" title="All Hail Blue and Gold" label="All Hail Blue and Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346131" start="8879" end="8894" title="Edwards Stadium" label="Edwards Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="8961" end="8970" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075430" start="9305" end="9324" title="2011–17 California drought" label="the ongoing drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q58416875" start="9580" end="9589" title="Camp Fire (2018)" label="Camp Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476540" start="10096" end="10109" title="Lake Lagunita" label="Lake Lagunita"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="10190" end="10200" title="Vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030667" start="10201" end="10228" title="California tiger salamander" label="California tiger salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598718" start="10620" end="10667" title="Stanford Band" label="Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682497" start="10987" end="11000" title="J. Henry Meyer Memorial Library" label="Meyer Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405931" start="11151" end="11164" title="Cecil H. Green Library" label="Green Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561758" start="11256" end="11270" title="1925 Rose Bowl" label="1925 Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356935" start="11298" end="11310" title="Ernie Nevers" label="Ernie Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273237" start="11684" end="11695" title="Dick Norman (football)" label="Dick Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931489" start="11895" end="11910" title="Vince Ferragamo" label="Vince Ferragamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q432931" start="12324" end="12334" title="John Elway" label="John Elway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922711" start="12418" end="12427" title="bowl game" label="bowl game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358600" start="12520" end="12537" title="Hall of Fame Bowl" label="Hall of Fame Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522255" start="12577" end="12585" title="The Play (American football)" label="The Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329813" start="12972" end="12975" title="KGO-AM" label="KGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212490" start="12992" end="13003" title="Joe Starkey" label="Joe Starkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252322" start="14210" end="14219" title="John Paye" label="John Paye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210609" start="14366" end="14374" title="Joe Kapp" label="Joe Kapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q24923" start="14754" end="14764" title="Field goal (football)" label="field goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239827" start="15758" end="15770" title="John Hopkins (football)" label="John Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083063" start="15913" end="15933" title="two-point conversion" label="two-point conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163221" start="16278" end="16292" title="Jason Palumbis" label="Jason Palumbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047193" start="16319" end="16331" title="Ed McCaffrey" label="Ed McCaffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094549" start="16953" end="16964" title="onside kick" label="onside kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381867" start="17730" end="17743" title="Russell White" label="Russell White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572862" start="17792" end="17804" title="Glyn Milburn" label="Glyn Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621996" start="18039" end="18058" title="Christian McCaffrey" label="Christian McCaffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048545" start="18153" end="18164" title="Casey Moore" label="Casey Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="18250" end="18258" title="Overtime (sports)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q506098" start="18314" end="18325" title="Andrew Luck" label="Andrew Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q58416875" start="19373" end="19382" title="Camp Fire (2018)" label="Camp Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q97185231" start="20006" end="20045" title="2020 NCAA Division I FBS football season" label="COVID-19 pandemic-shortened 2020 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318274" start="20954" end="20967" title="Justin Wilcox (American football)" label="Justin Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603777" start="20988" end="20991" title="Conversion (gridiron football)" label="PAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q756355" start="21390" end="21415" title="Atlantic Coast Conference" label="Atlantic Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q122918023" start="21479" end="21492" title="Justin Lamson" label="Justin Lamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123411920" start="21669" end="21685" title="Fernando Mendoza" label="Fernando Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q131450320" start="21911" end="21924" title="Nyziah Hunter" label="Nyziah Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q132626401" start="21961" end="21973" title="Jack Endries" label="Jack Endries"/>
<link wikidata="Q114324322" start="22116" end="22125" title="Jaydn Ott" label="Jaydn Ott"/>
<link wikidata="Q122193463" start="22329" end="22343" title="Ashton Daniels" label="Ashton Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598717" start="22452" end="22464" title="Stanford Axe" label="Stanford Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="22571" end="22585" title="Rugby football" label="Rugby football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419313" start="22636" end="22647" title="Santa Clara Broncos football" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647248" start="23113" end="23121" title="coxswain" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23223" end="23233" title="College rowing in the United States#Spring" label="duel races"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="23409" end="23419" title="Water polo" label="Water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="23450" end="23460" title="Ice hockey" label="Ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14085739" start="23491" end="23498" title="Sailing (sport)" label="Sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131388400" start="23501" end="23514" title="The Big Sail" label="The “Big Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q305561" start="23566" end="23575" title="Quidditch" label="Quidditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146907" start="23608" end="23613" title="College rugby" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591090" start="24556" end="24599" title="List of NCAA college football rivalry games" label="List of NCAA college football rivalry games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916817" start="24602" end="24664" title="List of most-played college football series in NCAA Division I" label="List of most-played college football series in NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598717" start="24666" end="24678" title="Stanford Axe" label="Stanford Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558639" start="24680" end="24708" title="1906–17 Stanford rugby teams" label="1906–17 Stanford rugby teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020510" start="24710" end="24739" title="California Golden Bears rugby" label="California Golden Bears rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q121027524" start="24741" end="24763" title="Kings–Warriors rivalry" label="Kings–Warriors rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873941" start="24765" end="24782" title="Bay Bridge Series" label="Bay Bridge Series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343692" wikidata="Q7598718" url="?curid=343692" title="Stanford Band">
<text>The Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band (LSJUMB) is the student marching band representing Stanford University and its athletic teams. Billing itself as &quot;The World&#x27;s Largest Rock and Roll Band,&quot; the Stanford Band performs at sporting events, student activities, and other functions. The Stanford Tree is the band&#x27;s mascot.

==History==
The LSJUMB was formed in 1893. However, its modern era began in 1963 with the hiring of Arthur P. Barnes as interim director (he got the full-time post two years later). Previous director Julius Shuchat had been very popular, and his ouster caused several members to go on strike. However, according to band lore, Barnes immediately won the band&#x27;s loyalty by ceding any meaningful control over it. As a result, the band is almost entirely student-run.

In 1972, the Band went from an all-male band to co-ed.

The band and its new director also clicked over his arrangement of &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner,&quot; which featured the striking effect of a single trumpet playing the first half of the song, joined later by soft woodwinds and tuba, and finally bringing the full power of the brass only in the final verse. When it was played at the &quot;Big Game&quot; against California, just eight days after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Barnes said, &quot;I&#x27;ve never heard such a loud silence.&quot;

Empowered, the student-led band threw away the traditional marching music and military-style uniforms, eventually settling for a mostly rock and roll repertoire and a simplified uniform consisting of a white fishing hat with red trim (and as many buttons as will fit), red blazer, black pants, and &quot;the ugliest tie you can get your hands on.&quot; In the springtime and at non-athletic events, band members appear at performances (and sometimes even at rehearsals) wearing &quot;rally&quot; attire, which can range from swim suits to Halloween costumes to furniture and pets, always displaying their freedom from the usual rules of fashion. Its Badonkadonk Land Cruiser, resembling a vehicle from the 1983 Star Wars movie &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;, is used as a band-support vehicle.

==Songs and shows==

The band&#x27;s repertoire is heavy on classic rock of the 1970s, particularly songs by Tower of Power, Santana, and The Who. In the 1990s, more modern music was introduced, including songs by Green Day and The Offspring. For many years, it has billed itself as &quot;The World&#x27;s Largest Rock &#x27;n Roll Band.&quot;

The &quot;de facto&quot; fight song is &quot;All Right Now,&quot; originally performed by Free. Another frequently played song in their repertoire is &quot;White Punks on Dope&quot;, originally by The Tubes. The band prides itself on its vast song selection, never playing the same song twice in one day (except for &quot;All Right Now&quot;). It has a library of over 1,000 songs at its disposal, 69 of which are in active rotation.

One of the first collegiate marching bands to record and release their music, the band has produced thirteen albums since 1967. Arrangements focus on the loudest brass instruments—trumpets, mellophones, and trombones—and percussion—one bass drum (called the Axis o&#x27; Rhythm), snare drums, and single tenor drums. This led a &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; writer to note in 1987, &quot;It&#x27;s hard for anyone raised on rock to imagine that a band could sound this loud without thousands of watts of amplification.&quot;

Many traditional band instruments like bells and glockenspiels are altogether absent. Traditional &quot;marching&quot; is also missing, as the band &quot;scatters&quot; from one formation to the next. The halftime field shows feature formations that are silly or suggestive shapes, as well as words. A team of Stanford students write a script for the halftime show, delivered over the public address system, which provides a basic explanation for the band&#x27;s formations.

===Stunts and incidents===
The LSJUMB&#x27;s behavior has made them notorious. They have been criticized and disciplined for their actions on several occasions, and according to Peter Sagal of NPR in 2006, the LSJUMB is &quot;the only university marching band...repeatedly fined and banned by the NCAA&quot;.
* In 1970 on September 12 at the Stanford-Arkansas football game, the band dropped their pants during the nationally televised halftime show.
*In the 1970s, one halftime show lampooned California student Patty Hearst&#x27;s kidnapping with a formation called the Hearst Burger — two buns and no patty.
*The LSJUMB has been banned from Disneyland due to their antics, such as taking over the microphone on the Storybook Land Canal boats, while visiting in Anaheim for the 1972 Rose Bowl. Disneyland officials were upset with the &quot;true story&quot; behind the ride. Additionally the Rose Bowl committee still requires advance review if the band marches in the parade due to their plan to ride golf carts instead of marching in 1971 and their having kegs of beer on a red wagon and passing out drinks to the crowd. The band also spelled out the initials SMUT (Stanford Marching Unit Thinkers – an official acronym for the group of band members who conceive the show) on the field before the 1972 Rose Bowl.
*In 1986, the university suspended the band from traveling to the UCLA football game scheduled on November 8, 1986, after incidents in previous games that season. First, on October 11, 1986, an infamous incident of public urination happened following the home football game against the Washington Huskies. Second, during the halftime show of the home USC game on October 25, 1986, the band spelled out &quot;NO BALLZ&quot; and formed male genitalia. Finally, they performed an anagram show and spelled out an anagram of a four-letter word (&quot;NCUT&quot;). After the UCLA game suspension was served, the band appeared at the Cal game wearing angel halos in an attempt to apologize and get invited to travel with the football team to a bowl game. The band attended the Gator Bowl that year, amid very close scrutiny.
*In 1989, before an away game against USC, the USC Trojan Marching Band toilet-papered the Stanford Tree mascot in the Coliseum tunnel before the pre-game show, resulting in a free-for-all between members of both bands and the mascot that had to be broken up by the referees.
*In 1990, Stanford suspended the band for a single game after their halftime show at the University of Oregon criticized the logging of the spotted owl&#x27;s habitats in the northwest United States. The band used formations in the shape of a chainsaw and in the shape of the word OWL changing to AWOL. Governor Neil Goldschmidt (a member of the Oregon Democratic Party) issued a decree that the band not return to Oregon for several years; the band did not return until 2001. After the spotted owl incident, all halftime shows were reviewed and approved by Stanford&#x27;s Athletic Department.
*In 1991, the University of Notre Dame banned the LSJUMB from visiting its campus after a halftime show at Stanford in which drum major Eric Selvik dressed as a nun and conducted the band using a wooden cross as a baton. (During the pregame show and first half of the game, the drum major had been dressed as an Orthodox Jew, where the wooden cross was part of a menorah-like baton.) After the halftime show, a female Notre Dame fan ran onto the field, approached from behind the unsuspecting Selvik, and forcibly ripped the nun habit off of his head. Selvik pursued and regained his habit from the attacker, who in the scuffle for the habit told the drum major he was &quot;going to hell for this.&quot;
*In 1992, the LSJUMB was denied entry to Disneyland after being invited there to play in connection with the Pigskin Classic III, which pitted Stanford against Texas A&amp;M.
*In 1992, Stanford&#x27;s athletic department pressured the LSJUMB to fire its announcer after one used the phrase &quot;No chuppah, no schtuppa&quot; at a San Jose State University game halftime show.
*In 1994, the band was disciplined after nineteen members skipped a field rehearsal in Los Angeles to play outside the Los Angeles County Superior Courthouse during jury selection for the O. J. Simpson murder trial. The band&#x27;s song selection included an arrangement of The Zombies&#x27; &quot;She&#x27;s Not There.&quot; Defense lawyer Robert Shapiro described the incident to the media as &quot;a new low in tasteless behavior.&quot; Later that year, during the halftime show of the football game against USC (where Simpson had played football and won the 1968 Heisman Trophy), band members drove a white Ford Bronco with bloody handprints around the Stanford Stadium track, an obvious allusion to the low-speed chase in which police followed a white Bronco carrying Simpson around the Los Angeles area.
*In 1997, the band was again disciplined for shows lampooning Catholicism and the Irish at a game against Notre Dame. The band put on a show entitled &quot;These Irish, Why Must they Fight?&quot; Besides the mocking supposedly stereotypical Irish-Catholic behavior, there was a Riverdance formation, and a Great Famine joke, drawing criticism for its &quot;tasteless&quot; portrayal of Catholics. Stanford President Gerhard Casper subsequently apologized for the band&#x27;s behavior; the band and the athletic director also apologized. Subsequently, the band was prohibited from playing at games against Notre Dame for two years.
*In 1999, when UCLA football players were caught in an ADA-accessible parking scandal, the band formed a disability-accessible symbol on the field, and wheeled the Stanford Tree in on a wheelchair.
*In 2002 and 2006, the band was sanctioned for off-the-field behavior, including violations of the university alcohol policy.
*In 2004, the band drew national attention and Mormon ire for joking about polygamy during a game against Brigham Young University. The Dollies appeared in wedding veils with the band manager of the time kneeling and &quot;proposing&quot; to each in turn as the announcer referred to marriage as &quot;the sacred bond that exists between a man and a woman... and a woman... and a woman... and a woman... and a woman.&quot;
*The band&#x27;s hijinks were given a wider audience when they became the subject of Alan Alda&#x27;s appearance on the &quot;Not My Job&quot; segment on NPR&#x27;s &quot;Wait Wait... Don&#x27;t Tell Me!&quot; on September 9, 2006.
*In 2006, the band was suspended by Stanford administrators when their former &quot;Band Shak&quot; was vandalized. After moving into a new $2.8 million facility, the previous Shak, a trailer that served as a temporary home for the band, was found with broken windows and profanities spray painted on the walls. Administrators believed members of the band were responsible for the damage, as the band had believed the trailer was to be demolished the next day. The Band was placed on a provisional status for several months, and had many privileges taken away for the duration of the suspension, including the right to be freely student-run. The band was also barred from performing at halftime of the 2006 Big Game as a result. However, the university stated that November they would not press vandalism charges. In March 2007, the university exonerated the individual Band members involved in the incident. It also charged the band $8,000 for damages (though it initially estimated damages of $50,000). In July 2007, the band was fully reinstated, and then two months later, the band&#x27;s alcohol probation was also lifted.
*In 2009, the band performed a field show at USC that openly criticized USC alum &amp; Girls Gone Wild founder Joe Francis, drawing ire from fans with lines like, &quot;USC can&#x27;t take all of the credit for the successes of its students. After all, it takes a special kind of man to be wanted for sexual harassment, drug trafficking, tax evasion, prostitution, child abuse and disruptive flatulence. But that&#x27;s just the kind of captain of industry Joe Francis is.&quot;
*Organizers of the 2011 Orange Bowl supposedly banned the band from performing their halftime show upon announcement of its theme: &quot;Recent Events in the Pro Sports World in Miami&quot;; this was done out of concern of hurting the feelings of athletes such as LeBron James, who had controversially joined the Miami Heat the previous summer. This was later revealed to be a misinterpretation as the game reserved halftime for the Goo Goo Dolls and the bands from both universities were limited to a pre game show.
*In 2015, following a joint investigation by Stanford&#x27;s Organization Conduct Board (OCB) and Title IX Office, it was announced that the band would be prohibited from performing at away athletic events for one year and would be required to adopt a number of reforms. The university initiated the joint inquiry after learning of concerns regarding several band events, including off-campus trips, that the band held for its members between 2012 and 2015. The investigation found that, on several occasions, the band violated university policies regarding alcohol, controlled substances, hazing and/or sexual harassment. Violations included a tradition in which a band member was given an alcoholic concoction intended to make that individual vomit publicly; an annual trip in which some band members used illegal substances; and a band selection process in which individuals were asked a number of inappropriate questions on sexual matters.
*At halftime of the 2016 Rose Bowl Game, the band performed a show that included the jingle from the Farmersonly.com dating website, formations that included a corn maze and a sad farmer, and an enactment of &quot;cow tipping&quot;. The performance was taken by many as insulting farmers, the state of Iowa, and the University of Iowa (Stanford&#x27;s opponent in the game). However, Stanford itself is also commonly nicknamed &quot;The Farm&quot;. The band was booed by Iowa fans, and the incident sparked outrage on social media. A transcript of the field show can be found on the band&#x27;s Facebook page.
*In December 2016, a Stanford Organizational Conduct Board panel found the band responsible for new violations of campus alcohol policy, the alcohol suspension and the travel ban. The OCB panel found “a systemic cultural problem” in the band organization and concluded that “the outstanding issues have not been taken seriously by the band or its leadership and that nothing more will be accomplished without extreme consequences.” The band was required to stop all activities and lose its status as a registered student group. The suspension was expected to last through the 2016–2017 school year, but the band successfully appealed the decision to Provost John Etchemendy. The appeal placed the band on a &quot;provisional status&quot; through the end of the 2016–2017 school year.
*At halftime of the 2017 Alamo Bowl, the band performed a routine that appeared to mock various aspects of the state of Texas, including Whataburger. Fans in attendance at the game booed the routine.
*In July 2020, two anonymous submissions to the popular student-run Instagram page &#x27;Stanford Missed Connections&#x27; highlighted that the band had consistently failed to address an alleged culture of sexual misconduct. The posts detailed one student&#x27;s attempt at reporting a case of misconduct, and accused the LSJUMB of a long history of &quot;silencing survivors&quot;. Both anecdotes were removed from the page almost immediately, which was soon revealed to have been done at the request of a former manager of the band. Band director Russ Gavin also commented that the culture of the LSJUMB had historically taught students to &quot;fear hurting the organization&quot;, which discouraged students from coming forward with allegations of sexual misconduct and assault.
*At halftime of the 2022 game against Arizona State, the Stanford Tree had a sign stating &#x27;STANFORD HATES FUN&#x27;. The student who acts as the tree mascot was suspended. A couple weeks later, a halftime show by the University of California Marching Band’s halftime show made fun of this stunt.
*In November 2022, the halftime show at the Stanford–BYU game featured a mock lesbian wedding accompanied by phrases from LDS temple ceremonies and theology, where two LSJUMB members were shown kissing. After blowback from BYU, Stanford Athletics issued a statement the following Monday: &quot;The Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band (LSJUMB) has a long history of lighthearted and satirical halftime performances. Unfortunately, some of the language that was used in Saturday’s halftime show did not reflect Stanford University’s values of religious freedom and diversity, inclusion and belonging. The LSJUMB deeply regrets that this performance caused offense to spectators, and the halftime performance review and approval process is being adjusted to ensure that issues like this do not occur again.&quot;

===The Play===
The Band&#x27;s most infamous and controversial moment, however, had nothing to do with its irreverence. In the final four seconds of the 1982 Big Game against the University of California, Berkeley (Cal), band members (as well as players from Stanford) ran out onto the field, thinking the game was over after Stanford players appeared to have tackled ball-carrier Dwight Garner. Garner managed to lateral it to another player, and they continued to lateral back and forth, with Cal&#x27;s Kevin Moen dodging through the band for a winning touchdown, which he ended by running over LSJUMB trombone player Gary Tyrrell in the end zone. &quot;The Play&quot; is celebrated by Cal fans and inspires the ire of many Stanford fans. To this day, it remains one of the most famous and controversial plays in American football history.

In 2002, during the Big Game halftime show, the LSJUMB performed a humorous re-enactment of The Play. Special emphasis was placed on the allegation that California player Garner&#x27;s knee touched the ground before his lateral; all band members performing the re-enactment froze in place at this stage, and a single member, carrying a large yellow arrow, ran out and repeatedly pointed at the &quot;down&quot; Garner. Officials at the time did not call Garner down and though no instant replay rule was in effect at the time, game tape appears inconclusive.

To this day the position of Band Manager is conferred from one generation to the next with four seconds left in the Big Game in commemoration of The Play.

==The Dollies==

The Dollies, a five-member female dance group, and the Stanford Tree, the university&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; mascot (the &quot;de jure&quot; mascot is the color cardinal), operate under the band&#x27;s aegis. The Dollies were incorporated into the Band in 1953 per 1954-56 band manager Donald Wells. The Dollies appear at all sporting events and school/community rallies with the Stanford Band and Tree.

The Dollies are a dance group, rather than cheerleaders in the typical sense. They are a separate entity from the Stanford Cheer team. Dollies are managed by their Dollie Daddy/Mama/Parent (the Band&#x27;s assistant manager or &quot;ass-man&quot;/&quot;ass-ma&#x27;am&quot;), and they choreograph their own routines, hold their own practices, and design their own dresses and costumes. Traditional dress colors are white for the spring, red for the fall, and cardinal for the winter. The Dollies are numbered 1–5 in order of height (shortest to tallest).

Dollies serve one-year terms, and each year five new dancers are chosen by previous Dollies and the band. Try-outs are held in February and culminate in &quot;Dollie Day,&quot; when prospective Dollies (&quot;ProDos&quot;) demonstrate their ability in front of the entire assembled band. Each year&#x27;s new Dollie cadre is revealed at the annual &quot;Dollie Splash,&quot; where the Dollies give their debut performance in the spring for the public followed by a dunking in the Stanford Claw.

The most recent Dollies have been:
* 2024-2025 Dollies: Ariana Lee, Alice Finklestein, Yujen Lin, Janae Lindsay, Abigail Lee 
* 2023-2024 Dollies: Cheryl Tolomeo, Rachel &quot;Mack&quot; Jones, Cordelia Li, Eva Geierstanger, Ava Tiffany
* 2022-2023 Dollies: Karina Chen, Sophia Chun, Emma Wang, Alyssa Frederick, Chuyi Zhang
* 2020-2022 Dollies: Amisha Iyer, Annabelle Wang, Yishu Chen, Vivian Urness, Audrey Ward
* 2019-2020 Dollies: Charlotte Brewer, Jasmine Rodriguez, Tiffany Liu, Julia Raven, Savannah Payne
* 2018-2019 Dollies: Justine Kaneda, Erica Olsen, Ellie Toler, Sabrina Medler, Sarah Ludington
* 2017–2018 Dollies: Grace Dong, Audrey Elliott, Samantha Loui, Lauren Clark, Sydney Maly
* 2016–2017 Dollies: Janelle Kaneda, Arianna Tapia, Taylor Butze, Jolena Ma, Emily O&#x27;Neal
* 2015–2016 Dollies: Alida Ratteray, Claudia Aber, Chloe Koseff, Shelby Crants, Dalia Szafer 
* 2014–2015 Dollies: Erika Nguyen, Aubriana Menendez, Martha Collins, Shelby Mynhier, Jordan Huelskamp
* 2013–2014 Dollies: Lindsay Fiorentino, Heather Glenny, Leigh Kinney, Courtney Yang, Amelia Chen
* 2012–2013 Dollies: Tayna Gonzalez, Emily Giglio, Dafna Szafer, Amber Quiñones, Christine Chung
* 2011–2012 Dollies: Paula Obler, Jessica Jin, Clare Bailey, Jessica Savoie, Danna Seligman
* 2010–2011 Dollies: Alina Pimentel, CC Chiu, Sarah Chang, Melissa Schwarz, Alex Nana-Sinkam
* 2009–2010 Dollies: Shea Ritchie, Paula Markey, Nia Minor, Kim Souza, Elise Birkhofer
* 2008–2009 Dollies: Jennifer Lee, Ali Romer, Taylor Phillips, Sydney Gulbronson, Taylor Thibodeaux
* 2007–2008 Dollies: Kelly Cahill, Sam Halladay, Alex Danto, Dana Ryan, Claire Robbins

==Albums of the LSJUMB==
*&quot;Funny On Occasion, Embarrassing On Average&quot; (2013)
*&quot;The One, The Only&quot; (2008)
*&quot;This Is Why We Can&#x27;t Have Nice Things&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Ultrasound&quot; (1999)
*&quot;The Winds of Freedom Blow (Greatest Hits 1970–1998)&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Mirth Control&quot; (1995)
*&quot;The Band Is Not Helping&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Contraband&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Block S&quot; (1982)
*&quot;Starting Salary: $22,275.00&quot; (1979)
*&quot;The Incomparables&quot; (1977)
*&quot;The Incomparable Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band&quot; (1974)
*&quot;The Incomparable Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band&quot; (1972)
*&quot;The Incomparable Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band&quot; (1970)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7598718" start="4" end="51" title="Stanford Band" label="Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598718" start="53" end="59" title="Stanford Band" label="LSJUMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="76" end="89" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="103" end="122" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938060" start="131" end="145" title="Stanford Cardinal" label="athletic teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598803" start="314" end="327" title="Stanford Tree" label="Stanford Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799889" start="456" end="472" title="Arthur P. Barnes" label="Arthur P. Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="955" end="979" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905753" start="1225" end="1233" title="Big Game (football)" label="Big Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650742" start="1248" end="1258" title="California Golden Bears football" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="1286" end="1299" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="1313" end="1328" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="1535" end="1548" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q883234" start="1672" end="1678" title="blazer" label="blazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643122" start="1938" end="1956" title="Halloween costumes" label="Halloween costumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="2110" end="2119" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="2132" end="2150" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="2254" end="2266" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569899" start="2303" end="2317" title="Tower of Power" label="Tower of Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q819016" start="2319" end="2326" title="Carlos Santana" label="Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="2332" end="2339" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="2408" end="2417" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="2422" end="2435" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054523" start="2584" end="2597" title="All Right Now" label="All Right Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q45650" start="2629" end="2633" title="Free (band)" label="Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740123" start="2695" end="2714" title="White Punks on Dope" label="White Punks on Dope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165544" start="2736" end="2745" title="The Tubes" label="The Tubes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3074" end="3089" title="#Albums of the LSJUMB" label="thirteen albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="3154" end="3161" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474853" start="3164" end="3174" title="mellophone" label="mellophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="3181" end="3189" title="trombone" label="trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="3210" end="3219" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="3254" end="3264" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196937" start="3278" end="3288" title="tenor drum" label="tenor drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3308" end="3321" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="3545" end="3557" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q902899" start="3701" end="3721" title="halftime show" label="halftime field shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="3881" end="3902" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="4165" end="4168" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="4269" end="4273" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q229556" start="4485" end="4497" title="Patty Hearst" label="Patty Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="4616" end="4626" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499909" start="4690" end="4710" title="Storybook Land Canal Boats" label="Storybook Land Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="4736" end="4743" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575141" start="4752" end="4766" title="1972 Rose Bowl" label="1972 Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431095" start="4976" end="4985" title="golf cart" label="golf cart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5355" end="5359" title="UCLA Bruins football (1980–1989)#1986" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22026185" start="5575" end="5593" title="1986 Washington Huskies football team" label="Washington Huskies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5640" end="5643" title="USC Trojans football under Ted Tollner#1986" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981" start="5766" end="5773" title="anagram" label="anagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910564" start="5811" end="5827" title="four-letter word" label="four-letter word"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650742" start="5916" end="5919" title="California Golden Bears football" label="Cal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922711" start="6026" end="6035" title="bowl game" label="bowl game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583017" start="6059" end="6069" title="1986 Gator Bowl" label="Gator Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="6145" end="6148" title="University of Southern California" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578009" start="6154" end="6178" title="Spirit of Troy" label="USC Trojan Marching Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440368" start="6179" end="6193" title="toilet papering" label="toilet-papered"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598803" start="6198" end="6211" title="Stanford Tree" label="Stanford Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873102" start="6472" end="6492" title="Autzen Stadium" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="6508" end="6515" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q748921" start="6523" end="6534" title="spotted owl" label="spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q887224" start="6686" end="6694" title="List of Governors of Oregon" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q373606" start="6695" end="6711" title="Neil Goldschmidt" label="Neil Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255722" start="6729" end="6752" title="Oregon Democratic Party" label="Oregon Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="6992" end="7016" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="7290" end="7302" title="Orthodox Jew" label="Orthodox Jew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7503" end="7512" title="Religious habit#Nuns" label="nun habit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116831" start="7629" end="7639" title="Drum major (marching band)" label="drum major"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="7843" end="7856" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147006" start="7982" end="7989" title="chuppah" label="chuppah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414486" start="8014" end="8039" title="San Jose State Spartans football" label="San Jose State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="8147" end="8158" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682102" start="8179" end="8212" title="Los Angeles County Superior Court" label="Los Angeles County Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="8248" end="8261" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669947" start="8262" end="8274" title="O. J. Simpson murder case" label="murder trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163207" start="8334" end="8345" title="The Zombies" label="The Zombies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379737" start="8358" end="8378" title="She&amp;#x27;s Not There" label="She&amp;#x27;s Not There"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349717" start="8401" end="8415" title="Robert Shapiro (lawyer)" label="Robert Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="8627" end="8641" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q534238" start="8671" end="8682" title="Ford Bronco" label="Ford Bronco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8768" end="8783" title="O. J. Simpson murder case#Arrest" label="low-speed chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8932" end="8943" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="8952" end="8957" title="Irish ethnicity" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188626" start="8976" end="8986" title="1997 Notre Dame Fighting Irish football team" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="9097" end="9110" title="stereotypical" label="stereotypical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="9111" end="9125" title="Irish-Catholic" label="Irish-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q310516" start="9148" end="9158" title="Riverdance" label="Riverdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="9176" end="9188" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102196" start="9286" end="9300" title="Gerhard Casper" label="Gerhard Casper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="9556" end="9570" title="ADA-accessible" label="ADA-accessible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598803" start="9665" end="9678" title="Stanford Tree" label="Stanford Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="9872" end="9878" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="9900" end="9908" title="Mormonism and polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602532" start="9931" end="9955" title="2004 BYU Cougars football team" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q310394" start="10333" end="10342" title="Alan Alda" label="Alan Alda"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="10402" end="10405" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q12504760" start="10419" end="10451" title="Wait Wait... Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Me!" label="Wait Wait... Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Me!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321220" start="11166" end="11174" title="halftime" label="halftime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564640" start="11695" end="11710" title="Girls Gone Wild (franchise)" label="Girls Gone Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059796" start="11719" end="11730" title="Joe Francis" label="Joe Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622095" start="12106" end="12122" title="2011 Orange Bowl" label="2011 Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="12265" end="12270" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="12351" end="12363" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729513" start="12373" end="12388" title="The Decision (TV special)" label="controversially"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="12400" end="12410" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q730046" start="12520" end="12533" title="Goo Goo Dolls" label="Goo Goo Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881478" start="13568" end="13587" title="2016 Rose Bowl" label="2016 Rose Bowl Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231954" start="14816" end="14831" title="John Etchemendy" label="John Etchemendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47507828" start="14962" end="14977" title="2017 Alamo Bowl" label="2017 Alamo Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q376627" start="15079" end="15090" title="Whataburger" label="Whataburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q110361850" start="15963" end="15976" title="2022 Arizona State Sun Devils football team" label="Arizona State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895199" start="16147" end="16185" title="University of California Marching Band" label="University of California Marching Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130905" start="16279" end="16282" title="2022 BYU Cougars football team" label="BYU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654661" start="16348" end="16358" title="Temple (LDS Church)" label="LDS temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938060" start="16454" end="16472" title="Stanford Cardinal" label="Stanford Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18705818" start="17228" end="17262" title="1982 California Golden Bears football team" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522255" start="17706" end="17714" title="The Play (Stanford vs. California)" label="The Play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17826" end="17861" title="The Play (American football)#Where it ranks" label="most famous and controversial plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598803" start="18681" end="18694" title="Stanford Tree" label="Stanford Tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343693" wikidata="Q503793" url="?curid=343693" title="Morgoth's Ring">
<text>Morgoth&#x27;s Ring (1993) is the tenth volume of Christopher Tolkien&#x27;s 12-volume series &quot;The History of Middle-earth&quot; in which he analyses the unpublished manuscripts of his father J. R. R. Tolkien. It contains &quot;The Annals of Aman&quot; which presents the history of Arda with year-by-year entries like real-world annals, and &quot;Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth&quot; which presents a discussion of death and immortality between an Elf and a human. 

Reviewers welcomed the volume, noting that it reveals Tolkien exploring hard questions about his mythology, and struggling to reconcile them, to the extent that he unsuccessfully attempts a destructive reworking of the entire cosmology of Arda. The issues covered include death, immortality, and the extent to which Tolkien embodied Christianity in Middle-earth; evil and the origin of Orcs; and Tolkien&#x27;s attempts to replace his mythology with &quot;feigned history&quot;.

== Book ==

=== Contents ===

&quot;Morgoth&#x27;s Ring&quot; presents source materials and editorial commentary on the following:

* Later (1951) revisions of &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, showing Tolkien&#x27;s drastic revisiting and rewriting of his legends.
* &quot;The Annals of Aman&quot; — the history of the world from the entry of the Valar into Arda until the Hiding of Valinor after the revolt and exile of the Noldor. It is written in the form of year-by-year entries of varying lengths, much like real-world annals. Tolkien attributes the work to the Noldorin lore-master and linguist Rúmil of Tirion. There are three extant versions of the text, including a carefully emended manuscript, a typescript and its carbon copy, each featuring different corrections and notes, and a typescript of the earlier sections of the text that deviates from the previous typescript. Christopher Tolkien surmises that the first typescript was composed in 1958. According to the second typescript, &quot;The Annals of Aman&quot; were remembered by the Noldorin Exiles in Middle-earth, who transmitted their knowledge to the Men of Númenor, whence it eventually reached Arnor and Gondor. A reworking of the earlier &quot;Annals of Valinor&quot; and connected closely with the narrative of the incomplete 1937 &quot;Quenta Silmarillion&quot;, &quot;The Annals of Aman&quot; moves from a compressed narrative style to a fuller accounting of the events of the chronology. 
* &quot;Laws and Customs among the Eldar&quot; — several essays and legends on the Eldar (Elves), particularly their mating and naming customs, and their conceptions of the &quot;fëa&quot; (soul) and &quot;hröa&quot; (body).

* &quot;Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth&quot; — A discussion between two characters, Finrod Felagund, an Elven king, and Andreth, a mortal woman, about the nature of death and immortality, and the ways in which Elves and Men suffer their different sorrows; and about the healing of the world and the fear of death by the hope of the coming of Eru Iluvatar into Middle-earth.
* &quot;Tale of Adanel&quot; — the Middle-earth version of the Fall, attached to &quot;Athrabeth&quot;.
* &quot;Myths Transformed&quot; — several fragments on Morgoth, Sauron, and the problem of the origin of the Orcs. This section, which proposes inconsistent solutions to the problem, is frequently cited in discussions of Tolkien&#x27;s legendarium, and represents the author&#x27;s later-evolved views on some central topics.

=== Title and inscription ===

The title of this volume comes from a statement in one of Tolkien&#x27;s essays: &quot;Just as Sauron concentrated his power in the One Ring, Morgoth dispersed his power into the very matter of Arda, thus the whole of Middle-earth was Morgoth&#x27;s Ring&quot;.

The title page of each volume of &quot;The History of Middle-earth&quot; displays an inscription in the Fëanorian characters (Tengwar, an alphabet devised by Tolkien for High-elven), written by Christopher Tolkien and describing the contents of the book. The inscription in Volume X reads: &quot;In this book are given many of the later writings of John Ronald Reuel Tolkien concerning the history of the Elder Days from the Music of the Ainur to the Hiding of Valinor; here much is told of the Sun and Moon; of the immortal Eldar and the death of the Atani; of the beginning of the Orcs and of the evil power of Melkor, the Morgoth, the Black Foe of the World.&quot;

== Reception ==

=== Death, immortality, and Christianity ===

Reviewing the book for &quot;Mythlore&quot;, Glen GoodKnight wrote that in it, Christopher Tolkien leads the reader into &quot;new third phase of his father&#x27;s concept of Middle-earth after the writing of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; — his recasting and adding to the mythos.&quot; In his view, the book is a major &quot;earthquake&quot; bringing &quot;astounding revelations&quot; about Tolkien&#x27;s development of Middle-earth. One is the &quot;Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth&quot; (The Debate of Finrod and Andreth), meant to be the last item in &quot;The Silmarillion&#x27;s&quot; appendix; it presents opinions of death held by Men and Elves. Andreth complains of how unfair Man&#x27;s short life is, believing death to be imposed by Morgoth, while Finrod speaks of hope, and that he believes human&#x27;s death to be given by Eru, and not imposed by Morgoth. Tolkien comments on the passage that &quot;Finrod has already guessed that the redemptive function was originally specially assigned to Men&quot;, leading GoodKnight to observe that Tolkien here aligns &quot;his mythology very closely to his faith and theological belief in the primary world.&quot; 

In her 2008 &quot;The Evolution of Tolkien&#x27;s Mythology&quot;, Elizabeth Whittingham calls the &quot;Athrabeth&quot; the nearest that Tolkien got to Christian theology anywhere in his legendarium. Further, she notes, Glorfindel is the only Elf who is reincarnated, while he abandoned the concept everywhere else. According to Deidre Dawson, who reviewed her book, this suggests that Tolkien kept the &quot;possibility&quot; of this non-Christian concept to allow his Elves to be immortal.

=== Evil and the origin of Orcs ===

Tolkien had a long-standing and unresolved challenge with the origin of Orcs, whether they were &quot;irredeemably evil&quot; (if derived from evil) or as Tolkien here states, bred from Men (who would be redeemable). Amelia Rutledge writes that &quot;theodicy, the study of justice and of the nature of evil&quot; is the &quot;central concern&quot; of &quot;Morgoth&#x27;s Ring&quot;. David Bratman, in &quot;Mythprint&quot;, finds interesting Tolkien&#x27;s explanation that unlike Sauron, Morgoth&#x27;s evil could not be fully purged from the world, because he had spread himself all through its physical matter. All in all, Bratman writes, the philosophical writings in the volume are &quot;unlike almost anything else&quot; in &quot;History of Middle-earth&quot;, as &quot;what they most resemble is some of the long self-explanatory letters that Tolkien wrote to readers in the late 1950s&quot;.

=== &quot;Feigned history&quot; versus mythology ===

Noad writes that Tolkien was &quot;virtually attempting a [destructive] reinvention of his mythology&quot;, including Arda&#x27;s cosmology, &quot;Elvish reincarnation, the origins of Orcs, and the powers of Morgoth.&quot; Noad comments that the attempt to rework the cosmology was an &quot;alarming and destructive débâcle&quot; that would effectively had demythologised his whole mythology, but that Tolkien broadly succeeded in his other attempted problem resolutions. Dawson describes the situation as Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;steady movement away from the archetypes and structures of ancient pagan myths, towards a mythology for the modern era which includes more elements inspired by biblical texts,&quot; as seen in &quot;Morgoth&#x27;s Ring&quot;. 

Bratman comments that the reader enters the &quot;Myths Transformed&quot; section at their peril, &quot;for here you will see the author probing the absolute rock-bottom theoretical base of his subcreation.&quot; The material reveals, too, why Tolkien could not complete &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, as he grappled with his changing view of the acceptability of a mythology as against a &quot;feigned history&quot;. The later volume &quot;The Nature of Middle-earth&quot; presents more of Tolkien&#x27;s attempts to resolve the dilemma.

=== Structure of &quot;The Silmarillion&quot; ===

GoodKnight writes that the materials in &quot;Morgoth&#x27;s Ring&quot; could have radically changed &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, had Tolkien lived to finish it &quot;to his satisfaction&quot;. Charles Noad, reviewing &quot;Morgoth&#x27;s Ring&quot; in &quot;Mallorn&quot;, approves of Tolkien&#x27;s intention to give his planned &quot;The Silmarillion&quot; shape with the &quot;Athrabeth&quot; at the end, with the &quot;Great Tales&quot; printed in full as appendices to the text, a structure that would in his view have been a great improvement. He praises Christopher Tolkien for his &quot;clarity of exposition ... clothed in expressive grace&quot;.

== See also ==

* History of Arda

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82032" start="50" end="69" title="Christopher Tolkien" label="Christopher Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q334750" start="100" end="127" title="The History of Middle-earth" label="The History of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="197" end="213" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q193866" start="335" end="341" title="annals" label="annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297294" start="672" end="713" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s round world dilemma" label="reworking of the entire cosmology of Arda"/>
<link wikidata="Q78493" start="1294" end="1299" title="Valar" label="Valar"/>
<link wikidata="Q774945" start="1305" end="1309" title="Arda (Middle-earth)" label="Arda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1320" end="1337" title="Valinor#The Hiding of Valinor" label="Hiding of Valinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672460" start="1372" end="1378" title="Noldor" label="Noldor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193866" start="1471" end="1476" title="annal" label="annal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920570" start="1479" end="1506" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s frame stories" label="Tolkien attributes the work"/>
<link wikidata="Q211686" start="2077" end="2084" title="Númenor" label="Númenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="2125" end="2131" title="Gondor" label="Gondor"/>
<link wikidata="Q502032" start="2166" end="2183" title="Annals of Valinor" label="Annals of Valinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="2260" end="2279" title="Quenta Silmarillion" label="Quenta Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7473935" start="2498" end="2503" title="Eldar (Middle-earth)" label="Eldar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203904" start="2505" end="2510" title="Elf (Middle-earth)" label="Elves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672460" start="2722" end="2737" title="Finrod Felagund" label="Finrod Felagund"/>
<link wikidata="Q120498125" start="2803" end="2824" title="Death and immortality in Middle-earth" label="death and immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621322" start="2858" end="2861" title="Edain" label="Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="2970" end="2976" title="Incarnation (Christianity)" label="coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q774945" start="2980" end="2992" title="Eru Iluvatar" label="Eru Iluvatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="3071" end="3079" title="Fall of man" label="the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q115824553" start="3196" end="3229" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s moral dilemma" label="problem of the origin of the Orcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738" start="3337" end="3363" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium" label="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281" start="3569" end="3575" title="Sauron" label="Sauron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19852" start="3606" end="3614" title="One Ring" label="One Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q80453" start="3616" end="3623" title="Morgoth" label="Morgoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q774945" start="3668" end="3672" title="Arda (Tolkien)" label="Arda"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="3692" end="3704" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q716794" start="3841" end="3850" title="Fëanorian" label="Fëanorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q473725" start="3863" end="3870" title="Tengwar" label="Tengwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56383" start="3907" end="3917" title="High-elven" label="High-elven"/>
<link wikidata="Q330826" start="4162" end="4180" title="Music of the Ainur" label="Music of the Ainur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4188" end="4205" title="Valinor#The Hiding of Valinor" label="Hiding of Valinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q194061" start="4320" end="4324" title="Orc (Middle-earth)" label="Orcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80453" start="4350" end="4356" title="Melkor" label="Melkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q92550" start="4498" end="4506" title="Mythlore" label="Mythlore"/>
<link wikidata="Q95077" start="4514" end="4529" title="Glen GoodKnight" label="Glen GoodKnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q80453" start="5216" end="5223" title="Morgoth" label="Morgoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q774945" start="5309" end="5312" title="Eru Iluvatar" label="Eru"/>
<link wikidata="Q126708316" start="5661" end="5702" title="The Evolution of Tolkien&amp;#x27;s Mythology" label="The Evolution of Tolkien&amp;#x27;s Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q126708316" start="5710" end="5731" title="Elizabeth Whittingham" label="Elizabeth Whittingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="5796" end="5814" title="Christian theology" label="Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q753773" start="5864" end="5874" title="Glorfindel" label="Glorfindel"/>
<link wikidata="Q276183" start="6425" end="6433" title="theodicy" label="theodicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105555661" start="6559" end="6572" title="David Bratman" label="David Bratman"/>
<link wikidata="Q243924" start="6583" end="6592" title="Mythprint" label="Mythprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q82915" start="7013" end="7039" title="The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien" label="letters that Tolkien wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297294" start="8138" end="8185" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s round world dilemma" label="could not complete &amp;quot;The Silmarillion&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q108612745" start="8326" end="8352" title="The Nature of Middle-earth" label="The Nature of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q127268946" start="8671" end="8683" title="Charles Noad" label="Charles Noad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15141681" start="8736" end="8743" title="Mallorn (journal)" label="Mallorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738" start="8901" end="8912" title="Great Tales" label="Great Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="9153" end="9168" title="History of Arda" label="History of Arda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343694" wikidata="Q503921" url="?curid=343694" title="The War of the Jewels">
<text>The War of the Jewels (1994) is the 11th volume of Christopher Tolkien&#x27;s series &quot;The History of Middle-earth&quot;, analysing the unpublished manuscripts of his father J. R. R. Tolkien. It is the second of two volumes—&quot;Morgoth&#x27;s Ring&quot; being the first—to explore the later 1951 &quot;Silmarillion&quot; drafts (those written after the completion of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;).

== Book ==

=== Contents ===

The volume includes:

* The second part of the 1951 &quot;Silmarillion&quot; drafts
* An expanded account of the &quot;Grey Annals&quot;, the history of Beleriand after the coming of the Elves.
* Additional narratives involving Húrin and the tragedy of his children (see Narn i Chîn Húrin). &quot;The Wanderings of Húrin&quot; is the conclusion to the &quot;Narn&quot;. It was not included in the final &quot;Silmarillion&quot; because Christopher Tolkien feared that the heavy compression which would have been necessary to make it a stylistic match with the rest of the book would have been too difficult and would have made the story overly complex and difficult to read.
* Christopher Tolkien&#x27;s explanation of how he, with the collaboration of future fantasy author Guy Gavriel Kay, constructed Chapter 22 &quot;Of the Ruin of Doriath&quot; of the &quot;Quenta Silmarillion&quot;, since none of his father&#x27;s accounts of this episode were recent enough to fit the narrative in its final form. In particular, the old texts all portray Thingol as a miser who cheats the Dwarves out of their payment, and the portrayal of the Girdle of Melian in the older stories is much weaker than the impenetrable barrier of the post-&quot;Lord of the Rings&quot; writings.
* Tolkien&#x27;s exploration of the origins of the Ents and the great Eagles.
* &quot;Quendi and Eldar&quot; discusses the many names the Elves gave to themselves in Primitive Quendian and Common Eldarin and their evolution in Quenya, Telerin, and Sindarin; it has many details about the history of the Elves and their sundering. It also explains the Elvish names given to Men, Dwarves, and Orcs.
* &quot;The Cuivienyarna&quot; is an Elvish folk-tale about the awakening of the Elves.

===Inscription===

There is an inscription in tengwar on the title page of each volume of &quot;The History of Middle-earth&quot;, written by Christopher Tolkien and describing the contents of the book. The inscription in Volume XI reads &quot;In this book are recorded the last writings of John Ronald Reuel Tolkien concerning the wars of Beleriand, here also is told the story of how Húrin Thali[o]n brought ruin to the Men of Brethil, with much else concerning the Edain and Dwarves and the names of many peoples in the speech of the Elves.&quot;

== Reception ==

Charles Noad, reviewing the book in &quot;Mallorn&quot;, comments that in the early 1950s, Tolkien began many works, but mainly failed to finish them: and that &quot;his creative energies began to desert him just at the time when they were most needed if &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, at least on the scale envisioned, were ever to be completed.&quot; He adds that &quot;The Wanderings of Húrin&quot; is the first of Tolkien&#x27;s works to be written in something other than his &quot;characteristic &#x27;high&#x27; style&quot;: it is in the third person and &quot;non-epic&quot;. Noad doubts its value, finding that since it is neither an epic, nor a first-person narrative, it feels unfocused. On the other hand, he found the legend of &quot;The Awakening of the Quendi [Elves]&quot; &quot;fascinating&quot; as it provides the only account of how the race of Elves was envisaged to begin. 

Noad comments, too, on Christopher Tolkien&#x27;s numerous expressed doubts over his editing of the published &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;. Noad observes that it was plainly necessary to publish something, and given that &quot;an edited single-text version with no editorial apparatus&quot; was the goal, then the editorial decisions were inevitably going to be difficult, and second thoughts were &quot;hardly surprising&quot;. More broadly, he adds that the &quot;History&quot; as a whole had done something that a single-volume work could not have achieved: it had changed people&#x27;s perspective on Tolkien&#x27;s Middle-earth writings, from being centred on &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; to what it had always been in Tolkien&#x27;s mind: &quot;Silmarillion&quot;-centred.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82032" start="51" end="77" title="Christopher Tolkien" label="Christopher Tolkien&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q334750" start="91" end="118" title="The History of Middle-earth" label="The History of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="178" end="194" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q503793" start="234" end="253" title="Morgoth&amp;#x27;s Ring" label="Morgoth&amp;#x27;s Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="308" end="320" title="The Silmarillion" label="Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="379" end="400" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451581" start="593" end="602" title="Beleriand" label="Beleriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q203904" start="627" end="632" title="Elf (Middle-earth)" label="Elves"/>
<link wikidata="Q770363" start="668" end="673" title="Húrin" label="Húrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309019" start="711" end="728" title="Narn i Chîn Húrin" label="Narn i Chîn Húrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="1200" end="1207" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95099" start="1215" end="1230" title="Guy Gavriel Kay" label="Guy Gavriel Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="1303" end="1322" title="Quenta Silmarillion" label="Quenta Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q734128" start="1487" end="1494" title="Thingol" label="Thingol"/>
<link wikidata="Q753788" start="1586" end="1592" title="Melian (Middle-earth)" label="Melian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667893" start="1762" end="1765" title="Ent" label="Ent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292021" start="1781" end="1787" title="Eagle (Middle-earth)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q56383" start="1877" end="1895" title="Primitive Quendian" label="Primitive Quendian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56383" start="1900" end="1914" title="Common Eldarin" label="Common Eldarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56383" start="1938" end="1944" title="Quenya" label="Quenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149537" start="1946" end="1953" title="Telerin" label="Telerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56437" start="1959" end="1967" title="Sindarin" label="Sindarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7473935" start="2030" end="2039" title="Sundering of the Elves" label="sundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q194061" start="2102" end="2106" title="Orc (Middle-earth)" label="Orcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q473725" start="2243" end="2250" title="tengwar" label="tengwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q127268946" start="2765" end="2777" title="Charles Noad" label="Charles Noad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15141681" start="2807" end="2814" title="Mallorn (journal)" label="Mallorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="3776" end="3792" title="The Silmarillion" label="The Silmarillion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343696" wikidata="Q1742007" url="?curid=343696" title="King Biscuit Time">
<text>:&quot;&quot;King Biscuit Time&quot; is also the name under which ex-Beta Band frontman Steve Mason releases his solo work.&quot;
King Biscuit Time is the longest-running daily American radio broadcast in history. The program is broadcast each weekday from KFFA in Helena, Arkansas, United States, and has won the George Foster Peabody Award for broadcasting excellence. In 2018, certain selections of &quot;King Biscuit Time&quot; from 1965 were selected for preservation in the National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress as being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.

==History and description==
The first broadcast of &quot;King Biscuit Time&quot; was on November 21, 1941 on KFFA in Helena, and featured blues artists Sonny Boy Williamson II (Rice Miller) and Robert Lockwood, Jr. Williamson and Lockwood played live in the studio and were the key musicians in the original studio band, the &quot;King Biscuit Entertainers&quot;. Other musicians who joined the original band were Pinetop Perkins on piano and James &quot;Peck&quot; Curtis on drums. Williamson left the program in 1947 but returned for a stint in 1965 just prior to his death.

The 30-minute-long live radio program is broadcast at 12:15 pm every weekday and was named after the local brand of flour, King Biscuit Flour, distributed by the Interstate Grocer Company. The distributor financed the show at the behest of Williamson in exchange for endorsements and naming rights. KFFA was the only station that would play music by African-Americans, and it reached an audience throughout the Mississippi Delta region. It inspired blues musicians including B.B. King, Robert Nighthawk, James Cotton, and Ike Turner. The show&#x27;s 12:15 pm time slot was chosen to match the lunch break of workers in the Delta.

&quot;King Biscuit Time&quot; celebrated its 17,000th broadcast on May 13, 2014. &quot;KBT&quot; has more broadcasts than the &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot; (which was never a daily broadcast) and &quot;American Bandstand&quot;. From 1951 until his death in 2018, the program was hosted by the award-winning &quot;Sunshine&quot; Sonny Payne who opened each broadcast with &quot;pass the biscuits, &#x27;cause it&#x27;s King Biscuit Time!&quot; Before Payne, the show was hosted by Hugh Smith, from 1943 to 1951. Over the years, the biggest names in blues have been associated with the program, and important blues artists continue to perform live.

==Influence and related projects==
The popularity of the program made Helena a major blues center. Helena became a stopping place for blues musicians on their way from the Delta region to the Chicago blues nightclubs and was also convenient to Memphis, Tennessee and its lively blues culture. Several blues musicians, including Little Walter Jacobs and Jimmy Rogers came to Helena and made it their home.

&quot;King Biscuit Time&quot; was also a major breakthrough for African-American music in general. The popularity of the program and its reach into the untapped African-American demographic gained notice and spawned a host of imitators. By 1947, the first black disc jockey in the South, Early Wright, had been signed at WROX across the river. WDIA in Memphis soon became the first radio station in the South with an all black staff (including deejay B.B. King) and musical format based on the success of &quot;King Biscuit Time&quot;.

Levon Helm, the late drummer and vocalist for The Band, credited &quot;King Biscuit Time&quot;, and in particular, James &quot;Peck&quot; Curtis, for inspiring his musical career.

Musician King Biscuit Boy was given that stage name by Ronnie Hawkins.

The &quot;King Biscuit Flower Hour&quot; is a one-hour syndicated rock and roll radio program, the name of which was derived from &quot;King Biscuit Time&quot;.

In 1986, the first annual King Biscuit Blues Festival (later renamed to &quot;Arkansas Blues and Heritage Festival&quot; and returned to King Biscuit Blues Festival in 2011) was held in Helena, attracting thousands of blues aficionados from around the world.

In 1992, Delta Broadcasting President Jim Howe started &quot;The King Biscuit Times&quot; newsletter to promote KFFA&#x27;s &quot;King Biscuit Time&quot; radio show and the King Biscuit Blues Festival&quot;.&quot; This publication soon transformed into a nationally distributed blues magazine published and edited by Mike Beck, along with Grammy-nominated writer and producer Larry Hoffman who served as staff contributor and editorial advisor. As time passed, the list of other contributors were to include John Anthony Brisbin, George Hansen, Sandra Pointer-Jones, and Donald E. Wilcock, the latter serving as managing editor. Regular columnists included “Sunshine” Sonny Payne and Robert Lockwood Jr. In 1997 the publication was the recipient of a &quot;Keeping the Blues Alive Award&quot; in Print Media by the Blues Foundation. The magazine, which later altered its name to &quot;King Biscuit Time&quot;, ceased publication in 2005.  

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1775665" start="69" end="78" title="The Beta Band" label="Beta Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613289" start="88" end="99" title="Steve Mason (musician)" label="Steve Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328947" start="257" end="261" title="KFFA (AM)" label="KFFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q679084" start="265" end="281" title="Helena, Arkansas" label="Helena, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="314" end="341" title="Peabody Award" label="George Foster Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="480" end="507" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="515" end="534" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q454692" start="765" end="802" title="Sonny Boy Williamson II" label="Sonny Boy Williamson II (Rice Miller)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351212" start="807" end="827" title="Robert Lockwood, Jr." label="Robert Lockwood, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q458229" start="1027" end="1042" title="Pinetop Perkins" label="Pinetop Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426203" start="1602" end="1619" title="Mississippi Delta" label="Mississippi Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q188969" start="1666" end="1675" title="B.B. King" label="B.B. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q704710" start="1677" end="1693" title="Robert Lee McCollum" label="Robert Nighthawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q731254" start="1695" end="1707" title="James Cotton" label="James Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q208871" start="1713" end="1723" title="Ike Turner" label="Ike Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="1954" end="1968" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q463447" start="2021" end="2039" title="American Bandstand" label="American Bandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540317" start="2126" end="2158" title="&amp;quot;Sunshine&amp;quot; Sonny Payne" label="&amp;quot;Sunshine&amp;quot; Sonny Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="2711" end="2729" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q380261" start="2795" end="2815" title="Little Walter Jacobs" label="Little Walter Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347919" start="2820" end="2832" title="Jimmy Rogers" label="Jimmy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="3135" end="3146" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600428" start="3161" end="3173" title="Early Wright" label="Early Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600432" start="3194" end="3198" title="WROX (AM)" label="WROX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118627" start="3217" end="3221" title="WDIA" label="WDIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q356986" start="3410" end="3420" title="Levon Helm" label="Levon Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q600344" start="3456" end="3464" title="The Band" label="The Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411277" start="3600" end="3616" title="King Biscuit Boy" label="King Biscuit Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q766930" start="3646" end="3660" title="Ronnie Hawkins" label="Ronnie Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196994" start="3673" end="3697" title="King Biscuit Flower Hour" label="King Biscuit Flower Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="3729" end="3742" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742006" start="3851" end="3878" title="Arkansas Blues and Heritage Festival" label="King Biscuit Blues Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742006" start="4258" end="4285" title="King Biscuit Blues Festival" label="King Biscuit Blues Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540317" start="4742" end="4764" title="&amp;quot;Sunshine&amp;quot; Sonny Payne" label="“Sunshine” Sonny Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351212" start="4769" end="4788" title="Robert Lockwood Jr." label="Robert Lockwood Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q886032" start="4900" end="4916" title="Blues Foundation" label="Blues Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343705" wikidata="Q503974" url="?curid=343705" title="The Peoples of Middle-earth">
<text>The Peoples of Middle-earth (1996) is the 12th and final volume of &quot;The History of Middle-earth&quot;, edited by Christopher Tolkien from the unpublished manuscripts of his father J. R. R. Tolkien. Some characters (including Anairë, the wife of Fingolfin) only appear here, as do a few other works that did not fit anywhere else.

==Contents==

Each volume of &quot;The History of Middle-earth&quot; bears on the title page spread an inscription by Christopher Tolkien in Fëanorian letters (in Tengwar, an alphabet J. R. R. Tolkien devised for the High-Elves), that describes the contents of the book. The inscription in Volume XII reads: &quot;This is the last volume of the work of Christopher Tolkien in which he has collected a great part of all that his father John Ronald Reuel Tolkien wrote of Middle-earth and Valinor. In this book is traced the devising of the history of the later ages in the Northwest of Middle-earth after the Great Battle and the Fall of Morgoth.&quot;

===Part One: The Prologue and Appendices to &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;===

This section focuses on covering the development of the Prologue and Appendices of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; as well as the &quot;Akallabêth&quot;, along with themes and ideas associated with them. It is by far the most substantial section of the book, consisting of nearly 300 of the book&#x27;s 480 text pages. It includes early drafts of the novel&#x27;s Prologue and the appendices on languages, family trees, and calendars, as well as the history of the &quot;Akallabêth&quot;, &quot;The Tale of Years&quot; (chronologies of the Second and Third Ages), the heirs of Elendil, and the making of Appendix A.

===Part Two: Late Writings===
Materials mostly postdating 1969, consisting of the essays &quot;Of Dwarves and Men&quot;, on the development of the languages of these races; &quot;The Shibboleth of Fëanor&quot;, on the linguistics of the Elvish language of Quenya and giving etymologies for the names of the princes of the Noldor; &quot;The Problem of Ros&quot;, exploring the suffix &quot;-ros&quot; found in certain names such as Elros and Maedhros; and some &quot;last writings&quot; addressing the subjects of the &quot;Istari&quot; (Wizards), Glorfindel of Gondolin and Rivendell, and Círdan the Shipwright.

===Part Three: The Teachings of Pengoloð===

A brief narrative going back to the &quot;Book of Lost Tales&quot; period, presenting information provided by Pengoloð of Gondolin to Ælfwine of England in regard to the sundering of the Elven tongues.

===Part Four: Incomplete Tales===
Two stories written in the 1950s.

====The New Shadow====
&quot;The New Shadow&quot; is a sequel to &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, set a little over a century later in the time of King Eldarion, Aragorn&#x27;s son. The editor mentions (p. 409) that Tolkien wrote three versions of the beginning of this story, but all were abandoned after a few pages.

====Tal-Elmar====
&quot;Tal-Elmar&quot; is set in the Second Age and tells of the Númenórean colonization of Middle-earth from the point of view of the Wild Men. The title character and protagonist, one of the ancient inhabitants of the lands of Gondor, is partly descended from Númenórean settlers.

== Reception ==

=== An intricate history ===

Charles Noad, in &quot;Mallorn&quot;, comments that the book &quot;at long last&quot; provides Tolkien&#x27;s account of the &quot;reincarnation&quot; of Glorfindel, a character who appears both in &quot;The Silmarillion&quot; and (thousands of years later) in &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;.

Noad writes that &quot;Christopher Tolkien warned that a history of the Appendices would prove &#x27;both far-ranging and intricate&#x27;; and so they have.&quot; Noad describes the situation with the Appendices for &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; as a &quot;debacle&quot;. He notes Tolkien&#x27;s unpreparedness for publishing the extensive Appendices that he had hoped would accompany the narrative of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; as putting him in a weak position to defend their inclusion. In the event, he had to compress them extremely heavily, which was &quot;a pity&quot;: and he did not &quot;re-expand&quot; them in the second edition. Noad comments that given this much trouble with the Appendices, it was &quot;extraordinarily optimistic&quot; of him to imagine that he could have published &quot;The Silmarillion&quot; at the same time.

=== Reframing Middle-earth ===

Noad remarks, too, on the &quot;Note on the Shire Records&quot; which Tolkien added to the 2nd edition Prologue, as it &quot;dismantled the framing mechanism for &quot;The Silmarillion&quot; that had survived for the past half-century.&quot; The frame story had involved Eriol or Ælfwine of England who had visited Tol Eressea and been briefed by an Elf, Pengoloð; the wandering mariner had written it all down and it had come into Tolkien&#x27;s hands. But the &quot;Note&quot; has instead Bilbo Baggins&#x27;s three volumes of &quot;great skill and learning&quot;, written from the library at Rivendell, mainly describing &quot;the Elder Days&quot;, i.e. &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;. So, Noad writes, Bilbo&#x27;s work &quot;makes Ælfwine&#x27;s tales redundant.&quot; He wonders why Tolkien would have made this major change, since having Ælfwine for ancient times and Bilbo for the later ones was &quot;perfectly reasonable and coherent&quot;. Noad suggests that perhaps Tolkien thought that the Straight Road was no longer available by the 20th century, so that the traveller could not have used it. Or perhaps, he suggests, Tolkien had at last dropped the &quot;old dream&quot; of providing a mythology for England, linking the legendarium to English history.

== See also ==

* &quot;The Nature of Middle-earth&quot;, edited by Carl Hostetter, effectively the next volume of the series

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334750" start="73" end="100" title="The History of Middle-earth" label="The History of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q82032" start="118" end="137" title="Christopher Tolkien" label="Christopher Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="185" end="201" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q217190" start="250" end="259" title="Fingolfin" label="Fingolfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334750" start="371" end="398" title="The History of Middle-earth" label="The History of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q716794" start="477" end="486" title="Fëanorian" label="Fëanorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q473725" start="499" end="506" title="Tengwar" label="Tengwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q368572" start="823" end="830" title="Valinor" label="Valinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80453" start="973" end="980" title="Morgoth" label="Morgoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="1160" end="1181" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="1209" end="1219" title="Akallabêth" label="Akallabêth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141342" start="1468" end="1477" title="Languages constructed by J. R. R. Tolkien" label="languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q97274144" start="1479" end="1491" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s Middle-earth family trees" label="family trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="1624" end="1633" title="Third Age" label="Third Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q719736" start="1650" end="1657" title="Elendil" label="Elendil"/>
<link wikidata="Q716794" start="1887" end="1893" title="Fëanor" label="Fëanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203904" start="1927" end="1933" title="Elf (Middle-earth)" label="Elvish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56383" start="1946" end="1952" title="Quenya" label="Quenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672460" start="2012" end="2018" title="Noldor" label="Noldor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672460" start="2131" end="2139" title="Maedhros" label="Maedhros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059791" start="2213" end="2219" title="Istari" label="Istari"/>
<link wikidata="Q753773" start="2237" end="2247" title="Glorfindel" label="Glorfindel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154417" start="2251" end="2259" title="Gondolin" label="Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q218562" start="2264" end="2273" title="Rivendell" label="Rivendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q203904" start="2279" end="2285" title="Círdan" label="Círdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q340401" start="2390" end="2408" title="Book of Lost Tales" label="Book of Lost Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133721" start="2482" end="2500" title="Ælfwine of England" label="Ælfwine of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7473935" start="2518" end="2527" title="Sundering of the Elves" label="sundering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2535" end="2548" title="Elvish languages (Middle-earth)#Internal history" label="Elven tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q180322" start="2784" end="2791" title="Aragorn" label="Aragorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="2996" end="3006" title="Second Age" label="Second Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q211686" start="3024" end="3034" title="Númenórean" label="Númenórean"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="3051" end="3063" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="3188" end="3194" title="Gondor" label="Gondor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127268946" start="3290" end="3302" title="Charles Noad" label="Charles Noad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15141681" start="3313" end="3320" title="Mallorn (journal)" label="Mallorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q753773" start="3444" end="3454" title="Glorfindel" label="Glorfindel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920570" start="4613" end="4634" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s frame stories" label="the framing mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133721" start="4757" end="4775" title="Ælfwine of England" label="Ælfwine of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q368572" start="4792" end="4803" title="Tol Eressea" label="Tol Eressea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185737" start="4968" end="4981" title="Bilbo Baggins" label="Bilbo Baggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q218562" start="5072" end="5081" title="Rivendell" label="Rivendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q126737213" start="5474" end="5491" title="Straight Road (Tolkien)" label="the Straight Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q126193009" start="5675" end="5698" title="a mythology for England" label="a mythology for England"/>
<link wikidata="Q108612745" start="5769" end="5795" title="The Nature of Middle-earth" label="The Nature of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q112561854" start="5813" end="5827" title="Carl Hostetter" label="Carl Hostetter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343723" wikidata="Q6978618" url="?curid=343723" title="National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program">
<text>The space-grant colleges are educational institutions in the United States that comprise a network of fifty-three consortia established in 1988 for the purpose of outer space-related research. Each consortium is based in one of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, or Guam, and each consists of multiple independent space-grant institutions, with one of the institutions acting as lead.

Similar programs include sea-grant colleges (instituted in 1966) and sun-grant colleges (instituted in 2003).

==Objectives==
The program states the following objectives:
*Establish and maintain a national network of universities with interests and capabilities in aeronautics, outer space, and related fields;
*Encourage cooperative programs among universities, the aerospace industry, and federal, state, and local governments;
*Encourage interdisciplinary training, research, and public service programs related to aerospace;
*Recruit and train U.S. citizens, especially women, underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities, for careers in aerospace science and technology; and,
*Promote a strong science, mathematics, and technology education base from elementary through secondary levels.

==History==
The National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program was established in 1988 by the US Congress following the success of similar scholarship opportunities in the oceanic Sea Grant and agricultural Land Grant fields. The catch-all term Space Grant refers back to these previous federal programs. In 1989, the program was given over to NASA, which administers it in the same way that NOAA administers Sea Grant.

The first meeting of the National Council of Space Grant Directors took place from January 16 to January 19, 1990, at the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory in Columbia, Maryland, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in La Cañada Flintridge, California.
 In 2011, an effort was made to begin collecting the history of the council.

==Programs==
Building Leaders for Advancing Science and Technology (BLAST)
BLAST is a three-day summer event that takes place at Virginia&#x27;s Old Dominion University. This free, STEM-centered event, is available to 8th and 9th graders with a 2.3 GPA or better. BLAST&#x27;s purpose is to show the students the interesting aspects of STEM to those who are unsure whether they want to be involved in STEM or not.

Nationwide Eclipse Ballooning Project
The NEBP is a high-altitude, balloon launching program.

eXploration Systems and Habitation (X-Hab) 2019 Academic Innovation Challenge
The eXploration Systems and Habitation (X-Hab) challenge seeks better the academic and technological abilities of university students. It utilizes hands-on training in the implementation of space habitats for deep space missions. There is an Advanced Exploration Systems (AES) Division where university students can compete to win awards worth $15,000–50,000 for a functional design that the AES finds useful and, or, interesting.

John Mather Nobel Scholars
Established in 2008, the John Mather Nobel Scholars is a scholarship program open to NASA-Goddard Space Flight. The program provides $3,000 so that a chosen participant can share their research paper with NASA professionals. To be a part of this program, a GPA of 3.5 or higher is necessary along with being a junior or higher.

NASA KSC Higher Education Support Services
The NASA/Kennedy Space Center Higher Education Support Services supports college grade Higher Education competitions. Such competitions entail internships, senior design projects, and selective grants.

National Space Grant Distinguished Service Award
The National Space Grant Distinguished Service Award was created by Josh Simpson and is awarded to students who will have an impact in a STEM field related to NASA&#x27;s mission/goals.

Space Grant Support Services
The goal of the Space Grant Support Services is to better the Space Grant network. The Space Grant Support Services supports the Space Grant network in many different ways from an economical view to a public view.

Space Systems Engineering Website
The Space Systems Engineering Website is a free, six-week, online course that allows students to work and learn with NASA&#x27;s engineers. Course materials will always be accessible and students are able to use the learned resources in any way they please.

Virginia Aerospace Science and Technology Program
The Virginia Aerospace Science and Technology Program is a one-week, online, STEM summer program. The program focuses on NASA-related research provided by NASA&#x27;s STEM professionals.

Virginia Commonwealth STEM Industry Internship Program (CSIIP)
The Virginia Commonwealth STEM Industry Internship Program or CSIIP, provides an online internship application system for STEM majors. This was done for the people to meet the increasing demand for citizens with STEM majors.

Virginia Earth System Science Scholars
The Virginia Earth System Science Scholars is a STEM-centered program where participants participate with NASA&#x27;s professional researchers. The Virginia Space Coast Scholars (VSCS) program is an online, week long, STEM-centered program that focuses on the study of NASA&#x27;s missions.

William A Hiscock Space Grant Scholarship Fund
The William A Hiscock Space Grant Scholarship Fund was created &quot;in memory of William Hiscock, the former director of the Montana Space Grant.&quot; Due to his efforts, many NASA ballooning centered programs were created.

==Participating institutions==
As of 2002, there are over 850 participating institutions.

Alabama Space Grant Consortium
*University of Alabama in Huntsville, lead institution
*Auburn University
*University of Alabama
*University of Alabama at Birmingham 

*University of South Alabama
*Alabama A&amp;M University
*Tuskegee University

Alaska Space Grant Consortium
*University of Alaska Fairbanks, lead institution
*Alaska Pacific University

*University of Alaska Anchorage
*University of Alaska Southeast

Arizona Space Grant Consortium
*University of Arizona, lead institution
*Arizona State University
*Northern Arizona University
*Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
*USGS Flagstaff Branch
*World View Enterprises
*Arizona Daily Star
*Arizona Daily Sun
*Arizona Near Space Research
*Biosphere 2
*Central Arizona College
*Coconino Community College
*Diné College
*Estrella Mountain Community College
*Flandrau Science Center and Planetarium
*Glendale Community College
*Iridium Satellite Communications

*Lowell Observatory
*Mt. Lemmon SkyCenter and Sky School
*National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO)
*National Undergraduate Research Observatory (NURO)
*Northern Arizona Planetary Science Alliance (NAPSA)
*Northrop Grumman
*Paragon Space Development Corporation
*Phoenix College
*Pima Community College
*Planetary Science Institute
*Prescott Astronomy Club
*Raytheon Corporation
*Rincon Research
*Tohono O&#x27;odham Community College
*USDA ARS Southwest Watershed Research Center

Arkansas Space Grant Consortium
*University of Arkansas at Little Rock, lead institution
*Arkansas State University, Jonesboro
*Arkansas Tech University, Russellville
*Harding University, Searcy
*Henderson State University, Arkadelphia
*Hendrix College, Conway
*John Brown University
*Lyon College, Batesville
*Ouachita Baptist University, Arkadelphia
*Southern Arkansas University, Magnolia
*University of Arkansas, Fayetteville
*University of Arkansas at Fort Smith
*University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

*University of Arkansas at Monticello
*University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
*University of Central Arkansas
*University of the Ozarks
*Arkansas Aerospace Training Consortium
*Arkansas Aviation Historical Society
*Arkansas Department of Aeronautics
*Arkansas Economic Development Commission
*Arkansas Department of Education
*Arkansas Department of Higher Education
*BEI Precision
*Civil Air Patrol, Arkansas Wing
*Conestoga-Rovers &amp; Associates

California Space Grant Consortium
*Astronomical Society of the Pacific
*Azusa Pacific University
*California State Polytechnic University, Pomona
*California Polytechnic State University
*California Institute of Technology
*California State University, Sacramento
*California State University, San Bernardino
*California State University, Long Beach
*California State University, Los Angeles
*Pomona College
*San Diego State University
*San Jose State University

*Santa Clara University
*Sonoma State University
*Stanford University
*UC Berkeley
*UC Davis
*UC Irvine
*UC Los Angeles
*UC Riverside
*UC San Diego, lead institution
*UC Santa Barbara
*UC Santa Cruz
*University of San Diego
*University of Southern California
Colorado Space Grant Consortium
*University of Colorado Boulder, lead institution
*Adams State University
*Aims Community College
*Colorado Mesa University
*Colorado School of Mines
*Colorado State University
*Colorado State University - Pueblo
*University of Denver
*Community College of Aurora
*Community College of Denver
*Fort Lewis College

*Front Range Community College
*Otero College
*Metropolitan State University of Denver
*Pikes Peak State College
*Pueblo Community College
*Red Rocks Community College
*Space Foundation
*Trinidad State College
*University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
*University of Northern Colorado
*Western State Colorado University

Connecticut Space Grant Consortium
*University of Hartford, lead institution
*Asnuntuck Community College
*Capital Community College
*Housatonic Community College
*Manchester Community College
*Middlesex Community College
*Naugatuck Valley Community College
*Northwestern Connecticut Community College
*Norwalk Community College
*Quinebaug Valley Community College
*Three Rivers Community College
*Tunxis Community College
*Central Connecticut State University

*Eastern Connecticut State University
*Fairfield University
*Southern Connecticut State University
*Trinity College
*University of Bridgeport
*University of Connecticut
*University of New Haven
*Wesleyan University
*Yale University
*Connecticut Invention Convention
*New England Air Museum
*Connecticut Science Center
*Discovery Museum

Delaware Space Grant Consortium
*University of Delaware, lead institution
*Delaware Technical Community College - Jack F. Owens Campus
*Delaware Technical Community College - Stanton Campus
*Delaware Technical Community College - Terry Campus
*Delaware Technical Community College - George Campus

*Wesley College
*Wilmington University

Florida Space Grant Consortium
*Astronauts Memorial Foundation
*Bethune-Cookman University
*Broward College
*Eastern Florida State College
*Eckerd College
*Embry–Riddle Aeronautical University
*Florida A&amp;M University
*Florida Atlantic University
*Florida Gulf Coast University
*Florida Institute of Technology
*Florida International University

*Florida Polytechnic University
*Florida State University
*Kennedy Space Center
*Orlando Science Center
*Space Florida
*University of Central Florida, lead institution
*University of Florida
*University of Miami
*University of North Florida
*University of South Florida
*University of West Florida

Georgia Space Grant Consortium
*Georgia Institute of Technology, lead institution
*Albany State University
*Agnes Scott College
*Clark Atlanta University
*Columbus State University
*Fort Valley State University
*Georgia Southern University
*Georgia Southern University - Armstrong Campus
*Georgia State University
*Kennesaw State University

*Mercer University
*Morehouse College
*Museum of Aviation
*Savannah State University
*SpaceWorks Enterprises, Inc.
*Spelman College
*University of Georgia
*University of Georgia - Griffin Campus
*University of North Georgia
*University of West Georgia

Hawai&#x27;i Space Grant Consortium
*University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, lead institution
*University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo
*Hawai‘i Community College
*Honolulu Community College
*Kapi‘olani Community College

*Kaua‘i Community College
*Leeward Community College
*University of Hawai&#x27;i Maui College
*Windward Community College
*University of Guam

Idaho Space Grant Consortium
*University of Idaho, lead institution
*Boise State University
*Brigham Young University - Idaho
*Bruneau Dunes State Park
*College of Southern Idaho
*College of Western Idaho
*Craters of the Moon National Monument
*Discovery Center of Idaho
*Eastern Idaho Engineering Council
*Idaho Academy of Science and Engineering
*Idaho Department of Education
*Idaho Museum of Natural History

*Idaho National Laboratory
*Idaho Out-of-School Network
*Idaho Science Teachers Association
*Idaho State University
*Idaho STEM Action Center
*Idaho Transportation Department - Division of Aeronautics
*Lewis-Clark State College
*North Idaho College
*Northwest Nazarene University
*Palouse Discovery Center
*The College of Idaho
Illinois Space Grant Consortium
*University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign, lead institution
*Adler Planetarium
*Bradley University
*Chicago State University
*City Colleges of Chicago
*DePaul University
*Discovery Center Museum

*Illinois Institute of Technology
*Northern Illinois University
*Northwestern University
*Southern Illinois University Edwardsville
*University of Chicago
*University of Illinois Chicago
Indiana Space Grant Consortium
*Purdue University, lead Institution
*Ball State University
*Anderson University
*Challenger Learning Center
*Children&#x27;s Museum Indianapolis
*Conner Prairie
*Evansville Museum
*Ethos Science Center
*Indiana University
*Indiana State Museum
*Indiana State University
*Indiana University Bloomington
*Indiana University–Purdue University Columbus

*Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis
*NearSpace Launch Inc.
*Purdue University Fort Wayne
*Purdue University Northwest
*Science Central
*StratoStar Project Based STEM Learning
*Taylor University
*Terre Haute Children&#x27;s Museum
*Trine University
*University of Evansville
*University of Southern Indiana
*Valparaiso University
Iowa Space Grant Consortium
*Iowa State University, lead institution
*Aerodyne Labs
*Ames Laboratory
*Collins Aerospace
*Des Moines Area Community College
*Grout Museum District
*Iowa Academy of Science
*Iowa Aviation Promotion Group, Inc.
*Iowa Department of Education
*Iowa DOT - Aviation Bureau

*ISU Extension and Outreach 4-H Youth Development
*Loras College
*National Lab for Agriculture and the Environment
*National Mississippi River Museum and Aquarium
*Putnam Museum
*Science Center of Iowa
*Softronics, Ltd.
*University of Iowa
*University of Northern Iowa
*Drake University
Kansas Space Grant Consortium
*Wichita State University, lead institution
*Emporia State University
*Fort Hays State University
*Haskell Indian Nations University

*Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center
*Kansas State University
*Pittsburg State University
*University of Kansas
Kentucky Space Grant Consortium
*University of Kentucky College of Engineering, lead institution
*Asbury University
*Ashland Community and Technical College
*Aviation Museum of Kentucky
*Bellarmine University
*Berea College
*Bluegrass Community and Technical College
*Centre College
*Eastern Kentucky University
*Faradine Systems
*Global Parametrics
*Hopkinsville Community College
*Innoviator, LLC
*Kentucky Science &amp; Technology Corp

*Kentucky Science Center
*Kentucky State University
*The Living Arts and Science Center
*Morehead State University
*Murray State University
*Northern Kentucky University
*Owensboro Community and Technical College
*Space Tango
*Thomas More University
*Tribo Flow Separations, LLC
*University of Louisville
*University of Pikeville
*West Kentucky Community and Technical 
*Western Kentucky University
Louisiana Space Grant Consortium
*Louisiana State University, lead institution
*Baton Rouge Community College
*BREC/Highland Road Park Observatory
*Delgado Community College
*Dillard University
*Gordon A. Cain Center for STEM Literacy
*Grambling State University and A &amp; M College
*Louisiana Business Technology Center
*Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education
*Louisiana Board of Regents
*Louisiana Public Broadcasting
*Louisiana State University - Alexandria
*Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
*Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center at Shreveport
*Louisiana State University in Shreveport
*Louisiana Tech University

*Loyola University
*McNeese State University
*Nicholls State University
*Northshore Technical Community College
*Northwestern State University of Louisiana
*Nunez Community College
*River Parishes Community College
*SciPort Discovery Center
*Southeastern Louisiana University
*Southern University and A &amp; M College
*Southern University at New Orleans
*Tulane University
*University of Louisiana at Lafayette
*University of Louisiana at Monroe
*University of New Orleans
*Xavier University of Louisiana
Maine Space Grant Consortium
*Maine Space Grant Consortium, lead institution
*University of Maine
*Bates College
*Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
*BluShift Aerospace
*Bowdoin College
*Challenger Learning Center of Maine
*Colby College
*Island Institute
*Fryeburg Academy
*Gulf of Maine Research Institute
*Lockheed Martin

*Maine Department of Education
*Maine Manufacturing Extension Partnership
*Maine Maritime Academy
*Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
*Maine School of Science and Mathematics
*Northern Maine Museum of Science
*Saint Joseph&#x27;s College of Maine
*Southern Maine Community College
*University of New England
*University of Southern Maine
*VALT Enterprises, LLC
*York County Community College
Maryland Space Grant Consortium
*Johns Hopkins University, lead institution
*Capitol Technology University
*Hagerstown Community College
*The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
*Morgan State University
*National Center for Earth &amp; Space Science Education

*The Space Telescope Science Institute
*Towson University
*United States Naval Academy
*University of Maryland, Baltimore County
*University of Maryland, College Park
*University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Massachusetts Space Grant Consortium
*Massachusetts Institute of Technology, lead institution
*Boston Museum of Science
*Boston University
*Bridgewater State University
*Five College Astronomy Department
*Framingham State University
*Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
*Harvard University
*Maria Mitchell Observatory
*Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning
*Mount Holyoke College

*Northeastern University
*Roxbury Community College
*Tufts University
*University of Massachusetts
*University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
*University of Massachusetts Lowell
*Wellesley College
*Williams College
*Worcester Polytechnic Institute
*Worcester State University
Michigan Space Grant Consortium
*University of Michigan, lead institution
*Calvin University
*Eastern Michigan University
*Grand Valley State University
*Hope College
*Michigan State University

*Michigan Technological University
*Oakland University
*Saginaw Valley State University
*Wayne State University
*Western Michigan University
*Ann Arbor Public Schools
Minnesota Space Grant Consortium
*University of Minnesota, lead institution
*Augsburg University
*Bemidji State University
*Bethel University
*Carleton College
*Concordia College
*Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College

*Leech Lake Tribal College
*Macalester College
*Minnesota Dept. of Transportation – Office of Aeronautics
*St. Catherine University
*Southwest Minnesota State University
*University of Minnesota – Duluth
*University of St. Thomas
Mississippi Space Grant Consortium
*University of Mississippi, lead institution
*Alcorn State University
*Coahoma Community College
*Delta State University
*Hinds Community College
*Itawamba Community College
*Jackson State University
*Jones County Junior College
*Mississippi State University
*Meridian Community College
*Mississippi Delta Community College
*Mississippi Gulf Coast Community College
*Northeast Mississippi Community College
*Mississippi University for Women
*Mississippi Valley State University
*University of Southern Mississippi
*Pearl River Community College
Missouri Space Grant Consortium
*Missouri University of Science and Technology, lead institution
*Challenger Learning Center of St. Louis
*Lincoln University 
*Missouri State University
*St Louis University

*Truman State University
*University of Missouri
*University of Missouri–Kansas City
*University of Missouri–St. Louis
*Washington University in St. Louis
Montana Space Grant Consortium
*Aaniiih Nakoda College
*Anasphere, Inc.
*Blackfeet Community College
*Carroll College
*Chief Dull Knife College
*Montana Science Center
*Dawson Community College
*Flathead Valley Community College
*Fort Peck Community College
*Gallatin College
*Great Falls College MSU
*Helena College - UM
*HOPA Mountain, Inc.
*Little Big Horn College
*Miles Community College

*Missoula College
*Montana 4-H Foundation
*Montana Learning Center
*Montana State University Billings
*Montana State University Bozeman, lead institution
*Montana State University Northern
*Montana Tech of the University of Montana
*Museum of the Rockies
*Rocky Mountain College
*Salish Kootenai College
*Stone Child College
*University of Providence
*University of Montana - Missoula
*University of Montana - Western
Nebraska Space Grant Consortium
*University of Nebraska Omaha, lead institution
*CALMIT
*Chadron State College
*Civil Air Patrol - 99th Pursuit Squadron
*College of Saint Mary
*Creighton University
*Great Plains Girl Scouts
*Hastings College
*Metropolitan Community College
*Nebraska Academy of Sciences

*Nebraska Aviation Council
*Nebraska Department of Aeronautics
*Nebraska Department of Education
*Nebraska 4-H
*Nebraska Indian Community College
*University of Nebraska at Kearney
*University of Nebraska-Lincoln
*University of Nebraska Medical Center
*Western Nebraska Community College
Nevada Space Grant Consortium
*Desert Research Institute, lead institution
*DRI - Sciencealive
*Abaris Training Resources
*Challenger Learning Center of Northern Nevada
*College of Southern Nevada
*Digital Solid State Propulsion
*Fleischmann Planetarium &amp; Science Center
*Great Basin College
*Jack C. Davis Observatory

*Nevada State College
*The Planetarium at CSN
*Sustainable Grounding Systems
*Truckee Meadows Community College
*University of Nevada - Las Vegas
*University of Nevada - Reno
*University and Community College System of Nevada
*Western Nevada College
New Hampshire Space Grant Consortium
*University of New Hampshire, lead institution
*BAE Systems
*Great Bay Community College - Portsmouth
*Great Bay Community College - Rochester
*Dartmouth College
*Lakes Region Community College - Laconia
*Manchester Community College
*McAuliffe-Shepard Discovery Center

*Mount Washington Observatory
*Nashua Community College
*NHTI, Concord&#x27;s Community College
*Plymouth State University
*River Valley Community College - Lebanon
*River Valley Community College - Claremont
*River Valley Community College - Keene
*White Mountains Community College
New Jersey Space Grant Consortium
*Rutgers University - New Brunswick, lead institution
*Bloomfield College
*Brookdale Community College
*The College of New Jersey
*Essex County College
*Federal Aviation Administration, William J. Hughes Technical Center
*Georgian Court University
*Goddard Institute for Space Studies
*Liberty Science Center
*Middlesex County College
*Montclair State University
*New Jersey City University
*New Jersey Institute of Technology

*Princeton University
*Princeton University Plasma Physics Laboratory
*Ramapo College
*Raritan Valley Community College
*Rowan University
*Rutgers University-Camden
*Rutgers University-Newark
*Seton Hall University
*Stevens Institute of Technology
*Stockton University
*Union County College
*William Paterson University
New Mexico Space Grant Consortium
*New Mexico State University, lead institution
*American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
*Air Force Research Laboratory
*Arrowhead Center
*Blue Origin
*Boeing
*BRPH
*Center of Excellence for Commercial Space Transportation
*Central New Mexico Community College
*Colorado Air and Space Port
*Doña Ana Community College
*Federal Aviation Administration

*Fisher Space Pen
*Highlands University
*Jacobs
*Lockheed Martin
*New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
*Northrop Grumman
*Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute
*Space News
*Special Aerospace Services
*University of New Mexico
*Virgin Galactic
New York Space Grant Consortium
*Cornell University, lead institution
*Alfred University
*Barnard College
*Binghamton University
*City College of New York
*Clarkson University
*Colgate University
*Columbia University
*Cosmoptera, Inc.
*Intrepid Sea, Air &amp; Space Museum
*Lockheed Martin
*Medgar Evers College
*Moog Inc.

*New York University Tandon School of Engineering
*Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
*Rochester Institute of Technology
*Sciencenter
*SUNY Geneseo
*Stony Brook University
*Syracuse University
*Union College
*University at Buffalo
*University of Rochester
*Ursa Space Systems
*York College
North Carolina Space Grant Consortium

*North Carolina State University

North Dakota Space Grant Consortium
*University of North Dakota, lead institution
*Bismarck State College
*Cankdeska Cikana Community College
*Dakota College at Bottineau
*Dickinson State University
*Gateway To Science
*Lake Region State College
*Mayville State University
*Minot State University

*North Dakota State College of Science
*North Dakota State University
*Nueta Hidatsa Sahnish College
*Sitting Bull College
*State Historical Society of North Dakota
*Turtle Mountain Community College
*United Tribes Technical College
*Valley City State University
*Williston State College
Ohio Space Grant Consortium 
*Ohio Northern University, lead institution
*Ohio Aerospace Institute
*Baldwin Wallace University
*Case Western Reserve University
*Cedarville University
*Central State University
*The Cincinnati Observatory
*Cincinnati State Technical and Community College
*Cleveland State University
*Columbus State Community College
*Cuyahoga Community College
*Drake Planetarium and Science Center
*iSpace
*Kent State University
*Lakeland Community College

*Lorain County Community College
*Marietta College
*Miami University
*NASA Glenn Research Center
*Ohio University
*Ohio State University
*Sinclair Community College
*University of Akron
*University of Toledo
*University of Cincinnati
*University of Dayton
*University of Toledo
*Wright State University
*Wilberforce University
*Youngstown State University
Oklahoma Space Grant Consortium
*Oklahoma State University–Stillwater, lead institution
*Cameron University
*Center for Spatial Analysis
*East Central University
* Frontier Electronic Systems Corp
*Langston University
*Norman Economic Development Center
*Redlands Community College

*Science Applications International Corp
*Southeastern Oklahoma State University
*Southern Nazarene University
*Southwestern Oklahoma State University
*Stafford Air and Space Museum
*STARBASE Oklahoma
*Tulsa Community College
*University of Oklahoma
Oregon Space Grant Consortium
*Oregon State University, lead institution
*Eastern Oregon University
*Evergreen Aviation &amp; Space Museum
*George Fox University
*Lane Community College
*Linn Benton Community College
*The Museum at Warm Springs
*Oregon Coast Community College
*Oregon Institute of Technology

*Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
*Pacific University
*Portland Community College
*Portland State University
*Southern Oregon University
*Southwestern Oregon Community College
*University of Oregon
*University of Portland
*Western Oregon University
Pennsylvania Space Grant Consortium
*Pennsylvania State University, lead institution
*California University of Pennsylvania
*Carnegie Mellon University
*Cheyney University
*Drexel University
*Franklin &amp; Marshall College
*Gannon University
*Gettysburg College
*Lehigh University
*Lincoln University

*Montgomery County Community College
*NASTAR Center
*Penn State Abington
*University of Pittsburgh
*Swarthmore College
*Temple University
*Villanova University
*West Chester University
Puerto Rico Space Grant Consortium
*University of Puerto Rico, lead institution
*Ana G. Méndez University System
*Arecibo Observatory
*EcoExploratorium
*Interamerican University of Puerto Rico at Bayamón
*Polytechnic University Puerto Rico

*Puerto Rico Astronomy Society
*Puerto Rico Department of Education
*Puerto Rico NASA Explorer School
*RUM Planetarium
*StarBase Puerto Rico
Rhode Island Space Grant Consortium 
*Brown University, lead institution
*Bryant University
*Community College of Rhode Island
*Providence College
*Roger Williams Park Museum of Natural History and Planetarium
*Roger Williams University
*Rhode Island College
*Rhode Island School of Design

*Salve Regina University
*University of Rhode Island
*Wheaton College
*Rhode Island Aviation and Space Education Council
*NASA Educators Resource Center
*Northeast Planetary Data Center
*LADD Observatory
South Carolina Space Grant Consortium

*College of Charleston

South Dakota Space Grant Consortium
*South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, lead institution
*Augustana University
*Badlands Observatory
*Black Hills Astronomical Society
*Black Hills State University
*Dakota State University
*The Journey Museum and Learning Center
*Lake Area Technical Institute
*Missouri Breaks Industries Research, Inc.
*Northern State University
*Oglala Lakota College
*Raven Industries

*RESPEC
*Sanford Underground Research Facility
*Sinte Gleska University
*South Dakota Air &amp; Space Museum
*South Dakota Board of Regents
*South Dakota Discovery Center
*South Dakota State Library
*South Dakota State University
*University of South Dakota
*USGS Center for Earth Resources Observation and Science
*Washington Pavilion / Kirby Science Discovery Center
Tennessee Space Grant Consortium
*Vanderbilt University, lead institution
*Austin Peay State University
*East Tennessee State University
*Middle Tennessee State University

*Oak Ridge Associated Universities
*Rhodes College
*Tennessee Technological University
*University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
Texas Space Grant Consortium

Academic Members
*Angelo State University
*Austin Community College District
*Baylor University
*El Paso Community College
*Houston Community College
*Lamar University
*Laredo College
*Lone Star College System
*McLennan Community College
*Prairie View A&amp;M University
*Rice University
*San Jacinto College
*South Texas College
*Southern Methodist University
*St. Edward&#x27;s University
*Sul Ross State University
*Tarleton State University
*Texas A&amp;M International University
*Texas A&amp;M University
*Texas A&amp;M University–Commerce
*Texas A&amp;M University–Corpus Christi
*Texas A&amp;M University–Kingsville
*Texas A&amp;M University–Texarkana
*Texas Christian University
*Texas Southern University
*Texas State University
*Texas Tech University
*Texas Woman&#x27;s University
*Trinity University (Texas)
*University of Dallas
*University of Houston
*University of Houston–Clear Lake
*University of Houston–Downtown
*University of North Texas
*University of St. Thomas (Texas)
*University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
*University of Texas at Arlington
*University of Texas at Austin, lead institution
*University of Texas at Dallas
*University of Texas at El Paso
*University of Texas at San Antonio
*University of Texas at Tyler
*University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
*University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
*University of Texas Medical Branch
*University of Texas Permian Basin
*University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center

Government Members
*Governor of Texas
*Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board

Industry Members
*Lockheed Martin

Non-Profit Members
*Austin Astronomical Society
*Austin Planetarium
*Bob Bullock Texas State History Museum
*Capitol Area Council, Boy Scouts of America
*Don Harrington Discovery Center
*Girlstart
*Rio Grande Valley Science Association
*Scobee Education Center
*Seal of Valor
*SEDS-USA
*Southwest Research Institute
*STEAMSPACE
*Texas Alliance for Minorities in Engineering
*Texas Medical Center
*Universities Space Research Association

Utah Space Grant Consortium
*University of Utah, lead institution
*Brigham Young University
*Utah State University

Vermont Space Grant Consortium

*University of Vermont, lead institution

Virginia Space Grant Consortium

* College of William &amp; Mary
* Hampton University
* Old Dominion University
* University of Virginia
* Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University

Washington D.C. NASA Space Grant Consortium

*American University

Washington NASA Space Grant Consortium

*University of Washington

West Virginia Space Grant Consortium

*West Virginia University

Wisconsin Space Grant Consortium

*Carthage College
*Lawrence University
*University of Wisconsin–Green Bay

Wyoming NASA Space Grant Consortium

*University of Wyoming

==See also==
*Land Grant Colleges
*Sea Grant Colleges
*Sun Grant Colleges

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6978618" start="4" end="24" title="National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program" label="space-grant colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="61" end="74" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="114" end="123" title="consortia" label="consortia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15706425" start="163" end="191" title="Space research" label="outer space-related research"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="232" end="244" title="U.S. state" label="fifty states"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="250" end="270" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="272" end="283" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="288" end="292" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978302" start="433" end="451" title="Sea grant colleges" label="sea-grant colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638697" start="477" end="495" title="Sun grant colleges" label="sun-grant colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="673" end="684" title="aeronautics" label="aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="686" end="697" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="775" end="784" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="799" end="806" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802419" start="808" end="813" title="State government" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="819" end="835" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="877" end="885" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="891" end="905" title="public services" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="1121" end="1128" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1130" end="1141" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1147" end="1157" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="1178" end="1188" title="primary education" label="elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="1197" end="1206" title="high school" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1315" end="1326" title="United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978302" start="1401" end="1410" title="Sea Grant" label="Sea Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="1428" end="1438" title="Land-grant university" label="Land Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1565" end="1569" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="1613" end="1617" title="NOAA" label="NOAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q249373" start="1764" end="1804" title="Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory" label="Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q397905" start="1808" end="1826" title="Columbia, Maryland" label="Columbia, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="1836" end="1861" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011181" start="1865" end="1897" title="La Cañada Flintridge, California" label="La Cañada Flintridge, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881523" start="2158" end="2162" title="STEM" label="STEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="2226" end="2229" title="GPA" label="GPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783148" start="5627" end="5662" title="University of Alabama in Huntsville" label="University of Alabama in Huntsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="5682" end="5699" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="5701" end="5722" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472663" start="5724" end="5759" title="University of Alabama at Birmingham" label="University of Alabama at Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q13572981" start="5763" end="5790" title="University of South Alabama" label="University of South Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551044" start="5792" end="5818" title="Alabama A&amp;amp;M University" label="Alabama A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682329" start="5820" end="5839" title="Tuskegee University" label="Tuskegee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285262" start="5872" end="5902" title="University of Alaska Fairbanks" label="University of Alaska Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565621" start="5922" end="5947" title="Alaska Pacific University" label="Alaska Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285252" start="5950" end="5980" title="University of Alaska Anchorage" label="University of Alaska Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q94279" start="5982" end="6012" title="University of Alaska Southeast" label="University of Alaska Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="6046" end="6067" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="6087" end="6111" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q139901" start="6113" end="6140" title="Northern Arizona University" label="Northern Arizona University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052113" start="6142" end="6178" title="Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University" label="Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6180" end="6201" title="USGS Flagstaff Branch" label="USGS Flagstaff Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395442" start="6203" end="6225" title="World View Enterprises" label="World View Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982939" start="6227" end="6245" title="Arizona Daily Star" label="Arizona Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791285" start="6247" end="6264" title="Arizona Daily Sun" label="Arizona Daily Sun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6266" end="6293" title="Arizona Near Space Research" label="Arizona Near Space Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q68139" start="6295" end="6306" title="Biosphere 2" label="Biosphere 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060345" start="6308" end="6331" title="Central Arizona College" label="Central Arizona College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139809" start="6333" end="6359" title="Coconino County Community College" label="Coconino Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278773" start="6361" end="6373" title="Diné College" label="Diné College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401812" start="6375" end="6410" title="Estrella Mountain Community College" label="Estrella Mountain Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761246" start="6412" end="6451" title="Flandrau Science Center and Planetarium" label="Flandrau Science Center and Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568352" start="6453" end="6479" title="Glendale Community College (Arizona)" label="Glendale Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q154387" start="6481" end="6513" title="Iridium Communications" label="Iridium Satellite Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q466895" start="6516" end="6534" title="Lowell Observatory" label="Lowell Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6536" end="6571" title="Mt. Lemmon SkyCenter and Sky School" label="Mt. Lemmon SkyCenter and Sky School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315390" start="6573" end="6618" title="National Optical Astronomy Observatory" label="National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446595" start="6620" end="6670" title="Anderson Mesa Station" label="National Undergraduate Research Observatory (NURO)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6672" end="6715" title="Northern Arizona Planetary Science Alliance" label="Northern Arizona Planetary Science Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q329953" start="6725" end="6741" title="Northrop Grumman" label="Northrop Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141905" start="6743" end="6780" title="Paragon Space Development Corporation" label="Paragon Space Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186815" start="6782" end="6797" title="Phoenix College" label="Phoenix College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194574" start="6799" end="6821" title="Pima Community College" label="Pima Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201238" start="6823" end="6850" title="Planetary Science Institute" label="Planetary Science Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6852" end="6875" title="Prescott Astronomy Club" label="Prescott Astronomy Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="6877" end="6897" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6899" end="6914" title="Rincon Research" label="Rincon Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813304" start="6916" end="6953" title="Tohono Oʼodham Community College" label="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6955" end="6999" title="USDA ARS Southwest Watershed Research Center" label="USDA ARS Southwest Watershed Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q500154" start="7034" end="7071" title="University of Arkansas at Little Rock" label="University of Arkansas at Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q500131" start="7091" end="7116" title="Arkansas State University" label="Arkansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q673111" start="7129" end="7153" title="Arkansas Tech University" label="Arkansas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656138" start="7169" end="7187" title="Harding University" label="Harding University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604967" start="7197" end="7223" title="Henderson State University" label="Henderson State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605137" start="7238" end="7253" title="Hendrix College" label="Hendrix College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223569" start="7263" end="7284" title="John Brown University" label="John Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149853" start="7286" end="7298" title="Lyon College" label="Lyon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110141" start="7312" end="7339" title="Ouachita Baptist University" label="Ouachita Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724577" start="7354" end="7382" title="Southern Arkansas University" label="Southern Arkansas University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070333" start="7394" end="7416" title="University of Arkansas" label="University of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495828" start="7432" end="7468" title="University of Arkansas at Fort Smith" label="University of Arkansas at Fort Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q941298" start="7470" end="7513" title="University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences" label="University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571390" start="7516" end="7552" title="University of Arkansas at Monticello" label="University of Arkansas at Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495825" start="7554" end="7590" title="University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff" label="University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782724" start="7592" end="7622" title="University of Central Arkansas" label="University of Central Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896711" start="7624" end="7648" title="University of the Ozarks" label="University of the Ozarks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7650" end="7688" title="Arkansas Aerospace Training Consortium" label="Arkansas Aerospace Training Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579080" start="7690" end="7726" title="Arkansas Aviation Historical Society" label="Arkansas Aviation Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406495" start="7728" end="7762" title="Arkansas Department of Aeronautics" label="Arkansas Department of Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7764" end="7804" title="Arkansas Economic Development Commission" label="Arkansas Economic Development Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791767" start="7806" end="7838" title="Arkansas Department of Education" label="Arkansas Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7840" end="7879" title="Arkansas Department of Higher Education" label="Arkansas Department of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7881" end="7894" title="BEI Precision" label="BEI Precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q781210" start="7896" end="7912" title="Civil Air Patrol" label="Civil Air Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159517" start="7929" end="7962" title="Conestoga-Rovers &amp;amp; Associates" label="Conestoga-Rovers &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q751779" start="7999" end="8034" title="Astronomical Society of the Pacific" label="Astronomical Society of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583636" start="8036" end="8060" title="Azusa Pacific University" label="Azusa Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026868" start="8062" end="8109" title="California State Polytechnic University, Pomona" label="California State Polytechnic University, Pomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026846" start="8111" end="8150" title="California Polytechnic State University" label="California Polytechnic State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="8152" end="8186" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026941" start="8188" end="8227" title="California State University, Sacramento" label="California State University, Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026944" start="8229" end="8272" title="California State University, San Bernardino" label="California State University, San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026926" start="8274" end="8313" title="California State University, Long Beach" label="California State University, Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026932" start="8315" end="8355" title="California State University, Los Angeles" label="California State University, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227384" start="8357" end="8371" title="Pomona College" label="Pomona College"/>
<link wikidata="Q913861" start="8373" end="8399" title="San Diego State University" label="San Diego State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q498526" start="8401" end="8426" title="San Jose State University" label="San Jose State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q992830" start="8429" end="8451" title="Santa Clara University" label="Santa Clara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q624571" start="8453" end="8476" title="Sonoma State University" label="Sonoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="8478" end="8497" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="8499" end="8510" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="8512" end="8520" title="University of California, Davis" label="UC Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="8522" end="8531" title="University of California, Irvine" label="UC Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="8533" end="8547" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UC Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075148" start="8549" end="8561" title="University of California, Riverside" label="UC Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="8563" end="8575" title="University of California, San Diego" label="UC San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="8595" end="8611" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="UC Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="8613" end="8626" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="UC Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q262663" start="8628" end="8651" title="University of San Diego" label="University of San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="8653" end="8686" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="8720" end="8750" title="University of Colorado Boulder" label="University of Colorado Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q351971" start="8770" end="8792" title="Adams State University" label="Adams State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697183" start="8794" end="8816" title="Aims Community College" label="Aims Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507218" start="8818" end="8842" title="Colorado Mesa University" label="Colorado Mesa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111367" start="8844" end="8868" title="Colorado School of Mines" label="Colorado School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111640" start="8870" end="8895" title="Colorado State University" label="Colorado State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111515" start="8897" end="8931" title="Colorado State University–Pueblo" label="Colorado State University - Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="8933" end="8953" title="University of Denver" label="University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154688" start="8955" end="8982" title="Community College of Aurora" label="Community College of Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154691" start="8984" end="9011" title="Community College of Denver" label="Community College of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438597" start="9013" end="9031" title="Fort Lewis College" label="Fort Lewis College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505816" start="9034" end="9063" title="Front Range Community College" label="Front Range Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108531" start="9065" end="9078" title="Otero College" label="Otero College"/>
<link wikidata="Q613736" start="9080" end="9119" title="Metropolitan State University of Denver" label="Metropolitan State University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193647" start="9121" end="9145" title="Pikes Peak State College" label="Pikes Peak State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258436" start="9147" end="9171" title="Pueblo Community College" label="Pueblo Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304941" start="9173" end="9200" title="Red Rocks Community College" label="Red Rocks Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572360" start="9202" end="9218" title="Space Foundation" label="Space Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842406" start="9220" end="9242" title="Trinidad State College" label="Trinidad State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495841" start="9244" end="9286" title="University of Colorado Colorado Springs" label="University of Colorado at Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783608" start="9288" end="9319" title="University of Northern Colorado" label="University of Northern Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564975" start="9321" end="9354" title="Western State Colorado University" label="Western State Colorado University"/>
<link wikidata="Q747053" start="9392" end="9414" title="University of Hartford" label="University of Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807464" start="9434" end="9461" title="Asnuntuck Community College" label="Asnuntuck Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035532" start="9463" end="9488" title="Capital Community College" label="Capital Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913494" start="9490" end="9518" title="Housatonic Community College" label="Housatonic Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747336" start="9520" end="9548" title="Manchester Community College (Connecticut)" label="Manchester Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841896" start="9550" end="9577" title="Middlesex Community College (Connecticut)" label="Middlesex Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981119" start="9579" end="9613" title="Naugatuck Valley Community College" label="Naugatuck Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060299" start="9615" end="9657" title="Northwestern Connecticut Community College" label="Northwestern Connecticut Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060777" start="9659" end="9684" title="Norwalk Community College" label="Norwalk Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272216" start="9686" end="9720" title="Quinebaug Valley Community College" label="Quinebaug Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797727" start="9722" end="9752" title="Three Rivers Community College (Connecticut)" label="Three Rivers Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715133" start="9754" end="9778" title="Tunxis Community College" label="Tunxis Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053764" start="9780" end="9816" title="Central Connecticut State University" label="Central Connecticut State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278152" start="9819" end="9855" title="Eastern Connecticut State University" label="Eastern Connecticut State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393265" start="9857" end="9877" title="Fairfield University" label="Fairfield University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253123" start="9879" end="9916" title="Southern Connecticut State University" label="Southern Connecticut State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927705" start="9918" end="9933" title="Trinity College (Connecticut)" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055874" start="9935" end="9959" title="University of Bridgeport" label="University of Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="9961" end="9986" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q917899" start="9988" end="10011" title="University of New Haven" label="University of New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="10013" end="10032" title="Wesleyan University" label="Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="10034" end="10049" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10051" end="10083" title="Connecticut Invention Convention" label="Connecticut Invention Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007140" start="10085" end="10107" title="New England Air Museum" label="New England Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161605" start="10109" end="10135" title="Connecticut Science Center" label="Connecticut Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281942" start="10137" end="10153" title="Discovery Museum and Planetarium" label="Discovery Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068072" start="10188" end="10210" title="University of Delaware" label="University of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253375" start="10230" end="10266" title="Delaware Technical Community College" label="Delaware Technical Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253375" start="10291" end="10327" title="Delaware Technical Community College" label="Delaware Technical Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253375" start="10346" end="10382" title="Delaware Technical Community College" label="Delaware Technical Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253375" start="10399" end="10435" title="Delaware Technical Community College" label="Delaware Technical Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983892" start="10454" end="10468" title="Wesley College (Delaware)" label="Wesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564053" start="10470" end="10491" title="Wilmington University" label="Wilmington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546040" start="10525" end="10555" title="Astronauts Memorial Foundation" label="Astronauts Memorial Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298457" start="10557" end="10583" title="Bethune-Cookman University" label="Bethune-Cookman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q556733" start="10585" end="10600" title="Broward College" label="Broward College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685856" start="10602" end="10631" title="Eastern Florida State College" label="Eastern Florida State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332879" start="10633" end="10647" title="Eckerd College" label="Eckerd College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052113" start="10649" end="10685" title="Embry–Riddle Aeronautical University" label="Embry–Riddle Aeronautical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430048" start="10687" end="10713" title="Florida A&amp;amp;M University" label="Florida A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q429863" start="10715" end="10742" title="Florida Atlantic University" label="Florida Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430054" start="10744" end="10773" title="Florida Gulf Coast University" label="Florida Gulf Coast University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152650" start="10775" end="10806" title="Florida Institute of Technology" label="Florida Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="10808" end="10840" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461548" start="10843" end="10873" title="Florida Polytechnic University" label="Florida Polytechnic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="10875" end="10899" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="10901" end="10921" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103184" start="10923" end="10945" title="Orlando Science Center" label="Orlando Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069728" start="10947" end="10960" title="Space Florida" label="Space Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q143451" start="10962" end="10991" title="University of Central Florida" label="University of Central Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="11011" end="11032" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="11034" end="11053" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473796" start="11055" end="11082" title="University of North Florida" label="University of North Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q500606" start="11084" end="11111" title="University of South Florida" label="University of South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q659255" start="11113" end="11139" title="University of West Florida" label="University of West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="11173" end="11204" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709390" start="11224" end="11247" title="Albany State University" label="Albany State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826926" start="11249" end="11268" title="Agnes Scott College" label="Agnes Scott College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572296" start="11270" end="11294" title="Clark Atlanta University" label="Clark Atlanta University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150130" start="11296" end="11321" title="Columbus State University" label="Columbus State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472214" start="11323" end="11351" title="Fort Valley State University" label="Fort Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q624959" start="11353" end="11380" title="Georgia Southern University" label="Georgia Southern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793919" start="11382" end="11428" title="Georgia Southern University–Armstrong Campus" label="Georgia Southern University - Armstrong Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509333" start="11430" end="11454" title="Georgia State University" label="Georgia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532470" start="11456" end="11481" title="Kennesaw State University" label="Kennesaw State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798612" start="11484" end="11501" title="Mercer University" label="Mercer University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524124" start="11503" end="11520" title="Morehouse College" label="Morehouse College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940779" start="11522" end="11540" title="Museum of Aviation (Warner Robins)" label="Museum of Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474474" start="11542" end="11567" title="Savannah State University" label="Savannah State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950802" start="11569" end="11597" title="SpaceWorks Enterprises" label="SpaceWorks Enterprises, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7575916" start="11599" end="11614" title="Spelman College" label="Spelman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="11616" end="11637" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="11639" end="11677" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia - Griffin Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895970" start="11679" end="11706" title="University of North Georgia" label="University of North Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495945" start="11708" end="11734" title="University of West Georgia" label="University of West Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="11773" end="11803" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150914" start="11823" end="11852" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684264" start="11854" end="11879" title="Hawai‘i Community College" label="Hawai‘i Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896667" start="11881" end="11907" title="Honolulu Community College" label="Honolulu Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366682" start="11909" end="11937" title="Kapiolani Community College" label="Kapi‘olani Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378632" start="11940" end="11964" title="Kauai Community College" label="Kaua‘i Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516572" start="11966" end="11991" title="Leeward Community College" label="Leeward Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895485" start="11993" end="12032" title="University of Hawaiʻi Maui College" label="University of Hawai&amp;#x27;i Maui College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024795" start="12034" end="12060" title="Windward Community College" label="Windward Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248737" start="12062" end="12080" title="University of Guam" label="University of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854488" start="12112" end="12131" title="University of Idaho" label="University of Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q891082" start="12151" end="12173" title="Boise State University" label="Boise State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029431" start="12175" end="12207" title="Brigham Young University–Idaho" label="Brigham Young University - Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978904" start="12209" end="12233" title="Bruneau Dunes State Park" label="Bruneau Dunes State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146837" start="12235" end="12260" title="College of Southern Idaho" label="College of Southern Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146875" start="12262" end="12286" title="College of Western Idaho" label="College of Western Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139053" start="12288" end="12325" title="Craters of the Moon National Monument and Preserve" label="Craters of the Moon National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12327" end="12352" title="Discovery Center of Idaho" label="Discovery Center of Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12354" end="12387" title="Eastern Idaho Engineering Council" label="Eastern Idaho Engineering Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12389" end="12429" title="Idaho Academy of Science and Engineering" label="Idaho Academy of Science and Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987440" start="12431" end="12460" title="Idaho State Department of Education" label="Idaho Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987387" start="12462" end="12493" title="Idaho Museum of Natural History" label="Idaho Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314158" start="12496" end="12521" title="Idaho National Laboratory" label="Idaho National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12523" end="12550" title="Idaho Out-of-School Network" label="Idaho Out-of-School Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12552" end="12586" title="Idaho Science Teachers Association" label="Idaho Science Teachers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656608" start="12588" end="12610" title="Idaho State University" label="Idaho State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12612" end="12636" title="Idaho STEM Action Center" label="Idaho STEM Action Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12638" end="12695" title="Idaho Transportation Department - Division of Aeronautics" label="Idaho Transportation Department - Division of Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822063" start="12697" end="12722" title="Lewis–Clark State College" label="Lewis-Clark State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055690" start="12724" end="12743" title="North Idaho College" label="North Idaho College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060132" start="12745" end="12774" title="Northwest Nazarene University" label="Northwest Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12776" end="12800" title="Palouse Discovery Center" label="Palouse Discovery Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146733" start="12802" end="12822" title="College of Idaho" label="The College of Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="12856" end="12895" title="University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q358052" start="12915" end="12932" title="Adler Planetarium" label="Adler Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q897052" start="12934" end="12952" title="Bradley University" label="Bradley University"/>
<link wikidata="Q915866" start="12954" end="12978" title="Chicago State University" label="Chicago State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123128" start="12980" end="13004" title="City Colleges of Chicago" label="City Colleges of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179603" start="13006" end="13023" title="DePaul University" label="DePaul University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13025" end="13048" title="Discovery Center Museum" label="Discovery Center Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q659706" start="13051" end="13083" title="Illinois Institute of Technology" label="Illinois Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191344" start="13085" end="13113" title="Northern Illinois University" label="Northern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="13115" end="13138" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q519349" start="13140" end="13181" title="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville" label="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="13183" end="13204" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="13206" end="13236" title="University of Illinois Chicago" label="University of Illinois Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023410" start="13237" end="13267" title="Indiana Space Grant Consortium" label="Indiana Space Grant Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="13269" end="13286" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q805122" start="13306" end="13327" title="Ball State University" label="Ball State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754216" start="13329" end="13348" title="Anderson University (Indiana)" label="Anderson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q196644" start="13350" end="13376" title="Challenger Center for Space Science Education" label="Challenger Learning Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336277" start="13378" end="13413" title="The Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Indianapolis" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161775" start="13415" end="13429" title="Conner Prairie" label="Conner Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416035" start="13431" end="13448" title="Evansville Museum of Arts, History and Science" label="Evansville Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13450" end="13470" title="Ethos Science Center" label="Ethos Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="13472" end="13490" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023430" start="13492" end="13512" title="Indiana State Museum" label="Indiana State Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q666128" start="13514" end="13538" title="Indiana State University" label="Indiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="13540" end="13570" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023671" start="13572" end="13617" title="Indiana University–Purdue University Columbus" label="Indiana University–Purdue University Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433199" start="13620" end="13669" title="Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis" label="Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13671" end="13692" title="NearSpace Launch Inc." label="NearSpace Launch Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q55456518" start="13694" end="13722" title="Purdue University Fort Wayne" label="Purdue University Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709782" start="13724" end="13751" title="Purdue University Northwest" label="Purdue University Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976656" start="13753" end="13768" title="Science Central" label="Science Central"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13770" end="13808" title="StratoStar Project Based STEM Learning" label="StratoStar Project Based STEM Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690168" start="13810" end="13827" title="Taylor University" label="Taylor University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13829" end="13863" title="Terre Haute Children&amp;#x27;s Museum" label="Terre Haute Children&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842344" start="13865" end="13881" title="Trine University" label="Trine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026988" start="13883" end="13907" title="University of Evansville" label="University of Evansville"/>
<link wikidata="Q940289" start="13909" end="13939" title="University of Southern Indiana" label="University of Southern Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q186047" start="13941" end="13962" title="Valparaiso University" label="Valparaiso University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="13992" end="14013" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14033" end="14046" title="Aerodyne Labs" label="Aerodyne Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745875" start="14048" end="14063" title="Ames Laboratory" label="Ames Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q358594" start="14065" end="14082" title="Collins Aerospace" label="Collins Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263500" start="14084" end="14117" title="Des Moines Area Community College" label="Des Moines Area Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14119" end="14140" title="Grout Museum District" label="Grout Museum District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064236" start="14142" end="14165" title="Iowa Academy of Science" label="Iowa Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14167" end="14202" title="Iowa Aviation Promotion Group, Inc." label="Iowa Aviation Promotion Group, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q16911686" start="14204" end="14232" title="Iowa Department of Education" label="Iowa Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14234" end="14260" title="Iowa DOT - Aviation Bureau" label="Iowa DOT - Aviation Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14263" end="14311" title="ISU Extension and Outreach 4-H Youth Development" label="ISU Extension and Outreach 4-H Youth Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678799" start="14313" end="14326" title="Loras College" label="Loras College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14328" end="14376" title="National Lab for Agriculture and the Environment" label="National Lab for Agriculture and the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974367" start="14378" end="14424" title="National Mississippi River Museum &amp;amp; Aquarium" label="National Mississippi River Museum and Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262349" start="14426" end="14439" title="Putnam Museum" label="Putnam Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30286230" start="14441" end="14463" title="Science Center of Iowa" label="Science Center of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14465" end="14481" title="Softronics, Ltd." label="Softronics, Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="14483" end="14501" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781094" start="14503" end="14530" title="University of Northern Iowa" label="University of Northern Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305629" start="14532" end="14548" title="Drake University" label="Drake University"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="14580" end="14604" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339396" start="14624" end="14648" title="Emporia State University" label="Emporia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q591426" start="14650" end="14676" title="Fort Hays State University" label="Fort Hays State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q845332" start="14678" end="14711" title="Haskell Indian Nations University" label="Haskell Indian Nations University"/>
<link wikidata="Q847637" start="14714" end="14749" title="Cosmosphere" label="Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="14751" end="14774" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097334" start="14776" end="14802" title="Pittsburg State University" label="Pittsburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="14804" end="14824" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392387" start="14825" end="14856" title="Kentucky Space Grant Consortium" label="Kentucky Space Grant Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895595" start="14858" end="14903" title="University of Kentucky College of Engineering" label="University of Kentucky College of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803762" start="14923" end="14940" title="Asbury University" label="Asbury University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805237" start="14942" end="14981" title="Ashland Community and Technical College" label="Ashland Community and Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828652" start="14983" end="15010" title="Aviation Museum of Kentucky" label="Aviation Museum of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894666" start="15012" end="15033" title="Bellarmine University" label="Bellarmine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q846859" start="15035" end="15048" title="Berea College" label="Berea College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14690128" start="15050" end="15091" title="Bluegrass Community and Technical College" label="Bluegrass Community and Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804942" start="15093" end="15107" title="Centre College" label="Centre College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278206" start="15109" end="15136" title="Eastern Kentucky University" label="Eastern Kentucky University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15138" end="15154" title="Faradine Systems" label="Faradine Systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15156" end="15174" title="Global Parametrics" label="Global Parametrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900754" start="15176" end="15206" title="Hopkinsville Community College" label="Hopkinsville Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15208" end="15223" title="Innoviator, LLC" label="Innoviator, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15225" end="15263" title="Kentucky Science &amp;amp; Technology Corp" label="Kentucky Science &amp;amp; Technology Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263906" start="15266" end="15289" title="Kentucky Science Center" label="Kentucky Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187623" start="15291" end="15316" title="Kentucky State University" label="Kentucky State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15318" end="15352" title="The Living Arts and Science Center" label="The Living Arts and Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q633040" start="15354" end="15379" title="Morehead State University" label="Morehead State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q574586" start="15381" end="15404" title="Murray State University" label="Murray State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001033" start="15406" end="15434" title="Northern Kentucky University" label="Northern Kentucky University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114753" start="15436" end="15477" title="Owensboro Community and Technical College" label="Owensboro Community and Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15479" end="15490" title="Space Tango" label="Space Tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792539" start="15492" end="15514" title="Thomas More University" label="Thomas More University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15516" end="15543" title="Tribo Flow Separations, LLC" label="Tribo Flow Separations, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317143" start="15545" end="15569" title="University of Louisville" label="University of Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896112" start="15571" end="15594" title="University of Pikeville" label="University of Pikeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985612" start="15596" end="15633" title="West Kentucky Community and Technical College" label="West Kentucky Community and Technical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474105" start="15636" end="15663" title="Western Kentucky University" label="Western Kentucky University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="15698" end="15724" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869472" start="15744" end="15773" title="Baton Rouge Community College" label="Baton Rouge Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15775" end="15810" title="BREC/Highland Road Park Observatory" label="BREC/Highland Road Park Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253711" start="15812" end="15837" title="Delgado Community College" label="Delgado Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4359655" start="15839" end="15857" title="Dillard University" label="Dillard University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15859" end="15898" title="Gordon A. Cain Center for STEM Literacy" label="Gordon A. Cain Center for STEM Literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593620" start="15900" end="15948" title="Grambling State University" label="Grambling State University and A &amp;amp; M College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689081" start="15950" end="15986" title="Louisiana Business Technology Center" label="Louisiana Business Technology Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689077" start="15988" end="16041" title="Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education" label="Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931320" start="16043" end="16069" title="Louisiana Board of Regents" label="Louisiana Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689247" start="16071" end="16100" title="Louisiana Public Broadcasting" label="Louisiana Public Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634567" start="16102" end="16141" title="Louisiana State University of Alexandria" label="Louisiana State University - Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689301" start="16143" end="16189" title="Louisiana State University Agricultural Center" label="Louisiana State University Agricultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689304" start="16191" end="16254" title="LSU Health Sciences Center Shreveport" label="Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center at Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689312" start="16256" end="16296" title="Louisiana State University Shreveport" label="Louisiana State University in Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872239" start="16298" end="16323" title="Louisiana Tech University" label="Louisiana Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q172430" start="16326" end="16343" title="Loyola University New Orleans" label="Loyola University"/>
<link wikidata="Q634396" start="16345" end="16369" title="McNeese State University" label="McNeese State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884307" start="16371" end="16396" title="Nicholls State University" label="Nicholls State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16398" end="16436" title="Northshore Technical Community College" label="Northshore Technical Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001231" start="16438" end="16480" title="Northwestern State University" label="Northwestern State University of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069822" start="16482" end="16505" title="Nunez Community College" label="Nunez Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337691" start="16507" end="16539" title="River Parishes Community College" label="River Parishes Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16541" end="16565" title="SciPort Discovery Center" label="SciPort Discovery Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q615998" start="16567" end="16600" title="Southeastern Louisiana University" label="Southeastern Louisiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q627271" start="16602" end="16643" title="Southern University" label="Southern University and A &amp;amp; M College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002144" start="16645" end="16679" title="Southern University at New Orleans" label="Southern University at New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="16681" end="16698" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q116485" start="16700" end="16736" title="University of Louisiana at Lafayette" label="University of Louisiana at Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552010" start="16738" end="16771" title="University of Louisiana at Monroe" label="University of Louisiana at Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474157" start="16773" end="16798" title="University of New Orleans" label="University of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q390087" start="16800" end="16830" title="Xavier University of Louisiana" label="Xavier University of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307345" start="16909" end="16928" title="University of Maine" label="University of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q810771" start="16930" end="16943" title="Bates College" label="Bates College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906809" start="16945" end="16982" title="Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences" label="Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902127" start="16984" end="17002" title="BluShift Aerospace" label="BluShift Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q895401" start="17004" end="17019" title="Bowdoin College" label="Bowdoin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q196644" start="17021" end="17056" title="Challenger Center for Space Science Education" label="Challenger Learning Center of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075116" start="17058" end="17071" title="Colby College" label="Colby College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17073" end="17089" title="Island Institute" label="Island Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471092" start="17091" end="17107" title="Fryeburg Academy" label="Fryeburg Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982893" start="17109" end="17141" title="Gulf of Maine Research Institute" label="Gulf of Maine Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="17143" end="17158" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736354" start="17161" end="17190" title="Maine Department of Education" label="Maine Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17192" end="17233" title="Maine Manufacturing Extension Partnership" label="Maine Manufacturing Extension Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978689" start="17235" end="17257" title="Maine Maritime Academy" label="Maine Maritime Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17259" end="17297" title="Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance" label="Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715236" start="17299" end="17338" title="Maine School of Science and Mathematics" label="Maine School of Science and Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058695" start="17340" end="17372" title="Northern Maine Museum of Science" label="Northern Maine Museum of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401512" start="17374" end="17410" title="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s College of Maine" label="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s College of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570118" start="17412" end="17444" title="Southern Maine Community College" label="Southern Maine Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215036" start="17446" end="17471" title="University of New England (United States)" label="University of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244049" start="17473" end="17501" title="University of Southern Maine" label="University of Southern Maine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17503" end="17524" title="VALT Enterprises, LLC" label="VALT Enterprises, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715374" start="17526" end="17555" title="York County Community College" label="York County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="17589" end="17613" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035867" start="17633" end="17662" title="Capitol Technology University" label="Capitol Technology University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638638" start="17664" end="17692" title="Hagerstown Community College" label="Hagerstown Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q249373" start="17694" end="17749" title="Applied Physics Laboratory" label="The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054905" start="17751" end="17774" title="Morgan State University" label="Morgan State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17776" end="17831" title="National Center for Earth &amp;amp; Space Science Education" label="National Center for Earth &amp;amp; Space Science Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540619" start="17834" end="17871" title="Space Telescope Science Institute" label="The Space Telescope Science Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474129" start="17873" end="17890" title="Towson University" label="Towson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="17892" end="17919" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q735049" start="17921" end="17961" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore County" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="17963" end="17999" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49089" start="18001" end="18037" title="University of Maryland Eastern Shore" label="University of Maryland Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="18076" end="18113" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139748" start="18133" end="18157" title="Boston Museum of Science" label="Boston Museum of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="18159" end="18176" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446076" start="18178" end="18206" title="Bridgewater State University" label="Bridgewater State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18208" end="18241" title="Five College Astronomy Department" label="Five College Astronomy Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982077" start="18243" end="18270" title="Framingham State University" label="Framingham State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492094" start="18272" end="18311" title="Olin College" label="Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="18313" end="18331" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761440" start="18333" end="18359" title="Maria Mitchell Observatory" label="Maria Mitchell Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18361" end="18417" title="Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning" label="Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="18419" end="18440" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="18443" end="18466" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372413" start="18468" end="18493" title="Roxbury Community College" label="Roxbury Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="18495" end="18511" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061122" start="18513" end="18540" title="University of Massachusetts" label="University of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118040" start="18542" end="18579" title="University of Massachusetts Dartmouth" label="University of Massachusetts Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15143" start="18581" end="18615" title="University of Massachusetts Lowell" label="University of Massachusetts Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="18617" end="18634" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49166" start="18636" end="18652" title="Williams College" label="Williams College"/>
<link wikidata="Q195046" start="18654" end="18685" title="Worcester Polytechnic Institute" label="Worcester Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446068" start="18687" end="18713" title="Worcester State University" label="Worcester State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="18747" end="18769" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698482" start="18789" end="18806" title="Calvin University" label="Calvin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278221" start="18808" end="18835" title="Eastern Michigan University" label="Eastern Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472315" start="18837" end="18866" title="Grand Valley State University" label="Grand Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475371" start="18868" end="18880" title="Hope College" label="Hope College"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="18882" end="18907" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="18910" end="18943" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q782116" start="18945" end="18963" title="Oakland University" label="Oakland University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399281" start="18965" end="18996" title="Saginaw Valley State University" label="Saginaw Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q349055" start="18998" end="19020" title="Wayne State University" label="Wayne State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546191" start="19022" end="19049" title="Western Michigan University" label="Western Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766227" start="19051" end="19075" title="Ann Arbor Public Schools" label="Ann Arbor Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="19110" end="19133" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q760516" start="19153" end="19172" title="Augsburg University" label="Augsburg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q816377" start="19174" end="19198" title="Bemidji State University" label="Bemidji State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445045" start="19200" end="19217" title="Bethel University (Minnesota)" label="Bethel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041671" start="19219" end="19235" title="Carleton College" label="Carleton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158956" start="19237" end="19254" title="Concordia College (Moorhead, Minnesota)" label="Concordia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564259" start="19256" end="19296" title="Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College" label="Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515757" start="19299" end="19324" title="Leech Lake Tribal College" label="Leech Lake Tribal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141571" start="19326" end="19344" title="Macalester College" label="Macalester College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19346" end="19403" title="Minnesota Dept. of Transportation – Office of Aeronautics" label="Minnesota Dept. of Transportation – Office of Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444427" start="19405" end="19429" title="St. Catherine University" label="St. Catherine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571324" start="19431" end="19467" title="Southwest Minnesota State University" label="Southwest Minnesota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495874" start="19469" end="19501" title="University of Minnesota Duluth" label="University of Minnesota – Duluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164229" start="19503" end="19527" title="University of St. Thomas (Minnesota)" label="University of St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="19564" end="19589" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805243" start="19609" end="19632" title="Alcorn State University" label="Alcorn State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137668" start="19634" end="19659" title="Coahoma Community College" label="Coahoma Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887993" start="19661" end="19683" title="Delta State University" label="Delta State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766201" start="19685" end="19708" title="Hinds Community College" label="Hinds Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094155" start="19710" end="19736" title="Itawamba Community College" label="Itawamba Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747601" start="19738" end="19762" title="Jackson State University" label="Jackson State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275177" start="19764" end="19791" title="Jones County Junior College" label="Jones County Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939211" start="19793" end="19821" title="Mississippi State University" label="Mississippi State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819301" start="19823" end="19849" title="Meridian Community College" label="Meridian Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879118" start="19851" end="19886" title="Mississippi Delta Community College" label="Mississippi Delta Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879156" start="19888" end="19928" title="Mississippi Gulf Coast Community College" label="Mississippi Gulf Coast Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057941" start="19930" end="19969" title="Northeast Mississippi Community College" label="Northeast Mississippi Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468084" start="19971" end="20003" title="Mississippi University for Women" label="Mississippi University for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316928" start="20005" end="20040" title="Mississippi Valley State University" label="Mississippi Valley State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q624090" start="20042" end="20076" title="University of Southern Mississippi" label="University of Southern Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158147" start="20078" end="20107" title="Pearl River Community College" label="Pearl River Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380853" start="20141" end="20186" title="Missouri University of Science and Technology" label="Missouri University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20206" end="20245" title="Challenger Learning Center of St. Louis" label="Challenger Learning Center of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126179" start="20247" end="20265" title="Lincoln University (Missouri)" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249251" start="20268" end="20293" title="Missouri State University" label="Missouri State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q734774" start="20295" end="20314" title="St Louis University" label="St Louis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847734" start="20317" end="20340" title="Truman State University" label="Truman State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="20342" end="20364" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q940690" start="20366" end="20400" title="University of Missouri–Kansas City" label="University of Missouri–Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q625103" start="20402" end="20434" title="University of Missouri–St. Louis" label="University of Missouri–St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="20436" end="20470" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661582" start="20503" end="20525" title="Aaniiih Nakoda College" label="Aaniiih Nakoda College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20527" end="20542" title="Anasphere, Inc." label="Anasphere, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4922829" start="20544" end="20571" title="Blackfeet Community College" label="Blackfeet Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046531" start="20573" end="20588" title="Carroll College (Montana)" label="Carroll College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096717" start="20590" end="20614" title="Chief Dull Knife College" label="Chief Dull Knife College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20616" end="20638" title="Montana Science Center" label="Montana Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242645" start="20640" end="20664" title="Dawson Community College" label="Dawson Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457900" start="20666" end="20699" title="Flathead Valley Community College" label="Flathead Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471807" start="20701" end="20728" title="Fort Peck Community College" label="Fort Peck Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="20730" end="20746" title="Gallatin College Montana State University" label="Gallatin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599153" start="20748" end="20771" title="Great Falls College Montana State University" label="Great Falls College MSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704552" start="20773" end="20792" title="Helena College University of Montana" label="Helena College - UM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20794" end="20813" title="HOPA Mountain, Inc." label="HOPA Mountain, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6649089" start="20815" end="20838" title="Little Big Horn College" label="Little Big Horn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851351" start="20840" end="20863" title="Miles Community College" label="Miles Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879418" start="20866" end="20882" title="Missoula College University of Montana" label="Missoula College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20884" end="20906" title="Montana 4-H Foundation" label="Montana 4-H Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20908" end="20931" title="Montana Learning Center" label="Montana Learning Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904332" start="20933" end="20966" title="Montana State University Billings" label="Montana State University Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="20968" end="21000" title="Montana State University" label="Montana State University Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904331" start="21020" end="21053" title="Montana State University Northern" label="Montana State University Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904341" start="21055" end="21096" title="Montana Tech of the University of Montana" label="Montana Tech of the University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628366" start="21098" end="21119" title="Museum of the Rockies" label="Museum of the Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704764" start="21121" end="21143" title="Rocky Mountain College" label="Rocky Mountain College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404844" start="21145" end="21168" title="Salish Kootenai College" label="Salish Kootenai College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618891" start="21170" end="21189" title="Stone Child College" label="Stone Child College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895472" start="21191" end="21215" title="University of Providence" label="University of Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="21217" end="21249" title="University of Montana - Missoula" label="University of Montana - Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551358" start="21251" end="21282" title="University of Montana - Western" label="University of Montana - Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495890" start="21316" end="21344" title="University of Nebraska Omaha" label="University of Nebraska Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21364" end="21370" title="CALMIT" label="CALMIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066497" start="21372" end="21393" title="Chadron State College" label="Chadron State College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21395" end="21435" title="Civil Air Patrol - 99th Pursuit Squadron" label="Civil Air Patrol - 99th Pursuit Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146822" start="21437" end="21458" title="College of Saint Mary" label="College of Saint Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q770544" start="21460" end="21480" title="Creighton University" label="Creighton University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21482" end="21506" title="Great Plains Girl Scouts" label="Great Plains Girl Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680304" start="21508" end="21524" title="Hastings College" label="Hastings College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825056" start="21526" end="21556" title="Metropolitan Community College (Nebraska)" label="Metropolitan Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21558" end="21586" title="Nebraska Academy of Sciences" label="Nebraska Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21589" end="21614" title="Nebraska Aviation Council" label="Nebraska Aviation Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21616" end="21650" title="Nebraska Department of Aeronautics" label="Nebraska Department of Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984712" start="21652" end="21684" title="Nebraska Department of Education" label="Nebraska Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21686" end="21698" title="Nebraska 4-H" label="Nebraska 4-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984746" start="21700" end="21733" title="Nebraska Indian Community College" label="Nebraska Indian Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895890" start="21735" end="21768" title="University of Nebraska at Kearney" label="University of Nebraska at Kearney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353679" start="21770" end="21800" title="University of Nebraska–Lincoln" label="University of Nebraska-Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895888" start="21802" end="21839" title="University of Nebraska Medical Center" label="University of Nebraska Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988097" start="21841" end="21875" title="Western Nebraska Community College" label="Western Nebraska Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264004" start="21907" end="21932" title="Desert Research Institute" label="Desert Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21952" end="21970" title="DRI - Sciencealive" label="DRI - Sciencealive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21972" end="21997" title="Abaris Training Resources" label="Abaris Training Resources"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21999" end="22044" title="Challenger Learning Center of Northern Nevada" label="Challenger Learning Center of Northern Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146840" start="22046" end="22072" title="College of Southern Nevada" label="College of Southern Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961815" start="22074" end="22104" title="Digital Solid State Propulsion" label="Digital Solid State Propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458525" start="22106" end="22150" title="Fleischmann Planetarium &amp;amp; Science Center" label="Fleischmann Planetarium &amp;amp; Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598715" start="22152" end="22171" title="Great Basin College" label="Great Basin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111510" start="22173" end="22198" title="Jack C. Davis Observatory" label="Jack C. Davis Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658675" start="22201" end="22221" title="Nevada State College" label="Nevada State College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22223" end="22245" title="The Planetarium at CSN" label="The Planetarium at CSN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22247" end="22276" title="Sustainable Grounding Systems" label="Sustainable Grounding Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847197" start="22278" end="22311" title="Truckee Meadows Community College" label="Truckee Meadows Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302311" start="22313" end="22345" title="University of Nevada, Las Vegas" label="University of Nevada - Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185955" start="22347" end="22374" title="University of Nevada, Reno" label="University of Nevada - Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003622" start="22376" end="22425" title="University and Community College System of Nevada" label="University and Community College System of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988100" start="22427" end="22449" title="Western Nevada College" label="Western Nevada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="22488" end="22515" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="22535" end="22546" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151044" start="22548" end="22588" title="Great Bay Community College" label="Great Bay Community College - Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151044" start="22590" end="22629" title="Great Bay Community College" label="Great Bay Community College - Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="22631" end="22648" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188312" start="22650" end="22690" title="Lakes Region Community College" label="Lakes Region Community College - Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747337" start="22692" end="22720" title="Manchester Community College (New Hampshire)" label="Manchester Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800008" start="22722" end="22756" title="McAuliffe-Shepard Discovery Center" label="McAuliffe-Shepard Discovery Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924509" start="22759" end="22787" title="Mount Washington Observatory" label="Mount Washington Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966902" start="22789" end="22813" title="Nashua Community College" label="Nashua Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008327" start="22815" end="22853" title="NHTI, Concord&amp;#x27;s Community College" label="NHTI, Concord&amp;#x27;s Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205857" start="22855" end="22880" title="Plymouth State University" label="Plymouth State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060819" start="22882" end="22922" title="River Valley Community College" label="River Valley Community College - Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060819" start="22924" end="22966" title="River Valley Community College" label="River Valley Community College - Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060819" start="22968" end="23006" title="River Valley Community College" label="River Valley Community College - Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995090" start="23008" end="23041" title="White Mountains Community College" label="White Mountains Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382826" start="23077" end="23111" title="Rutgers University - New Brunswick" label="Rutgers University - New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928235" start="23131" end="23149" title="Bloomfield College" label="Bloomfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974383" start="23151" end="23178" title="Brookdale Community College" label="Brookdale Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726772" start="23180" end="23205" title="The College of New Jersey" label="The College of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399674" start="23207" end="23227" title="Essex County College" label="Essex County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013250" start="23229" end="23296" title="William J. Hughes Technical Center" label="Federal Aviation Administration, William J. Hughes Technical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548012" start="23298" end="23323" title="Georgian Court University" label="Georgian Court University"/>
<link wikidata="Q422272" start="23325" end="23360" title="Goddard Institute for Space Studies" label="Goddard Institute for Space Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541946" start="23362" end="23384" title="Liberty Science Center" label="Liberty Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841902" start="23386" end="23410" title="Middlesex County College" label="Middlesex County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018694" start="23412" end="23438" title="Montclair State University" label="Montclair State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991254" start="23440" end="23466" title="New Jersey City University" label="New Jersey City University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272013" start="23468" end="23502" title="New Jersey Institute of Technology" label="New Jersey Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="23505" end="23525" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077236" start="23527" end="23573" title="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory" label="Princeton University Plasma Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289009" start="23575" end="23589" title="Ramapo College" label="Ramapo College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294576" start="23591" end="23623" title="Raritan Valley Community College" label="Raritan Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799872" start="23625" end="23641" title="Rowan University" label="Rowan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382823" start="23643" end="23668" title="Rutgers University-Camden" label="Rutgers University-Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382780" start="23670" end="23695" title="Rutgers University-Newark" label="Rutgers University-Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q585828" start="23697" end="23718" title="Seton Hall University" label="Seton Hall University"/>
<link wikidata="Q657222" start="23720" end="23751" title="Stevens Institute of Technology" label="Stevens Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329259" start="23753" end="23772" title="Stockton University" label="Stockton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885602" start="23774" end="23794" title="Union County College" label="Union County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444527" start="23796" end="23823" title="William Paterson University" label="William Paterson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="23859" end="23886" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q465165" start="23906" end="23956" title="American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" label="American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607176" start="23958" end="23987" title="Air Force Research Laboratory" label="Air Force Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23989" end="24005" title="Arrowhead Center" label="Arrowhead Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q885836" start="24007" end="24018" title="Blue Origin" label="Blue Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="24020" end="24026" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24028" end="24032" title="BRPH" label="BRPH"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24034" end="24090" title="Center of Excellence for Commercial Space Transportation" label="Center of Excellence for Commercial Space Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061506" start="24092" end="24128" title="Central New Mexico Community College" label="Central New Mexico Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275315" start="24130" end="24157" title="Colorado Air and Space Port" label="Colorado Air and Space Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877933" start="24159" end="24185" title="Doña Ana Community College" label="Doña Ana Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="24187" end="24218" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q284204" start="24221" end="24237" title="Fisher Space Pen" label="Fisher Space Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010189" start="24239" end="24259" title="New Mexico Highlands University" label="Highlands University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157622" start="24261" end="24267" title="Jacobs Engineering Group" label="Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="24269" end="24284" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052208" start="24286" end="24331" title="New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology" label="New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q329953" start="24333" end="24349" title="Northrop Grumman" label="Northrop Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571422" start="24351" end="24392" title="Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute" label="Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392262" start="24394" end="24404" title="SpaceNews" label="Space News"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24406" end="24432" title="Special Aerospace Services" label="Special Aerospace Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="24434" end="24458" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q373225" start="24460" end="24475" title="Virgin Galactic" label="Virgin Galactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="24509" end="24527" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446091" start="24547" end="24564" title="Alfred University" label="Alfred University"/>
<link wikidata="Q167733" start="24566" end="24581" title="Barnard College" label="Barnard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q863813" start="24583" end="24604" title="Binghamton University" label="Binghamton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="24606" end="24630" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q931865" start="24632" end="24651" title="Clarkson University" label="Clarkson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191335" start="24653" end="24671" title="Colgate University" label="Colgate University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="24673" end="24692" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24694" end="24710" title="Cosmoptera, Inc." label="Cosmoptera, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q952270" start="24712" end="24748" title="Intrepid Sea, Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="Intrepid Sea, Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="24750" end="24765" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805332" start="24767" end="24787" title="Medgar Evers College" label="Medgar Evers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907265" start="24789" end="24798" title="Moog Inc." label="Moog Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q75478" start="24801" end="24849" title="New York University Tandon School of Engineering" label="New York University Tandon School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q49211" start="24851" end="24883" title="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute" label="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140778" start="24885" end="24918" title="Rochester Institute of Technology" label="Rochester Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433718" start="24920" end="24931" title="Sciencenter" label="Sciencenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149540" start="24933" end="24945" title="SUNY Geneseo" label="SUNY Geneseo"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="24947" end="24969" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="24971" end="24990" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567748" start="24992" end="25005" title="Union College" label="Union College"/>
<link wikidata="Q681025" start="25007" end="25028" title="University at Buffalo" label="University at Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="25030" end="25053" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25055" end="25073" title="Ursa Space Systems" label="Ursa Space Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055406" start="25075" end="25087" title="York College, City University of New York" label="York College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="25128" end="25159" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q968559" start="25198" end="25224" title="University of North Dakota" label="University of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918312" start="25244" end="25266" title="Bismarck State College" label="Bismarck State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032498" start="25268" end="25302" title="Cankdeska Cikana Community College" label="Cankdeska Cikana Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209997" start="25304" end="25331" title="Dakota College at Bottineau" label="Dakota College at Bottineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273748" start="25333" end="25359" title="Dickinson State University" label="Dickinson State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25361" end="25379" title="Gateway To Science" label="Gateway To Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477507" start="25381" end="25406" title="Lake Region State College" label="Lake Region State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708361" start="25408" end="25433" title="Mayville State University" label="Mayville State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017530" start="25435" end="25457" title="Minot State University" label="Minot State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055057" start="25460" end="25497" title="North Dakota State College of Science" label="North Dakota State College of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000624" start="25499" end="25528" title="North Dakota State University" label="North Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470816" start="25530" end="25559" title="Nueta Hidatsa Sahnish College" label="Nueta Hidatsa Sahnish College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532066" start="25561" end="25581" title="Sitting Bull College" label="Sitting Bull College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603365" start="25583" end="25623" title="State Historical Society of North Dakota" label="State Historical Society of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856434" start="25625" end="25658" title="Turtle Mountain Community College" label="Turtle Mountain Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893617" start="25660" end="25691" title="United Tribes Technical College" label="United Tribes Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912012" start="25693" end="25721" title="Valley City State University" label="Valley City State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022152" start="25723" end="25746" title="Williston State College" label="Williston State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683585" start="25777" end="25801" title="Ohio Northern University" label="Ohio Northern University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25821" end="25845" title="Ohio Aerospace Institute" label="Ohio Aerospace Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805202" start="25847" end="25873" title="Baldwin Wallace University" label="Baldwin Wallace University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="25875" end="25906" title="Case Western Reserve University" label="Case Western Reserve University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057029" start="25908" end="25929" title="Cedarville University" label="Cedarville University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061855" start="25931" end="25955" title="Central State University" label="Central State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25957" end="25983" title="The Cincinnati Observatory" label="The Cincinnati Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120311" start="25985" end="26033" title="Cincinnati State Technical and Community College" label="Cincinnati State Technical and Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100801" start="26035" end="26061" title="Cleveland State University" label="Cleveland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150126" start="26063" end="26095" title="Columbus State Community College" label="Columbus State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197072" start="26097" end="26123" title="Cuyahoga Community College" label="Cuyahoga Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061626" start="26125" end="26161" title="Drake Planetarium and Science Center" label="Drake Planetarium and Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26163" end="26169" title="iSpace (American company)" label="iSpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473615" start="26171" end="26192" title="Kent State University" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478788" start="26194" end="26220" title="Lakeland Community College" label="Lakeland Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678731" start="26223" end="26254" title="Lorain County Community College" label="Lorain County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763222" start="26256" end="26272" title="Marietta College" label="Marietta College"/>
<link wikidata="Q590643" start="26274" end="26290" title="Miami University" label="Miami University"/>
<link wikidata="Q618728" start="26292" end="26318" title="Glenn Research Center" label="NASA Glenn Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075339" start="26320" end="26335" title="Ohio University" label="Ohio University"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="26337" end="26358" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522014" start="26360" end="26386" title="Sinclair Community College" label="Sinclair Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346135" start="26388" end="26407" title="University of Akron" label="University of Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302319" start="26409" end="26429" title="University of Toledo" label="University of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="26431" end="26455" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092392" start="26457" end="26477" title="University of Dayton" label="University of Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302319" start="26479" end="26499" title="University of Toledo" label="University of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002085" start="26501" end="26524" title="Wright State University" label="Wright State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730032" start="26526" end="26548" title="Wilberforce University" label="Wilberforce University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783191" start="26550" end="26577" title="Youngstown State University" label="Youngstown State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q749718" start="26611" end="26647" title="Oklahoma State University–Stillwater" label="Oklahoma State University–Stillwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444292" start="26667" end="26685" title="Cameron University" label="Cameron University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26687" end="26714" title="Center for Spatial Analysis" label="Center for Spatial Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328060" start="26716" end="26739" title="East Central University" label="East Central University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26742" end="26774" title="Frontier Electronic Systems Corp" label="Frontier Electronic Systems Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302016" start="26776" end="26795" title="Langston University" label="Langston University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26797" end="26831" title="Norman Economic Development Center" label="Norman Economic Development Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306031" start="26833" end="26859" title="Redlands Community College" label="Redlands Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26862" end="26901" title="Science Applications International Corp" label="Science Applications International Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q866829" start="26903" end="26941" title="Southeastern Oklahoma State University" label="Southeastern Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570171" start="26943" end="26971" title="Southern Nazarene University" label="Southern Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811567" start="26973" end="27011" title="Southwestern Oklahoma State University" label="Southwestern Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900641" start="27013" end="27042" title="Stafford Air and Space Museum" label="Stafford Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27044" end="27061" title="STARBASE Oklahoma" label="STARBASE Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852329" start="27063" end="27086" title="Tulsa Community College" label="Tulsa Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="27088" end="27110" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="27142" end="27165" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278219" start="27185" end="27210" title="Eastern Oregon University" label="Eastern Oregon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q490825" start="27212" end="27249" title="Evergreen Aviation &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="Evergreen Aviation &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539406" start="27251" end="27272" title="George Fox University" label="George Fox University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485363" start="27274" end="27296" title="Lane Community College" label="Lane Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554657" start="27298" end="27327" title="Linn Benton Community College" label="Linn Benton Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752703" start="27329" end="27355" title="The Museum at Warm Springs" label="The Museum at Warm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101137" start="27357" end="27387" title="Oregon Coast Community College" label="Oregon Coast Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q427553" start="27389" end="27419" title="Oregon Institute of Technology" label="Oregon Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q174617" start="27422" end="27459" title="Oregon Museum of Science and Industry" label="Oregon Museum of Science and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929270" start="27461" end="27479" title="Pacific University" label="Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231908" start="27481" end="27507" title="Portland Community College" label="Portland Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="27509" end="27534" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888661" start="27536" end="27562" title="Southern Oregon University" label="Southern Oregon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571442" start="27564" end="27601" title="Southwestern Oregon Community College" label="Southwestern Oregon Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="27603" end="27623" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q513658" start="27625" end="27647" title="University of Portland" label="University of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629641" start="27649" end="27674" title="Western Oregon University" label="Western Oregon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="27712" end="27741" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021159" start="27761" end="27798" title="California University of Pennsylvania" label="California University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="27800" end="27826" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445541" start="27828" end="27846" title="Cheyney University of Pennsylvania" label="Cheyney University"/>
<link wikidata="Q603034" start="27848" end="27865" title="Drexel University" label="Drexel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q664881" start="27867" end="27898" title="Franklin &amp;amp; Marshall College" label="Franklin &amp;amp; Marshall College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521430" start="27900" end="27917" title="Gannon University" label="Gannon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520129" start="27919" end="27937" title="Gettysburg College" label="Gettysburg College"/>
<link wikidata="Q622137" start="27939" end="27956" title="Lehigh University" label="Lehigh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570781" start="27958" end="27976" title="Lincoln University (Pennsylvania)" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10332113" start="27979" end="28014" title="Montgomery County Community College" label="Montgomery County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28016" end="28029" title="NASTAR Center" label="NASTAR Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163224" start="28031" end="28050" title="Penn State Abington" label="Penn State Abington"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="28052" end="28076" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378320" start="28078" end="28096" title="Swarthmore College" label="Swarthmore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="28098" end="28115" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="28117" end="28137" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443893" start="28139" end="28162" title="West Chester University" label="West Chester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075365" start="28199" end="28224" title="University of Puerto Rico" label="University of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750355" start="28244" end="28275" title="Ana G. Méndez University" label="Ana G. Méndez University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q102327045" start="28277" end="28296" title="Arecibo Observatory" label="Arecibo Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28298" end="28314" title="EcoExploratorium" label="EcoExploratorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570802" start="28316" end="28366" title="Interamerican University of Puerto Rico" label="Interamerican University of Puerto Rico at Bayamón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798894" start="28368" end="28402" title="Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico" label="Polytechnic University Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28405" end="28434" title="Puerto Rico Astronomy Society" label="Puerto Rico Astronomy Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294526" start="28436" end="28471" title="Puerto Rico Department of Education" label="Puerto Rico Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28473" end="28505" title="Puerto Rico NASA Explorer School" label="Puerto Rico NASA Explorer School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277976" start="28507" end="28522" title="RUM Planetarium" label="RUM Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28524" end="28544" title="StarBase Puerto Rico" label="StarBase Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="28583" end="28599" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012699" start="28619" end="28636" title="Bryant University" label="Bryant University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154693" start="28638" end="28671" title="Community College of Rhode Island" label="Community College of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439629" start="28673" end="28691" title="Providence College" label="Providence College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359135" start="28693" end="28754" title="Roger Williams Park Museum of Natural History and Planetarium" label="Roger Williams Park Museum of Natural History and Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940116" start="28756" end="28781" title="Roger Williams University" label="Roger Williams University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613236" start="28783" end="28803" title="Rhode Island College" label="Rhode Island College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49208" start="28805" end="28834" title="Rhode Island School of Design" label="Rhode Island School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695578" start="28837" end="28860" title="Salve Regina University" label="Salve Regina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641788" start="28862" end="28888" title="University of Rhode Island" label="University of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q924318" start="28890" end="28905" title="Wheaton College (Massachusetts)" label="Wheaton College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28907" end="28956" title="Rhode Island Aviation and Space Education Council" label="Rhode Island Aviation and Space Education Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28958" end="28988" title="NASA Educators Resource Center" label="NASA Educators Resource Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28990" end="29021" title="Northeast Planetary Data Center" label="Northeast Planetary Data Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469295" start="29023" end="29039" title="Ladd Observatory" label="LADD Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507421" start="29080" end="29101" title="College of Charleston" label="College of Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566983" start="29140" end="29183" title="South Dakota School of Mines and Technology" label="South Dakota School of Mines and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298397" start="29203" end="29223" title="Augustana University" label="Augustana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q527236" start="29225" end="29245" title="Badlands Observatory" label="Badlands Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29247" end="29279" title="Black Hills Astronomical Society" label="Black Hills Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920974" start="29281" end="29309" title="Black Hills State University" label="Black Hills State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210049" start="29311" end="29334" title="Dakota State University" label="Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034535" start="29336" end="29374" title="The Journey Museum and Learning Center" label="The Journey Museum and Learning Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474813" start="29376" end="29405" title="Lake Area Technical Institute" label="Lake Area Technical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29407" end="29448" title="Missouri Breaks Industries Research, Inc." label="Missouri Breaks Industries Research, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2001088" start="29450" end="29475" title="Northern State University" label="Northern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080082" start="29477" end="29498" title="Oglala Lakota College" label="Oglala Lakota College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296403" start="29500" end="29516" title="Raven Industries" label="Raven Industries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29519" end="29525" title="RESPEC" label="RESPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250343" start="29527" end="29564" title="Sanford Underground Research Facility" label="Sanford Underground Research Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525103" start="29566" end="29589" title="Sinte Gleska University" label="Sinte Gleska University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566943" start="29591" end="29626" title="South Dakota Air and Space Museum" label="South Dakota Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566951" start="29628" end="29657" title="South Dakota Board of Regents" label="South Dakota Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29659" end="29688" title="South Dakota Discovery Center" label="South Dakota Discovery Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q62026223" start="29690" end="29716" title="South Dakota State Library" label="South Dakota State Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302260" start="29718" end="29747" title="South Dakota State University" label="South Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305521" start="29749" end="29775" title="University of South Dakota" label="University of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29777" end="29832" title="USGS Center for Earth Resources Observation and Science" label="USGS Center for Earth Resources Observation and Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29834" end="29886" title="Washington Pavilion / Kirby Science Discovery Center" label="Washington Pavilion / Kirby Science Discovery Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="29921" end="29942" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q781153" start="29962" end="29990" title="Austin Peay State University" label="Austin Peay State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q634669" start="29992" end="30023" title="East Tennessee State University" label="East Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784748" start="30025" end="30058" title="Middle Tennessee State University" label="Middle Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583848" start="30061" end="30094" title="Oak Ridge Associated Universities" label="Oak Ridge Associated Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321046" start="30096" end="30110" title="Rhodes College" label="Rhodes College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700206" start="30112" end="30146" title="Tennessee Technological University" label="Tennessee Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781384" start="30148" end="30186" title="University of Tennessee at Chattanooga" label="University of Tennessee at Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q536709" start="30235" end="30258" title="Angelo State University" label="Angelo State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629946" start="30260" end="30293" title="Austin Community College District" label="Austin Community College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="30295" end="30312" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351764" start="30314" end="30339" title="El Paso Community College" label="El Paso Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="30341" end="30366" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393647" start="30368" end="30384" title="Lamar University" label="Lamar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488884" start="30386" end="30400" title="Laredo College" label="Laredo College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117087" start="30402" end="30426" title="Lone Star College System" label="Lone Star College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802193" start="30428" end="30454" title="McLennan Community College" label="McLennan Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306469" start="30456" end="30487" title="Prairie View A&amp;amp;M University" label="Prairie View A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="30489" end="30504" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414339" start="30506" end="30525" title="San Jacinto College" label="San Jacinto College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568637" start="30527" end="30546" title="South Texas College" label="South Texas College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="30548" end="30577" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495253" start="30579" end="30607" title="St. Edward&amp;#x27;s University" label="St. Edward&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635933" start="30609" end="30634" title="Sul Ross State University" label="Sul Ross State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551554" start="30636" end="30661" title="Tarleton State University" label="Tarleton State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707466" start="30663" end="30701" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M International University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="30703" end="30727" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407584" start="30729" end="30762" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Commerce" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q634651" start="30764" end="30803" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Corpus Christi" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707478" start="30805" end="30840" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Kingsville" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Kingsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711364" start="30842" end="30876" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Texarkana" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302280" start="30878" end="30904" title="Texas Christian University" label="Texas Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q626591" start="30906" end="30931" title="Texas Southern University" label="Texas Southern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495387" start="30933" end="30955" title="Texas State University" label="Texas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="30957" end="30978" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468361" start="30980" end="31009" title="Texas Woman&amp;#x27;s University" label="Texas Woman&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311379" start="31011" end="31037" title="Trinity University (Texas)" label="Trinity University (Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551578" start="31039" end="31059" title="University of Dallas" label="University of Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="31061" end="31082" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895505" start="31084" end="31116" title="University of Houston–Clear Lake" label="University of Houston–Clear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895509" start="31118" end="31148" title="University of Houston–Downtown" label="University of Houston–Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q860527" start="31150" end="31175" title="University of North Texas" label="University of North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495922" start="31177" end="31209" title="University of St. Thomas (Texas)" label="University of St. Thomas (Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028121" start="31211" end="31248" title="University of Texas Rio Grande Valley" label="University of Texas Rio Grande Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230739" start="31250" end="31282" title="University of Texas at Arlington" label="University of Texas at Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="31284" end="31313" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781394" start="31333" end="31362" title="University of Texas at Dallas" label="University of Texas at Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="31364" end="31394" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q183170" start="31396" end="31430" title="University of Texas at San Antonio" label="University of Texas at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q212528" start="31432" end="31460" title="University of Texas at Tyler" label="University of Texas at Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896431" start="31462" end="31514" title="University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston" label="University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005868" start="31516" end="31572" title="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio" label="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q921264" start="31574" end="31608" title="University of Texas Medical Branch" label="University of Texas Medical Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495935" start="31610" end="31643" title="University of Texas Permian Basin" label="University of Texas Permian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725999" start="31645" end="31692" title="University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center" label="University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="31714" end="31731" title="Governor of Texas" label="Governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707732" start="31733" end="31774" title="Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board" label="Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="31794" end="31809" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31831" end="31858" title="Austin Astronomical Society" label="Austin Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858423" start="31860" end="31878" title="Austin Planetarium" label="Austin Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858643" start="31880" end="31918" title="Bob Bullock Texas State History Museum" label="Bob Bullock Texas State History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31920" end="31963" title="Capitol Area Council, Boy Scouts of America" label="Capitol Area Council, Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292746" start="31965" end="31996" title="Don Harrington Discovery Center" label="Don Harrington Discovery Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31998" end="32007" title="Girlstart" label="Girlstart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32009" end="32046" title="Rio Grande Valley Science Association" label="Rio Grande Valley Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32048" end="32071" title="Scobee Education Center" label="Scobee Education Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32073" end="32086" title="Seal of Valor" label="Seal of Valor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32088" end="32096" title="SEDS-USA" label="SEDS-USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509357" start="32098" end="32126" title="Southwest Research Institute" label="Southwest Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32128" end="32138" title="STEAMSPACE" label="STEAMSPACE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32140" end="32184" title="Texas Alliance for Minorities in Engineering" label="Texas Alliance for Minorities in Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="32186" end="32206" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894455" start="32208" end="32247" title="Universities Space Research Association" label="Universities Space Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q168515" start="32278" end="32296" title="University of Utah" label="University of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="32316" end="32340" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052614" start="32342" end="32363" title="Utah State University" label="Utah State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="32398" end="32419" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="32474" end="32503" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797817" start="32506" end="32524" title="Hampton University" label="Hampton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="32527" end="32550" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="32553" end="32575" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="32578" end="32629" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168000" start="32677" end="32696" title="American University" label="American University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="32739" end="32763" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q115376" start="32804" end="32828" title="West Virginia University" label="West Virginia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298369" start="32865" end="32881" title="Carthage College" label="Carthage College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809286" start="32883" end="32902" title="Lawrence University" label="Lawrence University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378091" start="32904" end="32937" title="University of Wisconsin–Green Bay" label="University of Wisconsin–Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326975" start="32977" end="32998" title="University of Wyoming" label="University of Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="33014" end="33033" title="Land Grant Colleges" label="Land Grant Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978302" start="33035" end="33053" title="Sea Grant Colleges" label="Sea Grant Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638697" start="33055" end="33073" title="Sun Grant Colleges" label="Sun Grant Colleges"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343725" wikidata="Q6978302" url="?curid=343725" title="National Sea Grant College Program">
<text>The National Sea Grant College Program is a program of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) within the U.S. Department of Commerce. It is a national network of 34 university-based Sea Grant programs involved in scientific research, education, training, and extension projects geared toward the conservation and practical use of the coasts, Great Lakes, and other marine areas. The program is administered by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) with the national office located in Silver Spring, Maryland. There are Sea Grant programs located in every coastal and Great Lakes state as well as in Puerto Rico and Guam.

The program was instituted in 1966 when Congress passed the National Sea Grant College Program Act.

Sea Grant programs and colleges are not to be confused with land-grant colleges (a program instituted in 1862), space-grant colleges (instituted in 1988), or sun-grant colleges (instituted in 2003), although an institution may also be in one or more of the other programs concurrently with being a sea-grant institution.

==History==
At a 1963 meeting of the American Fisheries Society, a University of Minnesota professor, Athelstan Spilhaus, first suggested the establishment of Sea Grant colleges in universities that wished to develop oceanic work. The name &quot;Sea Grant&quot; was chosen to draw a parallel with the land-grant college program that was funded by grants of western lands to the states by the 1862 Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862. Early in the legislative process, there was consideration of leases of offshore parcels of ocean and sea bottom to fund the program by John A. Knauss and bill sponsor Claiborne Pell much like the 1862 land grants, but that plan was eventually scrapped in favor of direct congressional appropriation for the program. The 1966 Act allowed the National Science Foundation (NSF) authority to initiate and support education, research, and extension by:

Encouraging and developing programs consisting of instruction, practical demonstrations, publications, and otherwise, by sea grant colleges and other suitable institutes, laboratories, and public and private agencies through marine advisory programs with the object of imparting useful information to person currently employed or interested in the various fields related to the development of marine resources, the scientific community, and the general public.

Signing of the 1966 Sea Grant College and Program Act into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson was on October 15, 1966, as Public Law 89-688. The only major subsequent change to the Sea Grant Act was with a 1970 Reorganization Plan, whereby the Office of Sea Grant was transferred from the National Science Foundation to the newly organized National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, where it still resides today.

==Participating institutions==
Institutions involved with the program include:

===Pacific region===
* Oregon State University
* University of Washington
* University of California, San Diego
** California Sea Grant
* University of Southern California
* University of Alaska Fairbanks&#x27; College of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences
* University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa
* University of Guam

===Southeastern Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico region===
* Gulf of Mexico sub-region 
** Texas A&amp;M University
** Louisiana State University
** Mississippi-Alabama Sea Grant Consortium
*** Auburn University
*** Dauphin Island Sea Lab
*** Jackson State University
*** Mississippi State University
*** University of Alabama
*** University of Alabama at Birmingham
*** University of Mississippi
*** University of Southern Mississippi
*** University of South Alabama
* Southeast sub-region 
** Florida Sea Grant Consortium
***University of Florida (Lead Institution)
***Florida A&amp;M University
***Florida Atlantic University
***Florida Gulf Coast University
***Florida International University
***Florida Institute of Technology
***Florida State University
***Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute
***Jacksonville University
***Mote Marine Laboratory
***New College of Florida
***Nova Southeastern University
***University of Central Florida
***University of North Florida
***University of South Florida
***University of West Florida
***University of Miami
** University of Georgia
** University of Puerto Rico
** South Carolina Sea Grant Consortium
*** Clemson University
*** South Carolina Department of Natural Resources
*** Medical University of South Carolina
*** The Citadel
*** College of Charleston
*** South Carolina State University
*** Coastal Carolina University
*** University of South Carolina

===Mid-Atlantic region===
* North Carolina State University
* East Carolina University
* Virginia Sea Grant
** College of William &amp; Mary
*** Virginia Institute of Marine Science
** Old Dominion University 
** Virginia Tech
** University of Virginia
** Virginia Commonwealth University
** George Mason University
* University of Maryland, College Park
* University of Delaware
* New Jersey Sea Grant Consortium
** Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel
** Fairleigh Dickinson University
** Georgian Court University
** Kean University
** Marine Academy of Science and Technology
** Monmouth University
** Montclair State University
** New Jersey Institute of Technology
** Ramapo College of New Jersey
**Raritan Valley Community College
** Rowan University
** Rutgers University
** Seton Hall University
** Stevens Institute of Technology
** Stockton University
** The College of New Jersey
** Union County College
**William Paterson University

===Northeast region===
* New York Sea Grant (also participates in the Great Lakes Region)
** Stony Brook University
** State University of New York at Buffalo
** Cornell University
* University of Connecticut at Avery Point
* University of Rhode Island
* Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Lake Champlain Sea Grant (also participates in the Great Lakes region)
**University of Vermont 
**State University of New York at Plattsburgh
* University of New Hampshire
* University of Maine

===Great Lakes region===
* Pennsylvania State University
* Ohio State University
* Michigan Sea Grant
** Michigan State University
** University of Michigan
* Illinois-Indiana Sea Grant College Program
** University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
** Purdue University
* University of Wisconsin–Madison
* University of Minnesota, Duluth

==See also==
* Land-grant university
* National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program
* Sun grant colleges

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6978302" start="4" end="38" title="National Sea Grant College Program" label="National Sea Grant College Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="59" end="106" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="125" end="152" title="U.S. Department of Commerce" label="U.S. Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="233" end="252" title="scientific research" label="scientific research"/>
<link wikidata="Q641498" start="316" end="328" title="conservation biology" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="354" end="359" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="362" end="373" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="385" end="391" title="Marine (ocean)" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="434" end="481" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="525" end="548" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="703" end="711" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978302" start="723" end="761" title="National Sea Grant College Program" label="National Sea Grant College Program Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="824" end="843" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978618" start="876" end="896" title="Space grant colleges" label="space-grant colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638697" start="922" end="940" title="Sun Grant Colleges" label="sun-grant colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813345" start="1188" end="1206" title="Athelstan Spilhaus" label="Athelstan Spilhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="1387" end="1405" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="1483" end="1513" title="Morrill Land-Grant Acts" label="Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q17386123" start="1650" end="1664" title="John A. Knauss" label="John A. Knauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094716" start="1682" end="1696" title="Claiborne Pell" label="Claiborne Pell"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="1856" end="1883" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="2502" end="2519" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="2766" end="2813" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="2949" end="2972" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="2975" end="2999" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="3002" end="3037" title="University of California, San Diego" label="University of California, San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q604029" start="3041" end="3061" title="California Sea Grant" label="California Sea Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3064" end="3097" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285262" start="3100" end="3130" title="University of Alaska Fairbanks" label="University of Alaska Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432457" start="3137" end="3176" title="College of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences" label="College of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="3179" end="3209" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248737" start="3212" end="3230" title="University of Guam" label="University of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="3288" end="3302" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="3318" end="3342" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="3346" end="3372" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="3421" end="3438" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228074" start="3443" end="3465" title="Dauphin Island Sea Lab" label="Dauphin Island Sea Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747601" start="3470" end="3494" title="Jackson State University" label="Jackson State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939211" start="3499" end="3527" title="Mississippi State University" label="Mississippi State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="3532" end="3553" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472663" start="3558" end="3593" title="University of Alabama at Birmingham" label="University of Alabama at Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="3598" end="3623" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q624090" start="3628" end="3662" title="University of Southern Mississippi" label="University of Southern Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13572981" start="3667" end="3694" title="University of South Alabama" label="University of South Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="3754" end="3775" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430048" start="3798" end="3824" title="Florida A&amp;amp;M University" label="Florida A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q429863" start="3828" end="3855" title="Florida Atlantic University" label="Florida Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430054" start="3859" end="3888" title="Florida Gulf Coast University" label="Florida Gulf Coast University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="3892" end="3924" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152650" start="3928" end="3959" title="Florida Institute of Technology" label="Florida Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="3963" end="3987" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654568" start="3991" end="4028" title="Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute" label="Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q935018" start="4032" end="4055" title="Jacksonville University" label="Jacksonville University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917159" start="4059" end="4081" title="Mote Marine Laboratory" label="Mote Marine Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982482" start="4085" end="4107" title="New College of Florida" label="New College of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798499" start="4111" end="4139" title="Nova Southeastern University" label="Nova Southeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q143451" start="4143" end="4172" title="University of Central Florida" label="University of Central Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473796" start="4176" end="4203" title="University of North Florida" label="University of North Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q500606" start="4207" end="4234" title="University of South Florida" label="University of South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q659255" start="4238" end="4264" title="University of West Florida" label="University of West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="4268" end="4287" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="4291" end="4312" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075365" start="4316" end="4341" title="University of Puerto Rico" label="University of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q631066" start="4385" end="4403" title="Clemson University" label="Clemson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566572" start="4408" end="4454" title="South Carolina Department of Natural Resources" label="South Carolina Department of Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806451" start="4459" end="4495" title="Medical University of South Carolina" label="Medical University of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806300" start="4500" end="4511" title="The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507421" start="4516" end="4537" title="College of Charleston" label="College of Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566644" start="4542" end="4573" title="South Carolina State University" label="South Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104405" start="4578" end="4605" title="Coastal Carolina University" label="Coastal Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024426" start="4610" end="4638" title="University of South Carolina" label="University of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="4668" end="4699" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277776" start="4702" end="4726" title="East Carolina University" label="East Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="4751" end="4780" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934330" start="4785" end="4821" title="Virginia Institute of Marine Science" label="Virginia Institute of Marine Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="4825" end="4848" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="4853" end="4866" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="4870" end="4892" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303536" start="4896" end="4928" title="Virginia Commonwealth University" label="Virginia Commonwealth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="4932" end="4955" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="4958" end="4994" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068072" start="4997" end="5019" title="University of Delaware" label="University of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822400" start="5057" end="5094" title="Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University" label="Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393301" start="5098" end="5128" title="Fairleigh Dickinson University" label="Fairleigh Dickinson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548012" start="5132" end="5157" title="Georgian Court University" label="Georgian Court University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382148" start="5161" end="5176" title="Kean University" label="Kean University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763986" start="5180" end="5220" title="Marine Academy of Science and Technology" label="Marine Academy of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q922647" start="5224" end="5243" title="Monmouth University" label="Monmouth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018694" start="5247" end="5273" title="Montclair State University" label="Montclair State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272013" start="5277" end="5311" title="New Jersey Institute of Technology" label="New Jersey Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289009" start="5315" end="5343" title="Ramapo College of New Jersey" label="Ramapo College of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294576" start="5346" end="5378" title="Raritan Valley Community College" label="Raritan Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799872" start="5382" end="5398" title="Rowan University" label="Rowan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="5402" end="5420" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q585828" start="5424" end="5445" title="Seton Hall University" label="Seton Hall University"/>
<link wikidata="Q657222" start="5449" end="5480" title="Stevens Institute of Technology" label="Stevens Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329259" start="5484" end="5503" title="Stockton University" label="Stockton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726772" start="5507" end="5532" title="The College of New Jersey" label="The College of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885602" start="5536" end="5556" title="Union County College" label="Union County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444527" start="5559" end="5586" title="William Paterson University" label="William Paterson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="5681" end="5703" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q681025" start="5707" end="5746" title="State University of New York at Buffalo" label="State University of New York at Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="5750" end="5768" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5771" end="5811" title="University of Connecticut#Avery Point Campus" label="University of Connecticut at Avery Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641788" start="5814" end="5840" title="University of Rhode Island" label="University of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="5843" end="5880" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404053" start="5883" end="5919" title="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution" label="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="5995" end="6016" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603626" start="6020" end="6063" title="State University of New York at Plattsburgh" label="State University of New York at Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="6066" end="6093" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307345" start="6096" end="6115" title="University of Maine" label="University of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="6144" end="6173" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="6176" end="6197" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="6222" end="6247" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="6251" end="6273" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999307" start="6276" end="6302" title="Illinois-Indiana Sea Grant" label="Illinois-Indiana Sea Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="6322" end="6364" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="6368" end="6385" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="6388" end="6419" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495874" start="6422" end="6453" title="University of Minnesota, Duluth" label="University of Minnesota, Duluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="6470" end="6491" title="Land-grant university" label="Land-grant university"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978618" start="6494" end="6545" title="National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program" label="National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638697" start="6548" end="6566" title="Sun grant colleges" label="Sun grant colleges"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343727" wikidata="Q80541" url="?curid=343727" title="Blue Mosque, Istanbul">
<text>The Blue Mosque, officially the Sultan Ahmed Mosque (), is an Ottoman-era historical imperial mosque located in Istanbul, Turkey. It was constructed between 1609 and 1617 during the rule of Ahmed I and remains a functioning mosque today. It also attracts a large number of tourists and is one of the most iconic and popular monuments of Ottoman architecture. 

The mosque has a classical Ottoman layout with a central dome surrounded by four semi-domes over the prayer hall. It is fronted by a large courtyard and flanked by six minarets. On the inside, it is decorated with thousands of Iznik tiles and painted floral motifs in predominantly blue colours, which give the mosque its popular name. The mosque&#x27;s &quot;külliye&quot; (religious complex) includes Ahmed&#x27;s tomb, a madrasa, and several other buildings in various states of preservation.

The mosque was built next to the former Hippodrome and stands across from the Hagia Sophia, another popular tourist site. The Blue Mosque was included in the UNESCO World Heritage Site list in 1985 under the name of &quot;Historic Areas of Istanbul&quot;.

== History ==

=== Construction ===

After the Peace of Zsitvatorok, seen as a blow to Ottoman prestige, Sultan Ahmed I decided to build a large mosque in Istanbul in the hope of soliciting God&#x27;s favour. He was the first sultan to build an imperial mosque since Selim II (d. 1574), as both Murad III and Mehmed III before him had neglected to construct their own.

The mosque was built on the southeast side of the old Byzantine Hippodrome, near the Hagia Sophia (the most important mosque of the Ottoman Empire), a site of significant symbolic significance that allows it to dominate the city&#x27;s skyline. The mosque&#x27;s location was originally occupied by the Hippodrome&#x27;s bleachers and its imperial box (where the emperor sat when attending events here). During excavations in the early 20th century, some of the ancient seats were discovered in the mosque&#x27;s courtyard. Given the mosque&#x27;s location, size, and number of minarets, it is probable that Sultan Ahmed intended to create a monument that rivalled or surpassed the Hagia Sophia.

Prior to construction, this site was occupied by the palaces of several Ottoman viziers, including Sokollu Mehmet Pasha and Güzel Ahmet Pasha, which required a costly expropriation process. This, along with the fact that the empire was under economic stress, aroused the protests of the ulema (Islamic legal scholars), who argued that sultans should only fund the construction of an imperial mosque with spoils of conquest. Ahmed I had won no major victories and thus had to divert funds from the treasury for this expensive project. The ulema went so far as to forbid Muslims from praying at the mosque.
Despite the opposition, the sultan went ahead with the project. Construction started in 1609 and completed in 1617, when the opening ceremony was held, though the year 1616 is mentioned on some of the mosque&#x27;s inscriptions. Ahmed I died around the same time or very soon afterwards in 1617. Scholar Godfrey Goodwin notes that the last accounting reports on the mosque&#x27;s construction were signed by Mustafa I, Ahmed I&#x27;s successor, which suggests that Ahmed I had died before the final completion of the project.

In the end, the mosque&#x27;s grandeur, its luxurious decoration, and the elaborate public ceremonies that Ahmed I organized to celebrate the project appear to have swayed public opinion and overcome the initial controversy over its construction. It became one of the most popular mosques in the city. The mosque has left a major mark on the city and has given its name to the surrounding neighbourhood, now known as Sultanahmet.

=== Restorations ===
In 1883, much of the mosque interior&#x27;s painted decoration was replaced by new stenciled paintwork, some of which changed the original colour scheme. A major fire in 1912 damaged or destroyed several of the outlying structures of the mosque complex, which were subsequently restored.

A major restoration of the mosque took place in the 21st century. During preparatory work in 2013, it was discovered that the mosque&#x27;s northwest minaret had shifted over time, constituting a potential threat to its structural stability. Work to reconstruct and repair the minaret was underway in 2015. Comprehensive restoration work on the rest of the mosque began in 2018 and was finished in April 2023.

== Architecture ==

=== Overview ===

The design of the mosque is based on that of the earlier Şehzade Mosque designed by Mimar Sinan in the early 16th century. The prayer hall occupies an area of and has a central dome measuring in diameter. The dome is surrounded by four semi-domes, each of which is flanked by three smaller semi-domes or exedrae. Four smaller domes cover the corners of the prayer hall. On the outside, the mosque has six minarets, ablutions facilities, and a large courtyard preceding the prayer hall.

The mosque&#x27;s architect, Sedefkar Mehmed Agha, synthesized the ideas of his master Sinan, aiming for overwhelming size, majesty and splendor. According to the architect&#x27;s official biographer, the mosque was the culmination of his career. Reflecting the classical Ottoman style of the period, the structure incorporates aspects of Byzantine architecture from the neighboring Hagia Sophia with Islamic architecture. It was the last great mosque of this classical period. 

Architectural historian Doğan Kuban characterizes Mehmed Agha&#x27;s style as having a more &quot;sculptural&quot; approach, with more attention brought on the details of the building and a willingness to break up its elements into smaller parts, whereas Sinan had placed more emphasis on rigorous spatial designs with relatively restrained decoration. Scholar Gülru Necipoğlu states that the mosque demonstrates an emerging trend towards extravagance in the structure and decoration of Ottoman buildings during this time, as evidenced by its size, its profile (including the increased number of minarets), and its lavish use of Iznik tiles. A similar lack of restraint in decoration is also found, for example, in the New Mosque (or Yeni Valide Mosque) that was completed later that same century.

While architectural historians have criticized some details of the mosque&#x27;s structure and decoration when comparing it to the earlier works of Sinan, the mosque is one of the most impressive and popularly admired monuments of Ottoman architecture.

=== Interior ===

==== Layout and main features ====

The mosque&#x27;s interior is dominated by its dome and cascading semi-domes. The main dome reaches a height of . The weight of the dome is supported by four massive cylindrical pillars. The transition between the central dome and the pillars is achieved by four long, smooth pendentives. Smaller pendentives are used for transitions between the semi-domes and their exedrae and between the hall&#x27;s corner domes and the surrounding structure. The transitions between the smaller exedrae and the supporting walls or arches are covered by &quot;muqarnas&quot; (stalactite-like sculpting) made of stucco. By employing these elements, Mehmed Agha created a softer progression from the rectangular outer walls to the round central dome. A two-floor gallery, supported on columns, runs along three sides of the prayer hall, except for the southeastern (or qibla) side, where the mihrab is located. Two fountains are incorporated into the two northern pillars of the mosque, similar to the Süleymaniye Mosque&#x27;s prayer hall. The floors are covered with carpets, which are donated by the faithful and are regularly replaced as they wear out. 
At ground level, the focus of the prayer hall is the mihrab, which is made of finely carved marble, with a &quot;muqarnas&quot; niche and a two inscription panels above it. It is surrounded by many windows. To the right of the mihrab is the richly decorated &quot;minbar&quot;, or pulpit, where the imam stands when he is delivering his sermon at the time of noon prayer on Fridays or on holy days. The &quot;minbar&quot; is crafted from elaborately carved marble, with a summit covered by a gold-covered conical cap. The mosque has been designed so that even when it is at its most crowded, everyone in the mosque can see and hear the imam, with the exception of the areas behind the mosque&#x27;s large pillars. According to Evliya Çelebi, who saw the mosque in the 17th century, a hundred Qur&#x27;ans on lecterns inlaid with mother-of-pearl, all gifted by sultans and viziers, were placed near the mihrab.

The &quot;hünkâr mahfil&quot;, or sultan&#x27;s loge, is an elevated platform situated in the southeast corner of the prayer hall, where the sultan could pray. The platform has an L-shape and is supported on ten marble columns. It has its own mihrab with rich decoration, which used to include gold leaf and a jade rose. The loge is reached from the outside via an &quot;imperial pavilion&quot;, a large L-shaped structure composed of a covered ramp leading up to two rooms where the sultan could retire to rest, along with an enclosed portico or balcony on the south side overlooking the sea. These retiring rooms became the headquarters of the Grand Vizier during the suppression of the rebellious Janissary Corps in 1826. This auxiliary structure, which is awkwardly integrated into the overall mosque design, is an innovation that appears here for the first time in Ottoman architecture. It was partly destroyed by a fire in 1912 and was subsequently restored. 

==== Decoration ====
The lower walls of the mosque, especially around the galleries, are covered in Iznik tiles, a style of tilework named after their main production center, İznik (ancient Nicaea). Ahmed I had a great appreciation for these tiles and the production of tiles for his mosque occupied the entire Iznik industry during its construction. Starting in 1607, orders for tiles were sent out continuously and in 1613 the sultan even forbade the production and sale of tiles for any other purpose, so that his own commissions could be completed on time. 

A total of 21,043 tiles, featuring over fifty different designs, are found inside the mosque. Some panels were designed specifically for the mosque, while others seem to have been reused from other buildings and amassed here, including lower-quality tiles added during later repairs. The finest tiles are found on the walls of the upper gallery on the north wall, though these are difficult for most visitors to see today. They constitute a virtual museum of tile design from this period, with motifs including cypress trees, flowers, and fruit in a range of colours including blue, green, red, black, and turquoise.

Nearly 75 percent of the mosque&#x27;s walls, above the level of the tilework, are decorated with painted motifs. The predominant colour of this paintwork is blue, one of the reasons for the mosque&#x27;s popular name, though much of it has since been replaced with modern imitations of the original 16th/17th-century style. The painted motifs generally consist of floral arabesques. Other motifs include calligraphic inscriptions, including verses from the Qur&#x27;an, originally made by the famous calligrapher Seyyid Kasim Gubari, but these too have been restored repeatedly and no longer match the original calligrapher&#x27;s work. 

Some opus sectile decoration is also used at floor level. The mosque also contains some original inlaid woodwork of high quality, including the doors of the courtyard entrance, which were made by the father of Evliya Çelebi.

The mosque contains some 260 windows to admit natural light. Each semi-dome has 14 windows and the central dome 28 (four of which are blind). Each smaller exedra of the semi-domes has five windows, some of which are blind. Many of the windows were made in a traditional manner with intricate designs created with small pieces of coloured glass. Some of the glass was manufactured locally for the outer windows, but most of the glass, especially the coloured glass, was imported. Some of it was a gift from the Signoria of Venice, following a request from Ahmed I in 1610. Most of these original windows have been lost and since replaced with less elaborate modern windows. The modern windows probably make the mosque&#x27;s interior today brighter than the original stained glass windows would have.

The mosque is further illuminated by chandeliers hung from the ceiling. The many lamps inside the mosque were once covered with gold and gems. Among the lamps one could find ostrich eggs and crystal balls. Adding ostrich eggs to chandeliers was a frequent traditional practice in mosques and Near Eastern churches. It is popularly explained in Istanbul as a method to ward off spiders or mice, or to warn of earthquakes. Some of the crystal balls or glass bowls also contained other curiosities, such as a model of the mosque and a model of a galley, noted by 17th and 18th century writers.

=== Exterior ===

On the outside, Mehmed Agha used the cascade of domes and semi-domes, combined with more curved and multi-tiered supported elements, to create a softer profile that builds up smoothly towards the summit of the central dome, much like he did with the interior. This approach differs slightly from that of Sinan and earlier Ottoman architects, who used the deliberate juxtaposition of curved domes and vertical elements to create a more dramatic effect.

The courtyard of the mosque has three entrances: a central entrance on the northwest and two other side entrances. The central entrance is the most monumental, featuring a tall projecting portal topped by a small dome raised on a drum. A &quot;muqarnas&quot; semi-vault is set over the exterior doorway and there are two inscription panels. From the courtyard, the prayer hall is also entered via a monumental gate on the southeast side, decorated with its own &quot;muqarnas&quot; semi-vault and inscription panel. The prayer hall also has two other lateral entrances on the outside of the mosque, where non-Muslim tourists usually enter today. 
On the inside, the mosque courtyard has a classic rectangular peristyle form, lined on each side with an arcaded and domed portico (or &quot;riwaq&quot;). There are a total of 26 columns supporting the porticos and 30 domes above them. Unlike the courtyards of the Süleymaniye Mosque and Selimiye Mosque designed by Sinan, where the portico in front of the prayer hall is taller than those on the other three sides, Mehmet Agha kept the arches of the southeast portico level almost with the others, thus prioritizing greater uniformity.

At the center of the courtyard is the shadirvan, an octagonal domed kiosk sheltering a fountain that was used for ablutions. The outer surfaces of the kiosk are carved with low-relief foliate motifs. Today, Muslim ablutions are not performed at this fountain but at a series of water taps available outside the courtyard, along the northeast and southwest walls. The inclusion of these taps under arcaded galleries along the outer walls of the courtyard was an innovative feature.

A heavy iron chain hangs in the northwestern entrance (from the Hippodrome) to the outer precinct of the mosque. Only the sultan was allowed to enter the court of the mosque on horseback. The chain was put there, so that the sultan had to lower his head every single time he entered the court to avoid being hit. This was a symbolic gesture, to ensure the humility of the ruler in the face of the divine.

=== Minarets ===

The Blue Mosque is one of the five mosques in Turkey that has six minarets (one in the modern Sabancı Mosque in Adana, the Muğdat Mosque in Mersin, Çamlıca Mosque in Üsküdar and the Green mosque in Arnavutköy). According to folklore, an architect misheard the Sultan&#x27;s request for &quot;altın minareler&quot; (gold minarets) as &quot;altı minare&quot; (six minarets), a feature then-unique to the mosque of the Ka&#x27;aba in Mecca. When criticized for his presumption, the Sultan then ordered a seventh minaret to be built at the Mecca mosque.

Each of the six minaret towers is fluted and is topped by a slender, conical cap. The four minarets rising at the corners of the prayer hall each have three balconies (&quot;şerefe&quot;) while the other two at the outer corners of the courtyard have two balconies each. Each balcony is supported by &quot;muqarnas&quot;-carved corbeling. The minarets have been repaired many times in their history. Historically, the muezzin had to climb a narrow spiral staircase inside the minarets five times a day to announce the call to prayer.

== Other parts of the complex ==
As in most major Ottoman religious foundations, the Sultan Ahmed Mosque is the main element of a larger complex of buildings. Unlike in previous imperial mosque complexes, the other structures of this complex are not arranged in a regular, well-organized plan around the mosque. Because the mosque was built next to the Hippodrome, the site created difficulties for a planned complex and the auxiliary buildings were instead placed in various locations near the mosque or around the Hippodrome. The mosque is surrounded by an outer court or precinct enclosed by a wall. 

=== Mausoleum of Ahmed I ===

The mausoleum of Ahmed I is located northeast of the mosque, next to the Hippodrome square. It was begun in 1619 after Ahmed&#x27;s death, and completed by his son, Osman II (). Unlike many Ottoman mausoleums, which most typically have an octagonal form, the tomb chamber has a square floor plan covered by a dome, more reminiscent of a small mosque. The dome has a diameter of 15 metres. There is a small rectangular alcove at the back of the chamber whose original purpose is uncertain. The tomb is fronted by a portico with three arches. Inside are the tombs of Sultan Ahmed I and some of his family, including his wife Kösem and four of his sons, Sultan Osman II, Sultan Murad IV (), Şehzade Mehmed (d. 1621) and Şehzade Bayezid (d. 1635).

=== Madrasa ===

The madrasa of the complex is located just outside the outer wall of the mosque&#x27;s precinct, to the northeast. It was probably completed towards 1620. The madrasa has a generally classical layout, consisting of a rectangular courtyard surrounded on all four sides by an arcaded and domed portico. Behind each portico is a row of domed rooms that served as student sleeping quarters, with 24 rooms in total. The main features that depart from the design of earlier madrasas are the lack of a monumental entrance portal and the placement of the &quot;dershane&quot; (a larger domed chamber serving as a classroom), which is attached to a corner of the building rather than placed in the middle of one side. The madrasa is entered via a more discrete doorway on the northwest side, behind the outer garden wall of the nearby mausoleum. 

A separate square structure, the &quot;darülkurra&quot; (a school that teaches reading of the Qur&#x27;an), is contained within the outer enclosure of the nearby mausoleum It was restored in 1935 and is currently used as a storage for Ottoman archives.

=== The hospital and public kitchen ===

Four other structures of the complex were built over the sphendone, the semi-circular southwest end of the Hippodrome. The largest and furthest building was a hospital (), a square building arranged around an internal courtyard. Its construction was begun in 1609 and completed in 1620. It included a hammam (bathhouse) and a small mosque.

Directly northeast of this were three other buildings placed in a row, which together formed the &quot;imaret&quot; (a soup kitchen). This set of buildings was begun in 1617 and probably finished in 1620. The three structures include a pantry, a kitchen and oven, and a dining hall. The kitchen building is a square structure with four domes and several chimneys, while the other two structures (the pantry and dining hall) are rectangular buildings with six domes. Additionally, there were guesthouses nearby but these have disappeared.

In the 19th century, the hospital and the guesthouses were destroyed and an academy was built over the site. Only the hospital&#x27;s hammam section and the marble fountain of its courtyard have survived to the present day. The academy building burned down in the 1970s but was subsequently restored and now serves as the office of the rectorate of Marmara University. The surviving buildings of the imaret have been integrated into it.

=== Other structures ===

The primary school (&quot;sibyan mektebi&quot;) is a small and simple rectangular structure built over the outer precinct wall on the east side of the mosque. It was completed around 1617 and destroyed by a fire in 1912. It has since been restored.

To the south, beyond a sloped tunnel that gives access to and from the mosque precinct, was a hammam. It was probably completed in 1617. It is now partly ruined. Its furnace room, warm room, and hot room are still mostly standing, but the front part of the building, which was probably made of wood, has been lost.Stretching below the southeast side of the mosque precinct is an &quot;arasta&quot;, a market street that was built as part of the complex. It contains spaces for around 200 shops. It too was completed in 1617. In 1912, it was destroyed by fire but it was restored from its ruined state between 1982 and 1985. It is now open as a bazaar, catering especially to tourists.

== Pope Benedict XVI&#x27;s visit ==

Pope Benedict XVI visited the Blue Mosque on 30 November 2006 during his visit to Turkey. It is the second papal visit in history to a Muslim place of worship. Having removed his shoes, the Pope paused for a full two minutes, eyes closed in silent meditation, standing side by side with Mustafa Çağrıcı, the Mufti of Istanbul, and Emrullah Hatipoğlu, the Imam of the Blue Mosque.

The pope “thanked divine Providence for this” and said, “May all believers identify themselves with the one God and bear witness to true brotherhood.” The pontiff noted that Turkey “will be a bridge of friendship and collaboration between East and West”, and he thanked the Turkish people “for the cordiality and sympathy” they showed him throughout his stay, saying, “he felt loved and understood.”

==See also==

* List of mosques in Istanbul
* Çamlıca Mosque
* Shah Mosque
* List of tallest domes
* List of tallest structures built before the 20th century

== Notes ==
==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
*
*

==External links==

*Website of the Blue Mosque, Istanbul
*Photographs by Dick Osseman, PBase
*360 panorama of the mosque&#x27;s northern gallery and Iznik tiles (hosted on Google Maps)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80541" start="4" end="15" title="Blue Mosque, Istanbul" label="Blue Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q80541" start="32" end="51" title="Blue Mosque, Istanbul" label="Sultan Ahmed Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="62" end="73" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454820" start="85" end="100" title="Congregational mosque" label="imperial mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="112" end="120" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="122" end="128" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="190" end="197" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="337" end="357" title="Ottoman architecture" label="Ottoman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704573" start="378" end="395" title="Classical Ottoman architecture" label="classical Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955008" start="442" end="451" title="semi-dome" label="semi-dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q48356" start="529" end="536" title="minaret" label="minaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696793" start="588" end="599" title="Iznik tiles" label="Iznik tiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q71974" start="721" end="728" title="külliye" label="külliye"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="785" end="792" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q387548" start="898" end="908" title="Hippodrome of Constantinople" label="Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="936" end="948" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1016" end="1022" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1023" end="1042" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773394" start="1080" end="1106" title="Historic Areas of Istanbul" label="Historic Areas of Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q695212" start="1162" end="1182" title="Peace of Zsitvatorok" label="Peace of Zsitvatorok"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="1227" end="1234" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="1382" end="1390" title="Selim II" label="Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="1410" end="1419" title="Murad III" label="Murad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q171465" start="1424" end="1434" title="Mehmed III" label="Mehmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q387548" start="1549" end="1559" title="Sultanahmet Square" label="Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="1570" end="1582" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067349" start="1806" end="1815" title="Bleacher" label="bleachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48356" start="2063" end="2071" title="Minaret" label="minarets"/>
<link wikidata="Q298419" start="2281" end="2301" title="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha" label="Sokollu Mehmet Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="2469" end="2474" title="ulema" label="ulema"/>
<link wikidata="Q104437363" start="3091" end="3106" title="Godfrey Goodwin (scholar)" label="Godfrey Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="3127" end="3137" title="accounting" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="3195" end="3204" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q504073" start="3849" end="3858" title="Stencil" label="stenciled"/>
<link wikidata="Q644677" start="4561" end="4575" title="Şehzade Mosque" label="Şehzade Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600" start="4588" end="4599" title="Mimar Sinan" label="Mimar Sinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955008" start="4740" end="4750" title="Semi-dome" label="semi-domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q594648" start="4808" end="4815" title="Exedra" label="exedrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533343" start="5020" end="5040" title="Sedefkar Mehmed Agha" label="Sedefkar Mehmed Agha"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704573" start="5253" end="5276" title="Classical Ottoman architecture" label="classical Ottoman style"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="5330" end="5352" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="5374" end="5386" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="5392" end="5412" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303861" start="5495" end="5506" title="Doğan Kuban" label="Doğan Kuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q31189938" start="5832" end="5847" title="Gülru Necipoğlu" label="Gülru Necipoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q911720" start="6190" end="6200" title="New Mosque, Istanbul" label="New Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="6501" end="6521" title="Ottoman architecture" label="Ottoman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q734605" start="6854" end="6865" title="Pendentive" label="pendentives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356021" start="7125" end="7133" title="muqarnas" label="muqarnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="7176" end="7182" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173907" start="7455" end="7461" title="mihrab" label="mihrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q178643" start="7565" end="7583" title="Süleymaniye Mosque" label="Süleymaniye Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q443676" start="7985" end="7991" title="minbar" label="minbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="8020" end="8024" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q202308" start="8448" end="8461" title="Evliya Çelebi" label="Evliya Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="8513" end="8525" title="Quran" label="Qur&amp;#x27;ans"/>
<link wikidata="Q390539" start="8529" end="8536" title="lectern" label="lectern"/>
<link wikidata="Q215865" start="8550" end="8565" title="mother-of-pearl" label="mother-of-pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q19611524" start="8642" end="8655" title="Hünkâr Mahfili" label="hünkâr mahfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q929186" start="8926" end="8935" title="gold leaf" label="gold leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="8942" end="8946" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="9168" end="9175" title="portico" label="portico"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="9278" end="9290" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="9332" end="9341" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696793" start="9699" end="9710" title="Iznik pottery" label="Iznik tiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q468402" start="9723" end="9731" title="tilework" label="tilework"/>
<link wikidata="Q217125" start="9774" end="9779" title="İznik" label="İznik"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="9789" end="9795" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q186599" start="11152" end="11162" title="Arabesque" label="arabesques"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="11185" end="11197" title="Islamic calligraphy" label="calligraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16224779" start="11294" end="11313" title="Seyyid Kasim Gubari" label="Seyyid Kasim Gubari"/>
<link wikidata="Q641860" start="11425" end="11437" title="opus sectile" label="opus sectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q684335" start="11780" end="11785" title="Blind arch" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477879" start="12156" end="12164" title="Signoria of Venice" label="Signoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="12168" end="12174" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q191709" start="12484" end="12495" title="chandeliers" label="chandeliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="12584" end="12588" title="Gemstone" label="gems"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="12990" end="12996" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294433" start="13740" end="13744" title="Tholobate" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q725453" start="14219" end="14228" title="peristyle" label="peristyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="14262" end="14269" title="arcaded" label="arcaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155800" start="14298" end="14303" title="Riwaq (arcade)" label="riwaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q184534" start="14445" end="14460" title="Selimiye Mosque, Edirne" label="Selimiye Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q219466" start="14809" end="14818" title="Wudu" label="ablutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="14868" end="14878" title="Relief" label="low-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381468" start="15695" end="15709" title="Sabancı Mosque" label="Sabancı Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q38545" start="15713" end="15718" title="Adana" label="Adana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944533" start="15724" end="15737" title="Muğdat Mosque" label="Muğdat Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q134291" start="15741" end="15747" title="Mersin" label="Mersin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341384" start="15749" end="15763" title="Çamlıca Mosque" label="Çamlıca Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q428858" start="16003" end="16037" title="Great Mosque of Mecca" label="mosque of the Ka&amp;#x27;aba in Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126831" start="16186" end="16192" title="Fluting (architecture)" label="fluted"/>
<link wikidata="Q12537" start="16480" end="16489" title="corbeling" label="corbeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q239718" start="16570" end="16577" title="muezzin" label="muezzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q71974" start="16737" end="16766" title="Külliye" label="Ottoman religious foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q172056" start="17487" end="17495" title="Osman II" label="Osman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q61127" start="17945" end="17950" title="Kösem Sultan" label="Kösem"/>
<link wikidata="Q174762" start="17997" end="18005" title="Murad IV" label="Murad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528449" start="18010" end="18024" title="Şehzade Mehmed (son of Ahmed I)" label="Şehzade Mehmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722902" start="18039" end="18054" title="Şehzade Bayezid (son of Ahmed I)" label="Şehzade Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="18088" end="18095" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293141" start="19377" end="19385" title="Bimaristan" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q28077" start="19519" end="19525" title="hammam" label="hammam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302791" start="19662" end="19668" title="imaret" label="imaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142654" start="19678" end="19690" title="soup kitchen" label="soup kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424081" start="20447" end="20465" title="Marmara University" label="Marmara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618571" start="20566" end="20580" title="Kuttab" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q601970" start="20992" end="21001" title="Tepidarium" label="warm room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026403" start="21007" end="21015" title="Caldarium" label="hot room"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="21197" end="21203" title="Bazaar" label="arasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="21536" end="21553" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243533" start="22334" end="22361" title="List of mosques in Istanbul" label="List of mosques in Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341384" start="22364" end="22378" title="Çamlıca Mosque" label="Çamlıca Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q643098" start="22381" end="22392" title="Shah Mosque (Isfahan)" label="Shah Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354260" start="22395" end="22416" title="List of tallest domes" label="List of tallest domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178424" start="22419" end="22475" title="List of tallest structures built before the 20th century" label="List of tallest structures built before the 20th century"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343731" wikidata="Q220915" url="?curid=343731" title="Blue Mosque">
<text>Blue Mosque may refer to:

== Buildings ==
* Blue Mosque, Istanbul, Turkey
* Blue Mosque, Yerevan, Armenia
* Blue Mosque, Tabriz, Iran
* Blue Mosque, Amsterdam, Netherlands
* Great Mosque of Herat, Afghanistan
* Hazrat Ali Mazar, also known as Blue Mosque, Mazari Sharif, Afghanistan
* Ajdarbey Mosque, Baku, Azerbaijan
* Aqsunqur Mosque, Egypt
* King Abdullah I Mosque, Amman, Jordan
* Mohammad Al-Amin Mosque, Beirut, Lebanon
* Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Mosque, Shah Alam, Malaysia

==Other uses==
* &quot;Blue Mosque&quot; a 1994 album by album by Muslimgauze</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q220915" start="0" end="11" title="Blue Mosque" label="Blue Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q80541" start="45" end="66" title="Blue Mosque, Istanbul" label="Blue Mosque, Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979112" start="77" end="97" title="Blue Mosque, Yerevan" label="Blue Mosque, Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519733" start="109" end="128" title="Blue Mosque, Tabriz" label="Blue Mosque, Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12269634" start="137" end="159" title="Blue Mosque, Amsterdam" label="Blue Mosque, Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291612" start="175" end="196" title="Great Mosque of Herat" label="Great Mosque of Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q138388" start="212" end="228" title="Hazrat Ali Mazar" label="Hazrat Ali Mazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16415387" start="286" end="301" title="Ajdarbey Mosque" label="Ajdarbey Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q622784" start="322" end="337" title="Aqsunqur Mosque" label="Aqsunqur Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574587" start="347" end="369" title="King Abdullah I Mosque" label="King Abdullah I Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942724" start="387" end="410" title="Mohammad Al-Amin Mosque" label="Mohammad Al-Amin Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q308510" start="430" end="465" title="Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Mosque" label="Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980881" start="545" end="565" title="Bryn Jones discography" label="album by Muslimgauze"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343732" wikidata="Q5276046" url="?curid=343732" title="Digital cable">
<text>Digital cable is the distribution of cable television using digital data and video compression. The technology was first developed by General Instrument. By 2000, most cable companies offered digital features, eventually replacing their previous analog-based cable by the mid 2010s. During the late 2000s, broadcast television converted to the digital HDTV standard, which was incompatible with existing analog cable systems.

In addition to providing high-definition video, digital cable systems provide more services such as pay-per-view programming, cable internet access and cable telephone services. Most digital cable signals are encrypted, which reduced the incidence of cable television piracy which occurred in analog systems.

==History==
In 1990, General Instrument (acquired by Motorola and now owned by ARRIS Group) demonstrated that it was possible to use digital compression to deliver high quality HDTV in a standard 6 MHz television channel. Using the same technology General Instrument (GI) demonstrated the digital transmission of multiple high quality standard definition programs in a 6 MHz cable channel.

In the 1990s, cable providers began to invest heavily in this new multi-channel digital TV technology to expand the number of channels and services available to subscribers. Increased competition and programming choices from direct-broadcast satellite services such as DirecTV, Dish Network, and PrimeStar caused cable providers to seek new ways to provide more programming. Customers were increasingly interested in more channels, pay-per-view programming, digital music services, and high speed internet services. By 2000, most cable providers in the US were offering some form of digital cable TV to their customers.

Digital cable technology has allowed cable providers to compress video channels so that they take up less bandwidth and to offer two-way communication capabilities. This has enabled providers to offer more channels, video-on-demand services that don&#x27;t require a separate telephone line, telephone services, high speed internet services, and interactive television services. Digital cable implements error correction to ensure the integrity of the received signal and uses a secure digital distribution system (i.e. a secure encrypted signal to prevent eavesdropping and theft of service.)

Most digital cable providers use QAM for video services and DOCSIS standards for data services. Some providers have also begun to roll out video services using IPTV or Switched video.

==Channels==
Digital cable technology can allow many TV channels to occupy the frequency space that would normally be occupied by a single analog cable TV channel. The number of channels placed on a single analog frequency depends on the compression used. Many cable providers are able to fit about 10 digital SD channels or 2 digital HD channels on a single analog channel frequency. Some providers are able to squeeze more channels onto a single frequency with higher compression, but often this can cause the video quality of the channel to degrade.

The addition of this capability complicates the notion of a &quot;channel&quot; in digital cable (as well as in over-the-air ATSC digital broadcasts). The formal names for the two numbers that now identify a channel are the physical channel and the subchannel.

The physical channel is a number corresponding to a specific 6 MHz frequency range. See: North American cable television frequencies.

The subchannel is a logical channel of data within the physical channel. Technically there can be up to 1024 subchannels in a physical channel, though in practice only a few are used (as the bandwidth must be divided among all the subchannels).

There are two ways providers try to make this easier for consumers. The first, accomplished through PSIP, is where program and channel information is broadcast along with the video, allowing the consumer&#x27;s decoder (set-top box or display) to automatically identify the many channels and subchannels.

The second (also accomplished through PSIP) is where, in an effort to hide subchannels entirely, many cable companies map virtual channel numbers to underlying physical and sub-channels. For example, a cable company might call channel 5-1 &quot;channel 732&quot; and channel 5-2 &quot;channel 733&quot;. This also allows the cable company to change the frequency of a channel without changing what the customer sees as a channel number. In such arrangements, the physical/sub-channel numbers are called the &quot;QAM channel&quot;, and the alternative channel designation is called the &quot;mapped channel&quot;, &quot;virtual channel&quot;, or simply &quot;channel&quot;.

In theory, a set-top box can decode the PSIP information from every channel it receives and use that information to build the mapping between QAM channel and virtual channel. However, cable companies do not always reliably transmit PSIP information. Alternatively, CableCards receive the channel mapping and can communicate that to the set-top box.

==Technical information==
The standard for signal transmission over digital cable television systems in the United States is now fixed as both &quot;64-QAM&quot; and &quot;256-QAM&quot; (quadrature amplitude modulation), which is specified in SCTE 07, and is part of the DVB standard (but not ATSC). This method carries 38.47 Mbit/s using 256-QAM on a 6 MHz channel, which can carry nearly two full ATSC 19.39 Mbit/s transport streams. Each 6-MHz channel is typically used to carry 7–12 digital SDTV channels (256-QAM, MPEG2 MP/ML streams of 3–5 Mbit/s). On many boxes with QAM tuners (most notably the DVR boxes), high definition versions of local channels, and some cable channels are available.

Digital cable allows for the broadcast of EDTV (480p) as well as HDTV (720p, 1080i, and 1080p). By contrast, analog cable transmits programs solely in the 480i format (the lowest television definition in use today).

The Advanced Television Systems Committee standards include a provision for 16-VSB transmission over cable at 38.4 Mbit/s, but the encoding has not yet gained wide acceptance. Some SMATV systems may carry 8-VSB and QAM signals, mostly in apartment buildings and similar facilities that use a combination of terrestrial antennas and cable distribution sources (such as HITS or &quot;Headend in the Sky&quot;, a unit of Comcast that delivers digital channels by satellite to small cable systems).

Digital cable channels typically are allocated above 552 MHz, the upper frequency of cable channel 78. (Cable channels above channel 13 are at lower frequencies than UHF broadcast channels with the same number, as seen in North American cable television frequencies.) Between 552 and 750 MHz, there is space for 33 6-MHz channels (231–396 SDTV channels); when going all the way to 864 MHz, there is space for 52 6-MHz channels (364–624 SDTV channels).

In the U.S., digital cable systems with 750 MHz or greater activated channel capacity are required to comply with a set of SCTE and CEA standards. Until September 4, 2020, these companies were also required to provide CableCARDs to customers that requested them.

==See also==

*Cable Internet access
*Cable television in the United States
*CableCARD
*Digital television
*Direct-broadcast satellite
*DVB-C
*DigiCipher 2
*QAM Tuner
*Significantly viewed
*Tru2way

==References==
==External links==
*National Cable and Telecommunications Association - Digital Cable
*Digital cable &amp; Digital house
*US CATV Channels and Frequencies table (up to channel 78) 
*US CATV Channels and Frequencies table (comprehensive)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5276046" start="0" end="13" title="Digital cable" label="Digital cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q867147" start="21" end="33" title="Distribution (business)" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="37" end="53" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="60" end="72" title="digital data" label="digital data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="77" end="94" title="video compression" label="video compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="352" end="356" title="HDTV" label="HDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916762" start="452" end="473" title="high-definition video" label="high-definition video"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="527" end="539" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294471" start="553" end="574" title="cable internet access" label="cable internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710356" start="579" end="603" title="cable telephony" label="cable telephone services"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="636" end="645" title="encrypted" label="encrypted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015695" start="678" end="701" title="cable television piracy" label="cable television piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501636" start="758" end="776" title="General Instrument" label="General Instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="790" end="798" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033073" start="816" end="827" title="ARRIS Group" label="ARRIS Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="1353" end="1379" title="direct-broadcast satellite" label="direct-broadcast satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056839" start="1397" end="1404" title="DirecTV" label="DirecTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199757" start="1406" end="1418" title="Dish Network" label="Dish Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243222" start="1424" end="1433" title="PrimeStar" label="PrimeStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="1560" end="1572" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="1855" end="1864" title="frequency bandwidth" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="1878" end="1899" title="Duplex (telecommunications)" label="two-way communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="1965" end="1980" title="video-on-demand" label="video-on-demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="2025" end="2039" title="telephone line" label="telephone line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="2153" end="2169" title="error correction" label="error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q749753" start="2377" end="2380" title="QAM" label="QAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q944595" start="2404" end="2410" title="DOCSIS" label="DOCSIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="2504" end="2508" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659104" start="2512" end="2526" title="Switched video" label="Switched video"/>
<link wikidata="Q637801" start="3208" end="3231" title="ATSC Standards" label="ATSC digital broadcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053935" start="3434" end="3477" title="North American cable television frequencies" label="North American cable television frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276171" start="3484" end="3494" title="subchannel" label="subchannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062494" start="3826" end="3830" title="PSIP" label="PSIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291875" start="4154" end="4169" title="virtual channel" label="virtual channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5165" end="5178" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q749753" start="5244" end="5275" title="quadrature amplitude modulation" label="quadrature amplitude modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552411" start="5300" end="5304" title="SCTE" label="SCTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q178562" start="5328" end="5331" title="DVB" label="DVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q637801" start="5350" end="5354" title="ATSC" label="ATSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="5411" end="5414" title="MHz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858953" start="5504" end="5511" title="Channel (broadcasting)" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="5552" end="5556" title="SDTV" label="SDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q273902" start="5576" end="5581" title="MPEG2" label="MPEG2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265371" start="5631" end="5640" title="QAM tuner" label="QAM tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q865042" start="5660" end="5663" title="Digital video recorder" label="DVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348859" start="5798" end="5802" title="EDTV" label="EDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q637801" start="5977" end="6024" title="Advanced Television Systems Committee standards" label="Advanced Television Systems Committee standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552015" start="6049" end="6055" title="16-VSB" label="16-VSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391083" start="6154" end="6159" title="SMATV" label="SMATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645199" start="6178" end="6183" title="8-VSB" label="8-VSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242812" start="6355" end="6373" title="Headend in the Sky" label="Headend in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="6391" end="6398" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="6635" end="6638" title="UHF" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053935" start="6691" end="6734" title="North American cable television frequencies" label="North American cable television frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015616" start="7140" end="7149" title="CableCARD" label="CableCARD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294471" start="7201" end="7222" title="Cable Internet access" label="Cable Internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015692" start="7224" end="7261" title="Cable television in the United States" label="Cable television in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015616" start="7263" end="7272" title="CableCARD" label="CableCARD"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="7274" end="7292" title="Digital television" label="Digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="7294" end="7320" title="Direct-broadcast satellite" label="Direct-broadcast satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q255920" start="7322" end="7327" title="DVB-C" label="DVB-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275705" start="7329" end="7341" title="DigiCipher 2" label="DigiCipher 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265371" start="7343" end="7352" title="QAM Tuner" label="QAM Tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512967" start="7354" end="7374" title="Significantly viewed" label="Significantly viewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847079" start="7376" end="7383" title="Tru2way" label="Tru2way"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343739" wikidata="Q143357" url="?curid=343739" title="Barbizon School">
<text>The Barbizon school (, ) of painters were part of an art movement toward Realism in art, which arose in the context of the dominant Romantic Movement of the time. The Barbizon school was active roughly from 1830 through 1870. It takes its name from the village of Barbizon, France, on the edge of the Forest of Fontainebleau, where many of the artists gathered. Most of their works were landscape painting, but several of them also painted landscapes with farmworkers, and genre scenes of village life. Some of the most prominent features of this school are its tonal qualities, color, loose brushwork, and softness of form.

The leaders of the Barbizon school were: Théodore Rousseau, Charles-François Daubigny, Jules Dupré, Edouard Manet, Edgar Degas, Constant Troyon, Charles Jacque, and Narcisse Virgilio Díaz. Jean-François Millet lived in Barbizon from 1849, but his interest in figures with a landscape backdrop sets him rather apart from the others. Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot was the earliest on the scene, first painting in the forest in 1829, but British art historian Harold Osborne suggested that &quot;his work has a poetic and literary quality which sets him somewhat apart&quot;. Other artists associated with the school, often pupils of the main group, include: Henri Harpignies, Albert Charpin, François-Louis Français, and Émile van Marcke.

Many of the artists were also printmakers, mostly in etching but the group also provided the bulk of the artists using the semiphotographic cliché verre technique. The French etching revival began with the school, in the 1850s.

==History==

The Salon of 1824 in Paris exhibited works of John Constable, an English painter. His rural scenes influenced some of the younger artists of the time, moving them to abandon formalism and to draw inspiration directly from nature. Natural scenes became the subjects of their paintings rather than mere backdrops to dramatic events. During the Revolutions of 1848 artists gathered at Barbizon to follow Constable&#x27;s ideas, making nature the subject of their paintings. The French landscape became a major theme of the Barbizon painters.

In the spring of 1829, Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot came to Barbizon to paint in the Forest of Fontainebleau. He had first painted in the forest at Chailly in 1822. He returned to Barbizon in the autumn of 1830 and in the summer of 1831, where he made drawings and oil studies, from which he made a painting intended for the Salon of 1830; &quot;View of the Forest of Fontainebleau&#x27;&quot; (now in the National Gallery in Washington) and, for the Salon of 1831, another &quot;View of the Forest of Fontainebleau&quot;&#x27;. While there he met the members of the Barbizon school: Théodore Rousseau, Paul Huet, Constant Troyon, Jean-François Millet, and the young Charles-François Daubigny.
Millet extended the idea from landscape to figures – peasant figures, scenes of peasant life, and work in the fields. In &quot;The Gleaners&quot; (1857), for example, Millet portrays three peasant women working at the harvest. Gleaners are poor people who are permitted to gather the remains after the owners of the field complete the main harvest. The owners (portrayed as wealthy) and their laborers are seen in the back of the painting. Millet shifted the focus and the subject matter from the rich and prominent to those at the bottom of the social ladders.

During the late 1860s, the Barbizon painters attracted the attention of a younger generation of French artists studying in Paris. Several of those artists visited Fontainebleau Forest to paint the landscape, including Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Alfred Sisley and Frédéric Bazille. In the 1870s those artists, among others, developed the art movement called Impressionism and practiced &quot;plein air&quot; painting. In contrast, the main members of the school made drawings and sketches on the spot, but painted back in their studios.

The Post-Impressionist painter Vincent van Gogh studied and copied several of the Barbizon painters as well, including 21 copies of paintings by Millet. He copied Millet more than any other artist. He also did three paintings in Daubigny&#x27;s Garden.

Both Théodore Rousseau (1867) and Jean-François Millet (1875) died at Barbizon.

==Influence in Europe==

Painters in other countries were also influenced by this art. Beginning in the late nineteenth century, many artists came to Paris from Austria-Hungary to study the new movements. For instance, the Hungarian painter János Thorma studied in Paris as a young man. In 1896 he was one of the founders of the Nagybánya artists&#x27; colony in what is now Baia Mare, Romania, which brought impressionism to Hungary. In 2013 the Hungarian National Gallery opens a major retrospective of his work, entitled, &quot;János Thorma, the Painter of the Hungarian Barbizon&quot;, 8 February – 19 May 2013, Hungarian National Gallery

Karl Bodmer, originally Swiss, settled in Barbizon in 1849. László Paál, another Hungarian, lived in Barbizon in the 1870s.

==Influence in America==
The Barbizon painters also had a profound impact on landscape painting in the United States. This included the development of the American Barbizon school by William Morris Hunt. Several artists who were also in, or contemporary to, the Hudson River School studied Barbizon paintings for their loose brushwork and emotional impact. A notable example is George Inness, who sought to emulate the works of Rousseau. Paintings from the Barbizon school also influenced landscape painting in California. The artist Percy Gray carefully studied works by Rousseau and other painters which he saw in traveling exhibitions to inform his own paintings of California hills and coastline. The influence of the Barbizon painters may be seen in the sporting dog paintings of Percival Rosseau (1859–1937), who grew up in Louisiana and studied at the Academie Julien.

==Gallery==
==Related artists==
* Eugène Boudin
* Hippolyte Boulenger
* Jean Ferdinand Chaigneau
* Paul Cornoyer
* Gustave Courbet
* Pierre Emmanuel Damoye
* Constant Dutilleux
* Antonio Fontanesi
* Nicolae Grigorescu
* Winckworth Allan Gay
* H. I. Marlatt
* Adolphe Joseph Thomas Monticelli
* Léon Germain Pelouse
* Paul Trouillebert
* Albert Charpin
* Charles Olivier de Penne

==See also==
* Art colony
* Macchiaioli

==References==
==Sources==
* Catalogues des Collections des Musees de France. Ministère de la culture. (Catalogs of Collections of Museums of France. Ministry of Culture.)
* Osborne, Harold (ed), &quot;The Oxford Companion to Art&quot;, 1970, OUP, 

==External links==

* Hecht Museum
* Cambridge Art Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q143357" start="4" end="19" title="Barbizon School" label="Barbizon school"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="53" end="65" title="art movement" label="art movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="73" end="80" title="Realism (arts)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="132" end="149" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q256175" start="264" end="272" title="Barbizon" label="Barbizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293678" start="301" end="324" title="Forest of Fontainebleau" label="Forest of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="387" end="405" title="landscape painting" label="landscape painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q310025" start="667" end="684" title="Théodore Rousseau" label="Théodore Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q252357" start="686" end="711" title="Charles-François Daubigny" label="Charles-François Daubigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q959212" start="713" end="724" title="Jules Dupré" label="Jules Dupré"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="726" end="739" title="Edouard Manet" label="Edouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="741" end="752" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q219403" start="754" end="769" title="Constant Troyon" label="Constant Troyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125409" start="771" end="785" title="Charles Jacque" label="Charles Jacque"/>
<link wikidata="Q724140" start="791" end="813" title="Narcisse Virgilio Díaz" label="Narcisse Virgilio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q148458" start="815" end="835" title="Jean-François Millet" label="Jean-François Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="958" end="985" title="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot" label="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q187496" start="1280" end="1296" title="Henri Harpignies" label="Henri Harpignies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831040" start="1298" end="1312" title="Albert Charpin" label="Albert Charpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q943826" start="1314" end="1337" title="François-Louis Français" label="François-Louis Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q742379" start="1343" end="1359" title="Émile van Marcke" label="Émile van Marcke"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="1392" end="1402" title="printmaker" label="printmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="1415" end="1422" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362412" start="1502" end="1514" title="cliché verre" label="cliché verre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402491" start="1537" end="1552" title="etching revival" label="etching revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16658565" start="1608" end="1621" title="Salon of 1824" label="Salon of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1625" end="1630" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="1650" end="1664" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="1946" end="1965" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="2167" end="2194" title="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot" label="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293678" start="2228" end="2251" title="Forest of Fontainebleau" label="Forest of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15118718" start="2594" end="2607" title="Salon of 1831" label="Salon of 1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q310025" start="2727" end="2744" title="Théodore Rousseau" label="Théodore Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354027" start="2746" end="2755" title="Paul Huet" label="Paul Huet"/>
<link wikidata="Q219403" start="2757" end="2772" title="Constant Troyon" label="Constant Troyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q148458" start="2774" end="2794" title="Jean-François Millet" label="Jean-François Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q252357" start="2810" end="2835" title="Charles-François Daubigny" label="Charles-François Daubigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="2867" end="2876" title="landscape art" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368055" start="2964" end="2976" title="The Gleaners" label="The Gleaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q182872" start="3563" end="3583" title="Fontainebleau" label="Fontainebleau Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="3618" end="3630" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="3632" end="3653" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q175130" start="3655" end="3668" title="Alfred Sisley" label="Alfred Sisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207298" start="3673" end="3689" title="Frédéric Bazille" label="Frédéric Bazille"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="3747" end="3759" title="art movement" label="art movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="3767" end="3780" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="3801" end="3810" title="plein air" label="plein air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="3978" end="3994" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168586" start="4069" end="4098" title="Copies by Vincent van Gogh" label="copies of paintings by Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335084" start="4176" end="4198" title="Daubigny&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Daubigny&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="4443" end="4458" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320457" start="4523" end="4535" title="János Thorma" label="János Thorma"/>
<link wikidata="Q591229" start="4611" end="4641" title="Nagybánya artists&amp;#x27; colony" label="Nagybánya artists&amp;#x27; colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q185280" start="4657" end="4666" title="Baia Mare" label="Baia Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="4668" end="4675" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q252071" start="4729" end="4755" title="Hungarian National Gallery" label="Hungarian National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q124099" start="4926" end="4937" title="Karl Bodmer" label="Karl Bodmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q920009" start="4986" end="4997" title="László Paál" label="László Paál"/>
<link wikidata="Q133910" start="5206" end="5230" title="American Barbizon school" label="American Barbizon school"/>
<link wikidata="Q527599" start="5234" end="5253" title="William Morris Hunt" label="William Morris Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q943853" start="5313" end="5332" title="Hudson River School" label="Hudson River School"/>
<link wikidata="Q704868" start="5429" end="5442" title="George Inness" label="George Inness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070251" start="5585" end="5595" title="Percy Gray" label="Percy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q212600" start="5962" end="5975" title="Eugène Boudin" label="Eugène Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620022" start="5978" end="5997" title="Hippolyte Boulenger" label="Hippolyte Boulenger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6000" end="6024" title="Jean Ferdinand Chaigneau" label="Jean Ferdinand Chaigneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003364" start="6027" end="6040" title="Paul Cornoyer" label="Paul Cornoyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="6043" end="6058" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192198" start="6061" end="6083" title="Pierre Emmanuel Damoye" label="Pierre Emmanuel Damoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127678" start="6086" end="6104" title="Constant Dutilleux" label="Constant Dutilleux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081011" start="6107" end="6124" title="Antonio Fontanesi" label="Antonio Fontanesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q454321" start="6127" end="6145" title="Nicolae Grigorescu" label="Nicolae Grigorescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023886" start="6148" end="6168" title="Winckworth Allan Gay" label="Winckworth Allan Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403669" start="6171" end="6184" title="Hamilton Irving Marlatt" label="H. I. Marlatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152965" start="6187" end="6219" title="Adolphe Joseph Thomas Monticelli" label="Adolphe Joseph Thomas Monticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270988" start="6222" end="6242" title="Léon Germain Pelouse" label="Léon Germain Pelouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q709290" start="6245" end="6262" title="Paul Trouillebert" label="Paul Trouillebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831040" start="6265" end="6279" title="Albert Charpin" label="Albert Charpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959931" start="6282" end="6306" title="Charles Olivier de Penne" label="Charles Olivier de Penne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558054" start="6323" end="6333" title="Art colony" label="Art colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q574985" start="6336" end="6347" title="Macchiaioli" label="Macchiaioli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343742" wikidata="Q879921" url="?curid=343742" title="Mark Hatfield">
<text>Mark Odom Hatfield (July 12, 1922 – August 7, 2011) was an American politician and educator from the state of Oregon. A Republican, he served eight years as Governor of Oregon, followed by 30 years as one of its United States senators, including time as chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee. A native Oregonian, he served in the United States Navy in the Pacific Theater during World War II after graduating from Willamette University. After the war he earned a graduate degree from Stanford University before returning to Oregon and Willamette as a professor.

While still teaching, Hatfield served in both houses of the Oregon Legislative Assembly. He won election to the Oregon Secretary of State&#x27;s office at the age of 34 and two years later was elected as the 29th Governor of Oregon. He was the youngest person to serve in either of those offices, and served two terms as governor before election to the United States Senate. In the Senate he served for thirty years, the longest tenure of any Senator from Oregon. At the time of his retirement, he was seventh most senior Senator and the second most senior Republican. In 1968, he was considered a candidate to be Richard Nixon&#x27;s running mate for the Republican Party presidential ticket.

Hatfield served as Chairman of the Senate Committee on Appropriations on two occasions. With this role, he was able to direct funding to Oregon and research-related projects. Numerous Oregon institutions, buildings and facilities are named in his honor, including the Mark O. Hatfield United States Courthouse in Portland, the Mark O. Hatfield Library at Willamette University (his alma mater), the Hatfield Government Center light-rail station in Hillsboro, the Mark O. Hatfield School of Government in the College of Urban and Public Affairs at Portland State University, and the Hatfield Marine Science Center in Newport. Outside of Oregon, a research center at the National Institutes of Health was named after him for his support of medical research while in the Senate. Hatfield died in Portland on August 7, 2011, after a long illness.

==Early life==
Hatfield was born in Dallas, Oregon, on July 12, 1922, the only child of Dovie E. (Odom) Hatfield, a schoolteacher, and Charles Dolen Hatfield, a blacksmith for the Southern Pacific Railroad. Hatfield&#x27;s father was from California and his mother from Tennessee. When he was five years old, his maternal grandmother took over the household while his mother, Dovie attended Oregon State College and graduated with a teaching degree after four years. Dovie taught school in Dallas for two years before the family moved to Salem, where she taught junior high school.

Encouraged by his mother, Hatfield&#x27;s first experience with politics came at the age of 10, when he campaigned in his neighborhood for President Herbert Hoover&#x27;s 1932 re-election campaign. In the late 1930s Hatfield worked as a tour guide at the new Oregon State Capitol Building in Salem, using his key to enter the governor&#x27;s office, where he sat in the governor&#x27;s chair.

On June 10, 1940, the 17-year-old Hatfield, driving his mother&#x27;s car, struck and killed a pedestrian, 6-year-old Alice Marie Lane, as she crossed the street to deliver milk to her neighbors. Hatfield was not held criminally liable for the crash, but was found civilly liable to the family. The case made its way to the Oregon Supreme Court in 1943, with the court affirming the trial court&#x27;s decision.

Hatfield graduated from Salem High School in 1940 and then enrolled at Willamette University, also in Salem. While attending Willamette, Hatfield became a brother of Alpha Phi Omega and Kappa Gamma Rho, which he later helped become a chapter of Beta Theta Pi. (In 1964, Hatfield was elected to the National position of Third Vice President of Alpha Phi Omega). In college he also worked part-time for then Oregon Secretary of State Earl Snell, where he learned how to build a political base by sending out messages to potential voters after reading about life changes posted in newspapers, such as deaths and graduations. He also sketched out a political career path beginning with the state legislature and culminating in a spot in the United States Senate, with a blank for any position beyond the Senate. Hatfield graduated from Willamette in 1943 with a Bachelor of Arts degree after three years at the school. While at the school he lost his only election, for student body president.

Hatfield joined the U.S. Navy after graduation, taking part in the World War II battles at Iwo Jima and Okinawa as a landing craft officer where he witnessed the carnage of the war. A lieutenant, he also witnessed the effects of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, as one of the first Americans to see the ruins of the city (later, as Senator, Hatfield opposed arms proliferation and the Vietnam War). After Japan, he served in French Indochina, where he witnessed firsthand the wealth divide between the peasant Vietnamese and the colonial French bourgeoisie. After his discharge as a Lieutenant (junior grade), he spent one year at Willamette&#x27;s law school, but decided politics or teaching better suited him.

Hatfield then enrolled at Stanford University, where he obtained a master&#x27;s degree in political science in 1948. He returned to Salem and Willamette after Stanford and began working as an assistant professor in political science. During his tenure as professor, he built a political base by sending out messages and speaking at any public forum where he could get an invitation.

==Political career==
Mark Hatfield&#x27;s career in public office spanned five decades as he held office in both the legislative and executive branches of Oregon&#x27;s state government, including two terms as governor. On the national stage he became the longest serving U.S. Senator from Oregon and a candidate for the Republican vice presidential nomination in 1968. In the U.S. Senate he would twice serve as chairman of the Appropriations Committee, and twice be investigated for possible ethics violations.

===Oregon===
In 1950 while teaching political science and serving as dean of students at Willamette, Hatfield began his political career by winning election to the Oregon House of Representatives as a Republican. He defeated six others for the seat at a time when state assembly elections were still determined by county-wide votes. He served for two terms representing Marion County and Salem in the lower chamber of the Oregon Legislative Assembly. At the time he was the youngest legislator in Oregon and still lived at his parents&#x27; home. Hatfield would teach early-morning classes and then walk across the street to the Capitol to legislate.

In 1952 he won re-election to his seat in the Oregon House. He also received national attention for his early support for coaxing Dwight D. Eisenhower to run for President of the United States as a Republican. This earned him a spot as a delegate at the Republican National Convention that year.

While in college he saw firsthand the discrimination against African Americans in Salem when he was tasked by his fraternity, Alpha Phi Omega, after a dinner with driving their guest, black artist Paul Robeson back to Portland, as African Americans were prohibited from staying in hotels in Salem. In 1953, he introduced and passed legislation in the House that prohibited discrimination based on race in public accommodations before federal legislation and court decisions did so on a national level. In 1954, Hatfield ran and won a seat in the Oregon State Senate representing Marion County. While in the legislature, he continued to apply the grassroots strategy he learned from Earl Snell, but expanded it to cover the entire state to increase his political base.

After serving in the state senate, he became the youngest secretary of state in Oregon history after winning election in 1956 at age 34. Hatfield defeated fellow state senator Monroe Sweetland for the office, receiving 51.3% of the vote in the November general election. He took office on January 7, 1957, and remained until he resigned on January 12, 1959.

For his first run for Governor of Oregon in 1958, the Republican Party opposed his candidacy going into the primary election. The large political base he had cultivated allowed him to win the party&#x27;s primary despite the party&#x27;s opposition. In the primary he defeated Oregon State Treasurer Sig Unander for the Republican nomination. In July 1958, after the primary election, Hatfield married Antoinette Kuzmanich, a counselor at Portland State College (now Portland State University). The marriage during the campaign drew some attention as the Catholic Kuzmanich converted to Hatfield&#x27;s Baptist religion. They had four children: Elizabeth, Mark Jr., Theresa and Charles (&quot;Visko&quot;). He continued his campaign for the governor&#x27;s office after the wedding, but avoided most public appearances with fellow Republican candidates for office and did not mention them during his campaign, despite requests by other Republicans for joint appearances.

In the November general election Hatfield faced Democratic incumbent Robert D. Holmes. In the final days of the campaign U.S. Senator Wayne Morse, a Democrat, implied Hatfield lied in his trial regarding the deadly car accident when he was 17. This tactic backfired as the press denounced the comments, as did Holmes and other Democrats. Hatfield defeated Holmes in a landslide, winning 55.3% of the vote in the election. That same election saw the Democratic Party gain a majority in both chambers of the state legislature for the first time since 1878. Holmes&#x27; defeat was attributed in part to the image and charisma portrayed by Hatfield and in part due to the campaign issues such as the declining economy, increased taxation, capital punishment, labor, and education. After the election, Holmes attempted to appoint David O&#x27;Hara as Secretary of State to replace Hatfield, who would have to resign to become governor. Hatfield appointed Howell Appling, Jr. to the office, and O&#x27;Hara challenged the appointment in state court. The Oregon Supreme Court ruled in favor of Hatfield on the constitutional issue, with the appointment of Appling confirmed. He was the youngest governor in the history of Oregon at that point in time at the age of 36.

In 1962 Hatfield had been considered a possible candidate to run against Morse for his Senate seat, but Hatfield instead ran for re-election. He faced Oregon Attorney General Robert Y. Thornton in the general election, winning with 345,497 votes to Thornton&#x27;s 265,359. He became the state&#x27;s first two-term governor in the 20th century when he was re-elected in 1962, and later became only the second governor up to that point in the state&#x27;s history to serve two full-terms.

Hatfield gave the keynote speech at the 1964 Republican National Convention in San Francisco that nominated Barry Goldwater and served as temporary chairman of the party during the convention. He advocated a moderate approach for the party and opposed the extreme conservatism associated with Goldwater and his supporters. He also was the only governor to vote against a resolution by the National Governors&#x27; Conference supporting the Johnson Administration&#x27;s policy on the Vietnam War, as Hatfield opposed the war, but pledged &quot;unqualified and complete support&quot; for the troops. He preferred the use of economic sanctions to end the war.

Hatfield was a popular Governor who supported Oregon&#x27;s traditional industries of timber and agriculture, but felt that in the postwar era expansion of industry and funding for transportation and education needed to be priorities. While governor he worked to begin the diversification of the state&#x27;s economy, such as recruiting industrial development and holding trade missions. As part of the initiative, he helped to found the Oregon Graduate Center in 1963 in what became the Silicon Forest in Washington County. A graduate level school in the Portland area (Portland State was still a college with no graduate programs at this time) was seen by business leaders as essential to attracting new industries and by Tektronix as needed to retain highly skilled workers. In lieu of the standard portrait for former governors, Hatfield is represented by a marble bust at the Oregon State Capitol.

===National===
Limited to two terms as governor, Hatfield announced his candidacy in the 1966 U.S. Senate election for the seat vacated by the retiring Maurine Neuberger. During the Vietnam War, and during an election year, he was one of the only people to vote against a resolution by a governors&#x27; conference that expressed support for the U.S. involvement in the war in 1966. At that time the war was supported by 75 percent of the public, and was also supported by Hatfield&#x27;s opponent in the November election. He won the primary election with 178,782 votes compared to a combined 56,760 votes for three opponents. Hatfield then defeated Democratic Congressman Robert Duncan in the election. In order to finish his term as governor, which ended on January 9, 1967, he delayed taking his oath of office in the Senate until January 10 instead of the usual January 3.

Hatfield&#x27;s re-election victory for governor in 1962 and successful Senate campaign in 1966 made him something of a national figure. In 1968, Hatfield was on Richard Nixon&#x27;s short list for vice president, and received the strong backing of his friend, the Rev. Billy Graham. Hatfield was considered too liberal by many conservatives and Southern moderates, and Nixon chose the more centrist Maryland Governor Spiro Agnew. Hatfield would later find himself at odds with Nixon over Vietnam and other issues, including a threat by Hatfield to reduce funding for the White House&#x27;s legal department in 1973 during the Watergate Scandal, after Nixon had failed to use funds appropriated for renovating dams on the Columbia River.

On December 14, 1967, Hatfield appeared on William F. Buckley&#x27;s talk show &quot;Firing Line&quot;. On the show, Hatfield and Buckley primarily discussed Senator Barry Goldwater&#x27;s unsuccessful bid for the presidency in the 1964 election. Hatfield clarified that he believed it was &quot;Goldwater&#x27;s basic approach to problems,&quot; which &quot;tended to evoke fear,&quot; that was rejected by many Americans in the election, rather than &quot;Senator Goldwater as a person.&quot; In addition, Buckley criticized the system of the institution of a party convention which existed at the time, stating that &quot;So, even if you can assume a situation in which John won all the presidential primaries, but James is the favorite of the Republican Party qua institution, then James is going to get nominated.&quot; Hatfield argued that the system of presidential primaries as a whole should be turned into a system of a simple &quot;national primary.&quot; Buckley eventually prompted Hatfield to expand upon his ideal system of presidential nominations by asking, &quot;If, in fact, you invite four candidates to participate in a national primary, would you then understand that the Convention would meet merely to ratify the process, or would that be an advisory judgment by the people,&quot; to which the Senator replied, &quot;I would like to see this as the final decision by the people themselves. I would like to see this thing move toward that objective. It may not be achieved overnight.&quot;

As a senator Hatfield took positions that made him hard to classify politically. In the Summer of 1969, he had told Murray Rothbard that he had &quot;committed himself to the cause of libertarianism.&quot; Rothbard remarked concerning Hatfield, &quot;obviously his voting record is not particularly libertarian – it&#x27;s very good on foreign policy and the draft, but it&#x27;s not too great on other things&quot;, adding that &quot;in the abstract, at least, he is very favorable to libertarianism.&quot; Hatfield was opposed to abortion and the death penalty, though as governor he chose not to commute the sentence of a convicted murderer and allowed that execution to go forward. As a prominent evangelical Christian, he opposed government-sponsored school prayer and supported civil rights for minorities. Hatfield voted in favor of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 and the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, as well as to override President Reagan&#x27;s veto, for the nomination of Thurgood Marshall to the Supreme Court and the bill establishing Martin Luther King Jr. Day as a federal holiday. Hatfield voted against the Supreme Court nominations of Clement Haynsworth and George Harrold Carswell, but voted in favor of the nominations of William Rehnquist, Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas. Hatfield was the only Senator who voted for both Thurgood Marshall and Clarence Thomas. Regarding political solutions, Hatfield believed that they were found in the center.

In 1970, with Senator George McGovern (D-South Dakota), he co-sponsored the McGovern-Hatfield Amendment, which called for a complete withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam. In 1973 he explained to the Eugene Register-Guard his &quot;Neighborhood Government Act,&quot; which he repeatedly introduced in Congress. It would have permitted Americans to divert their personal federal tax money from Washington to their local community. He explained that his long-term goal was to have all social services provided at the neighborhood level.

Hatfield appeared alongside Frank Church, Charles Goodell, Harold Hughes, and George McGovern on a bipartisan broadcast concerning the Vietnam War on May 12, 1970. The broadcast specifically concerned the McGovern-Hatfield Amendment, and was primarily for the purpose of promoting it. The Amendment had not yet reached the Senate, where it eventually failed on September 1 of the same year. The Senators primarily discussed issues of the Constitution in relation to the war, as Senator McGovern began with, &quot;There is no way under the Constitution by which the Congress of the United States could act either to continue this war or to end it, except by a decision on whether we will appropriate funds to finance the war.&quot;
In 1981, Hatfield served as the chairman of the Congressional Joint Committee on Presidential Inaugurations, overseeing the first inauguration of Ronald Reagan in January of that year.

On December 2, 1981, Hatfield was one of four senators to vote against an amendment to President Reagan&#x27;s MX missiles proposal that would divert the silo system by $334 million as well as earmark further research for other methods that would allow giant missiles to be based. The vote was seen as a rebuff of the Reagan administration.

In the 1980s, Hatfield co-sponsored nuclear freeze legislation with Senator Edward M. Kennedy, as well as co-authoring a book on the topic. He also advocated for the closure of the N-Reactor at the Hanford Nuclear Site in the 1980s, though he was a supporter of nuclear fusion programs. The N-Reactor was used for producing weapons grade plutonium while producing electricity.

Hatfield frequently broke with his party on issues of national defense and foreign policy in support for non-interventionism, such as military spending and the ban on travel to Cuba, while often siding with them on environmental and conservation issues. Senator Hatfield supported increased logging on federal lands. He was the lone Republican to vote against the 1981 fiscal year&#x27;s appropriations bill for the Department of Defense. He was rated as the sixth most respected senator in a 1987 survey by fellow senators. In 1991, Hatfield voted against authorizing military action against Iraq in the Gulf War, one of only two members of his party to do so in the Senate. Most famously, in 1995, Hatfield was the deciding vote against a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution. Hatfield compared the balanced budget amendment to President Reagan&#x27;s tax cuts, claiming that both were examples of &quot;imagery versus substance&quot;.

====Scandal and rebukes====
Hatfield was sometimes called &quot;Saint Mark&quot; because of his squeaky-clean reputation, but in 1984 columnist Jack Anderson revealed that Hatfield&#x27;s wife Antoinette, a Washington, D.C., real estate lawyer, had been paid $55,000 by Greek arms dealer Basil Tsakos in connection with a real estate purchase. Tsakos had been lobbying Hatfield, then Appropriations Committee chairman, to support a trans-Africa oil pipeline megaproject. The Hatfields apologized and donated $55,000 to a Portland hospital. The Senate Ethics Committee investigated and decided to take no action. However, after Hatfield&#x27;s death, an FBI report released under Freedom of Information law revealed that Tsakos had been indicted for bribery and had offered to plead guilty to lesser charges (though this never occurred), and that the Department of Justice had decided against charging Hatfield in the case.

In 1991, it was also revealed that Hatfield had failed to report a number of expensive gifts from the president of the University of South Carolina, James B. Holderman. Again, he apologized. But the Senate Ethics Committee rebuked Hatfield for the latter act.

Hatfield received another rebuke from the Senate after the Ethics Committee investigated two gifts that he had received in the form of forgiven loans from a former congressman and a California businessman.
His final re-election campaign came in 1990 against businessman Harry Lonsdale. Lonsdale aggressively went after Hatfield with television attack ads that attacked Hatfield as out of touch on issues such as abortion and timber management and accused the incumbent of being too closely allied with special interest groups in Washington. Lonsdale&#x27;s tactics moved him even with, and then ahead of Hatfield in some polls. Hatfield, who had typically stayed above the fray of negative campaigning, responded in kind with attack ads of his own. He raised $1 million in a single month after trailing Lonsdale in the polls before the November election. He defeated the Democrat with 590,095 (53.7 percent) votes to 507,743 (46.2 percent) votes.

====Length of service====
In 1993, he became the longest-serving senator from Oregon, surpassing the record of 9,726 days in office previously held by Charles McNary. In 1995, Hatfield was the only Republican in the Senate to vote against the proposed balanced budget amendment, and was the deciding vote that prevented the passage of the bill. In 1996 the National Historical Publications and Records Commission, a group he served on previously, granted him their Distinguished Service Award.

Hatfield retired in 1996, having never lost an election in 46 years and 11 campaigns as an elected official. During his tenure he gained billions of dollars in the form of federal appropriations for projects in Oregon. This included funding for transportation projects, environmental protection of wilderness areas and scenic rivers, facilities for research on AIDS, Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, and Parkinson&#x27;s disease and health care facilities.

==Later years and legacy==
After retiring from political office, he returned to Oregon and teaching, joining the faculty of George Fox University in Newberg, Oregon. In 2006, he was named the Herbert Hoover Emeritus Distinguished Professor of Politics at the school. Additionally, he taught at the Hatfield School of Government at Portland State University, which is named in his honor, and lectured at Willamette University and Lewis &amp; Clark College while living in Portland.

In July 1999, Hatfield and his wife were passengers on a tour bus when a car collided with the bus. They received only minor injuries, but the experience led them to advocate for seat belts to be required on buses.

Numerous buildings, organizations, awards, and outdoor areas have been named in honor of Hatfield. These include:
* The Mark O. Hatfield Library at Willamette University
*Awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) degree from Whittier College in 1963.
* Awarded an honorary degree from Linfield College in 1971.
* Hatfield Marine Science Center at Oregon State University 
* Hatfield School of Government at Portland State University
* The Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research Center at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland
* Mark O. Hatfield Research Center at Oregon Health &amp; Science University (OHSU)
* The Mark O. Hatfield Wilderness 
* Mark O. Hatfield Institute for International Understanding at Southwestern Oregon Community College
* Hatfield Government Center station at the western terminus of the MAX Blue Line light rail in Hillsboro
* Mark O. Hatfield United States Courthouse in Portland
* The Mark Hatfield trailhead at the western end of the Historic Columbia River Highway State Trail in the Columbia River Gorge;
* The Mark Hatfield Award for clinical research in Alzheimer&#x27;s disease 
* The Mark O. Hatfield Leadership Award presented by the Council for Christian Colleges and Universities
* The Mark O. Hatfield Distinguished Historians Forum, speaker series presented by the Oregon Historical Society.

From February 2000 to May 2008 Hatfield served on the board of directors for Oregon Health &amp; Science University. His papers and book collection are stored in the Willamette University Archives and Special Collections, inside the Mark O. Hatfield Library. Senator Hatfield merited his own chapter in Tom Brokaw&#x27;s &quot;The Greatest Generation&quot;.

In 2014, a 90-minute documentary about Hatfield&#x27;s life and career called &quot;The Gentleman of the Senate: Oregon&#x27;s Mark Hatfield&quot; was released.

Hatfield was admitted to the Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research hospital at the National Institutes of Health in Maryland in November 2010 for observation after his health began to decline. Mark Hatfield died at a care facility in Portland on August 7, 2011, after several years of illness. A specific cause of death was not immediately given.

==Works authored==
A selection of items Hatfield authored or contributed to:

===Author===
*&quot;Not Quite So Simple&quot; (1968), 
*&quot;Conflict and Conscience&quot; (1971), 
*&quot;Between a Rock and a Hard Place&quot; (1976), 
*&quot;Against the Grain: Reflections of a Rebel Republican&quot; (2000), 

===Contributor===
*&quot;Amnesty?: The Unsettled Question of Vietnam&quot; (1973), 
*&quot;Social Power and Political Freedom&quot; (1980), (introduction)
*&quot;Freeze! How You Can Help Prevent Nuclear War&quot; (1982), (with Edward Kennedy)
*&quot;Real Christianity&quot; (1982), (introduction)
*&quot;What About the Russians: A Christian Approach to US-Soviet Conflict&quot; (1984), 
*&quot;Vice Presidents of the United States: 1789-1993&quot; (1997), (editor)

==See also==
* List of federal political scandals in the United States

==References==
==External links==

*Hatfield tribute page from Willamette University
*Hatfield Records from the Oregon State Archives
*Mark O. Hatfield (1922–2011) from the Oregon Historical Society
*Hatfield voting record from the &quot;Washington Post&quot;
*Hatfield retrospective from George Fox University




|-


|-




|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q879921" start="0" end="18" title="Mark Hatfield" label="Mark Odom Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="110" end="116" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="120" end="130" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="212" end="233" title="United States senator" label="United States senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="340" end="358" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="366" end="381" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="389" end="401" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q930291" start="424" end="445" title="Willamette University" label="Willamette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="494" end="513" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101257" start="633" end="660" title="Oregon Legislative Assembly" label="Oregon Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101331" start="685" end="710" title="Oregon Secretary of State" label="Oregon Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q887224" start="781" end="804" title="List of governors of Oregon" label="29th Governor of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="926" end="946" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846827" start="1075" end="1102" title="List of United States senators in the 104th Congress by seniority" label="seventh most senior Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="1187" end="1200" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495418" start="1287" end="1337" title="United States Senate Committee on Appropriations" label="Chairman of the Senate Committee on Appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769097" start="1536" end="1577" title="Mark O. Hatfield United States Courthouse" label="Mark O. Hatfield United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1581" end="1589" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769095" start="1595" end="1619" title="Mark O. Hatfield Library" label="Mark O. Hatfield Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q930291" start="1623" end="1644" title="Willamette University" label="Willamette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="1650" end="1660" title="alma mater" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681380" start="1667" end="1693" title="Hatfield Government Center (MAX station)" label="Hatfield Government Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q81824" start="1716" end="1725" title="Hillsboro, Oregon" label="Hillsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="1815" end="1840" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588892" start="1850" end="1880" title="Hatfield Marine Science Center" label="Hatfield Marine Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q824111" start="1884" end="1891" title="Newport, Oregon" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="1937" end="1966" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q630985" start="2148" end="2162" title="Dallas, Oregon" label="Dallas, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="2273" end="2283" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="2292" end="2317" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="2382" end="2391" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="2503" end="2523" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q43919" start="2650" end="2655" title="Salem, Oregon" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="2844" end="2858" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419314" start="2954" end="2983" title="Oregon State Capitol" label="Oregon State Capitol Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064922" start="3413" end="3433" title="Oregon Supreme Court" label="Oregon Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056572" start="3526" end="3543" title="North Salem High School (Salem, Oregon)" label="Salem High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q930291" start="3573" end="3594" title="Willamette University" label="Willamette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735100" start="3668" end="3683" title="Alpha Phi Omega" label="Alpha Phi Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897282" start="3747" end="3760" title="Beta Theta Pi" label="Beta Theta Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277163" start="3934" end="3944" title="Earl Snell" label="Earl Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="4360" end="4376" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4513" end="4522" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4560" end="4572" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q180182" start="4584" end="4592" title="Battle of Iwo Jima" label="Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="4597" end="4604" title="Battle of Okinawa" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="4610" end="4623" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="4677" end="4687" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="4726" end="4753" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4878" end="4889" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="4918" end="4934" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824398" start="5076" end="5101" title="Lieutenant (junior grade)" label="Lieutenant (junior grade)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003310" start="5124" end="5152" title="Willamette University College of Law" label="Willamette&amp;#x27;s law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="5233" end="5252" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="5274" end="5294" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q498656" start="5864" end="5888" title="List of United States Senators from Oregon" label="U.S. Senator from Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248443" start="5913" end="5952" title="List of United States Republican Party presidential tickets" label="Republican vice presidential nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495418" start="6021" end="6045" title="United States Senate Committee on Appropriations" label="Appropriations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="6142" end="6159" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145221" start="6270" end="6301" title="Oregon House of Representatives" label="Oregon House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q484408" start="6476" end="6489" title="Marion County, Oregon" label="Marion County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101257" start="6528" end="6555" title="Oregon Legislative Assembly" label="Oregon Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="6888" end="6908" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q361909" start="7012" end="7042" title="Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="7252" end="7264" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269859" start="7601" end="7620" title="Oregon State Senate" label="Oregon State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101331" start="7882" end="7900" title="Oregon Secretary of State" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902276" start="8000" end="8016" title="Monroe Sweetland" label="Monroe Sweetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149111" start="8205" end="8223" title="Governor of Oregon" label="Governor of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101370" start="8460" end="8482" title="Oregon State Treasurer" label="Oregon State Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22343564" start="8483" end="8494" title="Sig Unander" label="Sig Unander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="8650" end="8675" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502071" start="9224" end="9240" title="Robert D. Holmes" label="Robert D. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q676399" start="9289" end="9300" title="Wayne Morse" label="Wayne Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921670" start="10106" end="10125" title="Howell Appling, Jr." label="Howell Appling, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q12064922" start="10204" end="10224" title="Oregon Supreme Court" label="Oregon Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164225" start="10259" end="10279" title="Oregon Constitution" label="constitutional issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101039" start="10570" end="10593" title="Oregon Attorney General" label="Oregon Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351300" start="10594" end="10612" title="Robert Y. Thornton" label="Robert Y. Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571612" start="10949" end="10984" title="1964 Republican National Convention" label="1964 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="10988" end="11001" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="11017" end="11032" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091203" start="11165" end="11185" title="extreme conservatism" label="extreme conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="11298" end="11333" title="National Governors&amp;#x27; Conference" label="National Governors&amp;#x27; Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="11349" end="11378" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Johnson Administration&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="11393" end="11404" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="11532" end="11550" title="economic sanctions" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22024357" start="12006" end="12028" title="Oregon Graduate Center" label="Oregon Graduate Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q953027" start="12056" end="12070" title="Silicon Forest" label="Silicon Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q484538" start="12074" end="12091" title="Washington County, Oregon" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="12139" end="12153" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347679" start="12292" end="12301" title="Tektronix" label="Tektronix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891904" start="12561" end="12586" title="1966 United States Senate election in Oregon" label="1966 U.S. Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q434765" start="12624" end="12641" title="Maurine Neuberger" label="Maurine Neuberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="12654" end="12665" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q766533" start="13146" end="13159" title="Robert B. Duncan" label="Robert Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="13513" end="13526" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="13549" end="13563" title="vice president" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="13621" end="13633" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="13751" end="13759" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="13769" end="13780" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="13923" end="13934" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="13978" end="13995" title="Watergate Scandal" label="Watergate Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="14073" end="14087" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q378098" start="14133" end="14158" title="William F. Buckley Jr." label="William F. Buckley&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452076" start="14175" end="14186" title="Firing Line (TV program)" label="Firing Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="14256" end="14278" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="14322" end="14335" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="15720" end="15735" title="Murray Newton Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="16136" end="16144" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="16153" end="16166" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251200" start="16360" end="16373" title="school prayer" label="school prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094483" start="16448" end="16472" title="Civil Rights Act of 1968" label="Civil Rights Act of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124547" start="16481" end="16517" title="Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987" label="Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="16542" end="16558" title="Ronald Reagan" label="President Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="16594" end="16611" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="16615" end="16632" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792349" start="16641" end="16645" title="Passage of Martin Luther King Jr. Day" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q751738" start="16659" end="16685" title="Martin Luther King Jr. Day" label="Martin Luther King Jr. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440532" start="16691" end="16706" title="Federal holidays in the United States" label="federal holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131335" start="16764" end="16782" title="Clement Haynsworth" label="Clement Haynsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512264" start="16787" end="16810" title="George Harrold Carswell" label="George Harrold Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="16853" end="16870" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342219" start="16872" end="16883" title="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination" label="Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126773" start="16888" end="16903" title="Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="17101" end="17116" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801402" start="17155" end="17182" title="McGovern-Hatfield amendment" label="McGovern-Hatfield Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="17243" end="17250" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760062" start="17280" end="17301" title="Eugene Register-Guard" label="Eugene Register-Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q477169" start="17644" end="17656" title="Frank Church" label="Frank Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959243" start="17658" end="17673" title="Charles Goodell" label="Charles Goodell"/>
<link wikidata="Q382715" start="17675" end="17688" title="Harold Hughes" label="Harold Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="17694" end="17709" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="17751" end="17762" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801402" start="17821" end="17848" title="McGovern-Hatfield Amendment" label="McGovern-Hatfield Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="17939" end="17945" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="18054" end="18066" title="United States Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="18094" end="18110" title="George McGovern" label="Senator McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079094" start="18409" end="18454" title="United States Congress Joint Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies" label="Joint Committee on Presidential Inaugurations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="18493" end="18506" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625615" start="18911" end="18925" title="nuclear freeze" label="nuclear freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="18951" end="18968" title="Edward M. Kennedy" label="Edward M. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391462" start="19056" end="19065" title="N-Reactor" label="N-Reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="19073" end="19093" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford Nuclear Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="19137" end="19151" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203128" start="19358" end="19377" title="non-interventionism" label="non-interventionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="19430" end="19434" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="19669" end="19690" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="19846" end="19850" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="19858" end="19866" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q142567" start="20345" end="20358" title="Jack Anderson (columnist)" label="Jack Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20489" end="20501" title="Basil Tsakos" label="Basil Tsakos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024426" start="21244" end="21272" title="University of South Carolina" label="University of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18098277" start="21274" end="21292" title="James B. Holderman" label="James B. Holderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891349" start="21324" end="21347" title="United States Senate Select Committee on Ethics" label="Senate Ethics Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891910" start="21631" end="21635" title="United States Senate election in Oregon, 1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670709" start="21656" end="21670" title="Harry Lonsdale" label="Harry Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q257437" start="21719" end="21740" title="negative campaigning" label="television attack ads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959799" start="22485" end="22499" title="Charles McNary" label="Charles McNary"/>
<link wikidata="Q836357" start="22586" end="22611" title="balanced budget amendment" label="balanced budget amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="23190" end="23194" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="23196" end="23220" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="23226" end="23250" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539406" start="23404" end="23425" title="George Fox University" label="George Fox University"/>
<link wikidata="Q932637" start="23429" end="23444" title="Newberg, Oregon" label="Newberg, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211830" start="23487" end="23495" title="Emeritus" label="Emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23578" end="23607" title="Mark O. Hatfield School of Government" label="Hatfield School of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="23611" end="23636" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q930291" start="23683" end="23704" title="Willamette University" label="Willamette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227955" start="23709" end="23734" title="Lewis &amp;amp; Clark College" label="Lewis &amp;amp; Clark College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769095" start="24098" end="24122" title="Mark O. Hatfield Library" label="Mark O. Hatfield Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996868" start="24204" end="24220" title="Whittier College" label="Whittier College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553672" start="24264" end="24280" title="Linfield College" label="Linfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588892" start="24292" end="24322" title="Hatfield Marine Science Center" label="Hatfield Marine Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="24326" end="24349" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="24386" end="24411" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973757" start="24418" end="24459" title="Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research Center" label="Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="24467" end="24496" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q584451" start="24500" end="24518" title="Bethesda, Maryland" label="Bethesda, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q282097" start="24557" end="24595" title="Oregon Health &amp;amp; Science University" label="Oregon Health &amp;amp; Science University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457261" start="24609" end="24636" title="Mark O. Hatfield Wilderness" label="Mark O. Hatfield Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571442" start="24702" end="24739" title="Southwestern Oregon Community College" label="Southwestern Oregon Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681380" start="24742" end="24776" title="Hatfield Government Center (MAX station)" label="Hatfield Government Center station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714611" start="24808" end="24821" title="MAX Blue Line" label="MAX Blue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="24822" end="24832" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q81824" start="24836" end="24845" title="Hillsboro, Oregon" label="Hillsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769097" start="24848" end="24889" title="Mark O. Hatfield United States Courthouse" label="Mark O. Hatfield United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="24893" end="24901" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620784" start="24958" end="25001" title="Historic Columbia River Highway State Trail" label="Historic Columbia River Highway State Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112581" start="25009" end="25029" title="Columbia River Gorge" label="Columbia River Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176278" start="25165" end="25212" title="Council for Christian Colleges and Universities" label="Council for Christian Colleges and Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q241935" start="25300" end="25325" title="Oregon Historical Society" label="Oregon Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q919527" start="25631" end="25641" title="Tom Brokaw" label="Tom Brokaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="26730" end="26744" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Edward Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619371" start="26984" end="27039" title="List of federal political scandals in the United States" label="List of federal political scandals in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101346" start="27153" end="27174" title="Oregon State Archives" label="Oregon State Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q241935" start="27214" end="27239" title="Oregon Historical Society" label="Oregon Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="27279" end="27294" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343745" wikidata="Q1684643" url="?curid=343745" title="Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard d'Ansse de Villoison">
<text>Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard d&#x27;Ansse (or Dannse) de Villoison (5 March 1750 (or 1753) – 25 April 1805) was a classical scholar born at Corbeil-sur-Seine, France.

In 1773, he published the &quot;Homeric Lexicon&quot; of Apollonius the Sophist from a manuscript in the abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés. In 1778, his edition of Longus&#x27;s &quot;Daphnis and Chloë&quot; was published. He went to Venice in 1781, and spent three years there examining the library, his expenses being paid by the French government.

His chief discovery was a 10th-century manuscript of the &quot;Iliad&quot;—the famous codex Venetus A, with ancient &quot;scholia&quot; and marginal notes, indicating supposititious, corrupt or transposed verses. After leaving Venice, he accepted an invitation of the duke of Saxe-Weimar to come to his court. Some of the fruits of his research in the library of the palace were collected into a volume, &quot;Epistolae Vinarienses&quot; (1783), dedicated to his royal hosts.

Hoping to find a treasure similar to the Venetian Homer in Greece, he returned to Paris to prepare for a journey to the east. He visited Constantinople, Smyrna, the Greek islands, and Mount Athos, but the results did not meet his expectation. In 1786, de Villoison returned to Paris, and in 1788 brought out the &quot;Venetus A&quot; of Homer, which created a sensation in the learned world. When the French Revolution broke out, being banished from Paris, he lived in retirement in Orléans, occupying himself chiefly with the transcription of the notes in the library of the brothers Valois (Valesius).

Upon the restoration of order, having returned to Paris, he accepted a professorship of modern Greek established by the government, and held it until it was transferred to the Collège de France as the professorship of the ancient and modern Greek languages. He died in 1805, soon after his appointment.

Another work of some importance, &quot;Anecdota Graeca&quot; (1781), from the Paris and Venice libraries, contains the &quot;Ionia&quot; (violet garden) of the empress Eudocia, and several fragments of the Neoplatonists Iamblichus and Porphyry, Procopius of Gaza, Choricius, and the Greek grammarians. Materials for an exhaustive work he was contemplating on ancient and modern Greece are preserved in the royal library of Paris.

==References==
*Bon-Joseph Dacier, &quot;Notice historique sur la vie et les ouvrages de Villoison&quot; (1806); 
*Chardon de la Rochette, &quot;Mélanges de critique et de philologie&quot;, iii. (1812);
*Article by his friend and pupil E Quatremère in &quot;Nouvelle biographie generale&quot;, xiii., based upon private information.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1684643" start="0" end="34" title="Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard d&amp;#x27;Ansse de Villoison" label="Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard d&amp;#x27;Ansse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684643" start="39" end="45" title="Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard d&amp;#x27;Ansse de Villoison" label="Dannse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684643" start="47" end="59" title="Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard d&amp;#x27;Ansse de Villoison" label="de Villoison"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="107" end="124" title="classical scholar" label="classical scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208812" start="133" end="150" title="Corbeil-Essonnes" label="Corbeil-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="152" end="158" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696542" start="218" end="240" title="Apollonius the Sophist" label="Apollonius the Sophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q604717" start="275" end="297" title="Saint-Germain-des-Prés" label="Saint-Germain-des-Prés"/>
<link wikidata="Q314949" start="323" end="329" title="Longus" label="Longus"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="393" end="399" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="574" end="579" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512863" start="603" end="612" title="Venetus A" label="Venetus A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="633" end="640" title="scholia" label="scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q315667" start="787" end="798" title="Saxe-Weimar" label="Saxe-Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1038" end="1043" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1047" end="1053" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1070" end="1075" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1125" end="1139" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="1141" end="1147" title="İzmir" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="1172" end="1183" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512863" start="1306" end="1315" title="Venetus A" label="Venetus A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1389" end="1406" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="1471" end="1478" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216298" start="1573" end="1579" title="Henri Valois" label="Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="1681" end="1693" title="modern Greek" label="modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="1769" end="1786" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1834" end="1848" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q229307" start="2065" end="2072" title="Aelia Eudocia" label="Eudocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="2103" end="2115" title="Neoplatonist" label="Neoplatonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q310916" start="2117" end="2127" title="Iamblichus (philosopher)" label="Iamblichus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="2132" end="2140" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q557776" start="2142" end="2159" title="Procopius of Gaza" label="Procopius of Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q510659" start="2161" end="2170" title="Choricius of Gaza" label="Choricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q289886" start="2564" end="2576" title="Etienne Marc Quatremère" label="E Quatremère"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343749" wikidata="Q373694" url="?curid=343749" title="Tockus">
<text>Tockus is a genus of birds in the hornbill family, Bucerotidae, which are native to Africa.

== Description ==
Hornbills in the genus &quot;Tockus&quot; are medium-sized African birds with triangular shaped curved bills. They can be found in tropical and sub-tropical African grasslands, forests and savannahs. They all have long tail feathers which are black on the exterior and white on the interior.

==Species==
The genus contains the following ten species:
* Monteiro&#x27;s hornbill (&quot;Tockus monteiri&quot;)
* Red-billed hornbill group
** Northern red-billed hornbill (&quot;Tockus erythrorhynchus&quot;)
** Damara red-billed hornbill (&quot;Tockus damarensis&quot;)
** Southern red-billed hornbill (&quot;Tockus rufirostris&quot;)
** Tanzanian red-billed hornbill (&quot;Tockus ruahae&quot;)
** Western red-billed hornbill (&quot;Tockus kempi&quot;)
* Yellow-billed hornbill group
** Southern yellow-billed hornbill (&quot;Tockus leucomelas&quot;)
** Eastern yellow-billed hornbill (&quot;Tockus flavirostris&quot;)
* Von der Decken&#x27;s hornbill (&quot;Tockus deckeni&quot;)
* Jackson&#x27;s hornbill (&quot;Tockus jacksoni&quot;)

== References ==

* Gordon Lindsay Maclean - &quot;Robert&#x27;s Birds of South Africa&quot;, 6th Edition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="12" end="17" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="51" end="62" title="Bucerotidae" label="Bucerotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="84" end="90" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="242" end="250" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="255" end="267" title="sub-tropical" label="sub-tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="268" end="274" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088548" start="464" end="488" title="Monteiro&amp;#x27;s hornbill" label="Monteiro&amp;#x27;s hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708861" start="521" end="540" title="Red-billed hornbill" label="Red-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q912111" start="550" end="578" title="Northern red-billed hornbill" label="Northern red-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933619" start="619" end="645" title="Damara red-billed hornbill" label="Damara red-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933618" start="681" end="709" title="Southern red-billed hornbill" label="Southern red-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933620" start="746" end="775" title="Tanzanian red-billed hornbill" label="Tanzanian red-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443540" start="807" end="834" title="Western red-billed hornbill" label="Western red-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14842626" start="864" end="886" title="Yellow-billed hornbill" label="Yellow-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q754511" start="896" end="927" title="Southern yellow-billed hornbill" label="Southern yellow-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128617" start="963" end="993" title="Eastern yellow-billed hornbill" label="Eastern yellow-billed hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q285064" start="1030" end="1060" title="Von der Decken&amp;#x27;s hornbill" label="Von der Decken&amp;#x27;s hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q643557" start="1092" end="1115" title="Jackson&amp;#x27;s hornbill" label="Jackson&amp;#x27;s hornbill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343752" wikidata="Q633562" url="?curid=343752" title="Anorrhinus">
<text>Anorrhinus is a genus of hornbills (family Bucerotidae) found in forests of Southeast Asia (just barely extending into adjacent parts of India and China). They are social and typically seen in groups, but only the dominant pair are believed to breed, while other group members act as helpers.

==Taxonomy==
This genus is sometimes limited to the bushy-crested hornbill, in which case the two remaining species, which are sometimes considered conspecific, are placed in the genus &quot;Ptilolaemus&quot;. A molecular phylogenetic study published in 2013 found that &quot;Anorrhinus&quot; was sister to a clade containing the genera &quot;Anthracoceros&quot; and &quot;Ocyceros&quot;.

The genus contains three species:
==References==

* Kemp, A. C. (2001). Family Bucerotidae (Hornbills). pp. 436–523 in: del Hoyo, J., Elliott, A., &amp; Sargatal, J. eds. (2001). &quot;Handbook of the Birds of the World.&quot; Vol. 6. Mousebirds to Hornbills. Lynx Edicions, Barcelona. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="16" end="21" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="43" end="54" title="Bucerotidae" label="Bucerotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="76" end="90" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="137" end="142" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="147" end="152" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782625" start="442" end="453" title="conspecific" label="conspecific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="506" end="528" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="591" end="597" title="sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q132914" start="637" end="650" title="Anthracoceros" label="Anthracoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q592521" start="667" end="675" title="Ocyceros" label="Ocyceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="709" end="716" title="species" label="species"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343753" wikidata="Q132914" url="?curid=343753" title="Anthracoceros">
<text>Anthracoceros is a genus of birds in the family Bucerotidae.

The genus was introduced by the German naturalist Ludwig Reichenbach in 1849. The type species was subsequently designated as the Malabar pied hornbill (&quot;Anthracoceros coronatus&quot;). The name is a combination of the Ancient Greek words ανθραξ &quot;anthrax&quot;, ανθρακος &quot;anthrakos&quot; meaning &quot;coal black&quot; and κερας &quot;keras&quot;, κερως &quot;kerōs&quot; meaning &quot;horn&quot;. A molecular phylogenetic study published in 2013 found that &quot;Anthracoceros&quot; was sister to the genus &quot;Ocyceros&quot; which contains the three grey hornbill species.

The genus contains five species:

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="28" end="32" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="48" end="59" title="Bucerotidae" label="Bucerotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q58053" start="112" end="130" title="Ludwig Reichenbach" label="Ludwig Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="144" end="156" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q908959" start="192" end="213" title="Malabar pied hornbill" label="Malabar pied hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="286" end="299" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="477" end="499" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="565" end="571" title="sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q592521" start="591" end="599" title="Ocyceros" label="Ocyceros"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343754" wikidata="Q850627" url="?curid=343754" title="Buceros">
<text>Buceros is a genus of large Asian hornbills (family Bucerotidae).

==Description==
Hornbills in the genus &quot;Buceros&quot; include some of the largest arboreal hornbills in the world, with the largest being the great hornbill. All the hornbills in this genus have a large and hollow bony casque on their upper beak that can be useful to scientists and bird watchers to recognise their age, sex and species. Their wingspan can be up to 1.8 meters (6 foot) and they have the largest wingspan out of all the hornbills.

==Taxonomy==
The genus &quot;Buceros&quot; was introduced in 1758 by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot;. The name is from Latin &quot;becerus&quot; meaning &quot;horned like an ox&quot; which in turn is from the Ancient Greek boukerōs which combines &quot;bous&quot; meaning &quot;ox&quot; with &quot;kerōs&quot; meaning &quot;horn&quot;. The type species was designated as the rhinoceros hornbill (&quot;Buceros rhinoceros&quot;) by Daniel Giraud Elliot in 1882.

===Species===
The genus contains three species:




The helmeted hornbill is sometimes included in this genus, but today most authorities place it in the monotypic &quot;Rhinoplax&quot; instead.

==References==

* Kemp, A. C. (2001). Family Bucerotidae (Hornbills). pp. 436–523 in: del Hoyo, J., Elliott, A., &amp; Sargatal, J. eds. (2001). &quot;Handbook of the Birds of the World.&quot; Vol. 6. Mousebirds to Hornbills. Lynx Edicions, Barcelona. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="13" end="18" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="28" end="32" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="52" end="63" title="Bucerotidae" label="Bucerotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="83" end="91" title="Hornbill" label="Hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="100" end="105" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232768" start="214" end="228" title="great hornbill" label="great hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726820" start="291" end="297" title="Casque (anatomy)" label="casque"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="537" end="542" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="612" end="625" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="633" end="646" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="tenth edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="660" end="675" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="700" end="705" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="790" end="803" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="921" end="933" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q751036" start="956" end="975" title="rhinoceros hornbill" label="rhinoceros hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q383324" start="1012" end="1032" title="Daniel Giraud Elliot" label="Daniel Giraud Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q226043" start="1099" end="1116" title="helmeted hornbill" label="helmeted hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="1197" end="1206" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q226043" start="1213" end="1222" title="Rhinoplax" label="Rhinoplax"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343755" wikidata="Q6679873" url="?curid=343755" title="Lord President of the Court of Session">
<text>The Lord President of the Court of Session and Lord Justice General () is the most senior judge in Scotland, the head of the judiciary, and the presiding judge of the College of Justice, the Court of Session, and the High Court of Justiciary. The Lord President holds the title of Lord Justice General of Scotland and the head of the High Court of Justiciary &quot;ex officio&quot;, as the two offices were combined in 1836. The Lord President has authority over any court established under Scots law, except for the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and the Court of the Lord Lyon.

The current Lord President of the Court of Session is Lord Pentland, who was appointed to the position on 3 February 2025 succeeding Lord Carloway They are paid according to salary group 1.1 of the Judicial Salaries Scale, which in 2016 was £222,862.

==Remit and jurisdiction==

=== Head of the judiciary ===
As Lord President of the Court of Session and is the most senior judge in Scotland, the head of the judiciary, and the presiding judge of the College of Justice, and the Court of Session. Under Section 2(6) of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008, the Lord President has authority over the judiciary of any court established under Scots law, except for the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and the Court of the Lord Lyon. The Scottish Land Court, which until 1 April 2017 was administered separately, was transferred to the Scottish Courts and Tribunals Service. The 2008 act states:
The Lord President is supported by the Judicial Office for Scotland which was established on 1 April 2010 as a result of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008, and the Lord President chairs the corporate board of the Scottish Courts and Tribunals Service. The Lord President, and the wider judiciary, is advised on matters relating to the administration of justice by the Judicial Council for Scotland, which is a non-statutory body established in 2007. There had been plans for a statutory judges&#x27; council but these plans were abandoned in favour of a non-statutory council convened by the Lord President.

=== Inner House ===
The Lord President presides over the 1st Division of the Inner House of the Court of Session. The Inner House is the part of the Court of Session which acts as a court of appeal for cases decided the Outer House and Sheriff Appeal Court, and hearing appeals on questions of law from the Sheriff Appeal Court, Scottish Land Court, Court of the Lord Lyon, and the Lands Tribunal for Scotland.

=== Official Oath ===
In Scotland the Official Oath is taken before the Lord President of the Court of Session.

===Lord Justice General===
The Lord President is also the Lord Justice General of Scotland and the head of the High Court of Justiciary &quot;ex officio&quot;, with the two offices having been combined in 1836.The office of Lord Justice General is derived from the justiciars who were appointed from at least the twelfth century. From around 1567 onwards it was held heritably by the Earl of Argyll until the heritability was resigned to the Crown in 1607.

==Officeholders==
=== Justiciars ===

(called Lord Chief Justices by Scot of Scotstarvet).

* Argadus, Captain of Argyll, in the reign of Ethodius
* Comes Dunetus; in the reign of King William the Lion. (Donnchad II, Earl of Fife)
* William Comyn
* Richard Comyn
* David, Earl of Huntingdon (died 1219)
* Walter Clifford, Justiciary of the Lothians
* 1216: Allan, Justiciary to King Alexander II
* 1224: William Cumin, Earl of Buchan 
* Walter (died 1241), son of Allan High Steward of Scotland
* 1239: William, Earl of Ross, &quot;Lord Chief Justice of Scotland&quot;
* Alexander (d.1283), High Steward of Scotland to King Alexander II
* 1253: Alexander Cumin, Earl of Buchan
* 1366: Robert de Erskine, Justiciary South of the Forth for King David II
* bef 1372: Alan de Lawedre of The Bass, Whitslaid, &amp; Haltoun, Justiciary South of the Forth, (he received a pension for holding this post in 1374).
* 1437: James Douglas, Earl of Avondale and Lord Balveny
* 1446: Patrick de Ogilvy, Justiciary South of the Forth
* 1457: John, Lord Lindsay of the Byres, Justiciary South of the Forth
* William Sinclair, 3rd Earl of Orkney &amp; Caithness (d.1480), Justiciary North of the Forth for King James II
* 1477: John Haldane of Gleneagles, Justiciary North of the Forth
* Patrick Hepburn, 1st Lord Hailes (died after 1482), and Robert, 2nd Lord Lyle, Justiciaries South of the Forth
* Andrew, Earl of Crawfurd, and George Gordon, 2nd Earl of Huntly, Justiciaries North of the Forth
* 1488: Robert Lyle, 2nd Lord Lyle (died ), &quot;Lord Chief Justice&quot;
* 1489: John Lyon, 3rd Lord Glamis (died 1 April 1497), and John Drummond, 1st Lord Drummond: &quot;Justice-General&quot;
* 1492: Robert Lyle, 2nd Lord Lyle, and John Lyon, 3rd Lord Glamis
* 1494: John Drummond, 1st Lord Drummond (died c1519)
* 1504: Andrew Gray, 2nd Lord Gray, and John Kennedy, 2nd Lord Kennedy
* 1514: Colin Campbell, 3rd Earl of Argyll
* 1526: Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie
* 1532: Alexander Mylne, Abbot of Cambuskenneth
* 1537: Archibald Campbell, 4th Earl of Argyll
* 1567: Sir Colin Campbell, 6th Earl of Argyll, (d.1584) (heritably)
* 1578: Sir Colin Campbell, 6th Earl of Argyll, (re-appointment?)
* 1589: Archibald Campbell, 7th Earl of Argyll, (who exchanged the heritable office of Lord Chief Justice in 1607, for the heritable Lieutenancy of Argyll and Lorn, and most of The Isles).

===Lord Justice-General===
===Lord President===
==See also==
*List of Senators of the College of Justice
*List of Leading Scottish Legal Cases

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6679873" start="4" end="42" title="Lord President of the Court of Session" label="Lord President of the Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679873" start="47" end="67" title="Lord President of the Court of Session" label="Lord Justice General"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="90" end="95" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="99" end="107" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386102" start="125" end="134" title="Judiciary of Scotland" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146745" start="167" end="185" title="College of Justice" label="College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="191" end="207" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128540" start="217" end="241" title="High Court of Justiciary" label="High Court of Justiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128540" start="334" end="358" title="High Court of Justiciary" label="High Court of Justiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="365" end="375" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="491" end="500" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="517" end="552" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="561" end="583" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150047" start="640" end="653" title="Paul Cullen, Lord Pentland" label="Lord Pentland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145605" start="719" end="732" title="Colin Sutherland, Lord Carloway" label="Lord Carloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="961" end="966" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="970" end="978" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386102" start="996" end="1005" title="Judiciary of Scotland" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146745" start="1038" end="1056" title="College of Justice" label="College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="1066" end="1082" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="1235" end="1244" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="1261" end="1296" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="1305" end="1327" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437837" start="1333" end="1352" title="Scottish Land Court" label="Scottish Land Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437682" start="1431" end="1468" title="Scottish Courts and Tribunals Service" label="Scottish Courts and Tribunals Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386102" start="1530" end="1558" title="Judicial Office for Scotland" label="Judicial Office for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615390" start="1616" end="1656" title="Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008" label="Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437682" start="1715" end="1752" title="Scottish Courts and Tribunals Service" label="Scottish Courts and Tribunals Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035430" start="2188" end="2199" title="Inner House" label="Inner House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035430" start="2229" end="2240" title="Inner House" label="Inner House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="2293" end="2308" title="court of appeal" label="court of appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111979" start="2331" end="2342" title="Outer House" label="Outer House"/>
<link wikidata="Q29587167" start="2347" end="2367" title="Sheriff Appeal Court" label="Sheriff Appeal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271542" start="2392" end="2408" title="question of law" label="questions of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q29587167" start="2418" end="2438" title="Sheriff Appeal Court" label="Sheriff Appeal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437837" start="2440" end="2459" title="Scottish Land Court" label="Scottish Land Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="2461" end="2483" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485009" start="2493" end="2520" title="Lands Tribunal for Scotland" label="Lands Tribunal for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074471" start="2561" end="2574" title="Oath of Allegiance (United Kingdom)" label="Official Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128540" start="2747" end="2771" title="High Court of Justiciary" label="High Court of Justiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714329" start="2901" end="2910" title="justiciar" label="justiciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264472" start="3020" end="3034" title="Earl of Argyll" label="Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="3074" end="3083" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528051" start="3163" end="3182" title="Scot of Scotstarvet" label="Scot of Scotstarvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="3208" end="3214" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254111" start="3232" end="3240" title="List of legendary kings of Scotland" label="Ethodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q312594" start="3279" end="3295" title="William the Lion" label="William the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296535" start="3298" end="3323" title="Donnchad II, Earl of Fife" label="Donnchad II, Earl of Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545543" start="3327" end="3340" title="William Cumin" label="William Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324852" start="3343" end="3356" title="Richard Comyn" label="Richard Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177456" start="3359" end="3384" title="David of Scotland, 8th Earl of Huntingdon" label="David, Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773193" start="3451" end="3456" title="Alan Durward" label="Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237889" start="3477" end="3489" title="Alexander II of Scotland" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007041" start="3498" end="3527" title="William Comyn, jure uxoris Earl of Buchan" label="William Cumin, Earl of Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q958548" start="3531" end="3537" title="Walter Stewart, 3rd High Steward of Scotland" label="Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612888" start="3597" end="3618" title="Uilleam I, Earl of Ross" label="William, Earl of Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100506" start="3665" end="3674" title="Alexander Stewart, 4th High Steward of Scotland" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244355" start="3685" end="3709" title="High Steward of Scotland" label="High Steward of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577038" start="3739" end="3770" title="Alexander Comyn, Earl of Buchan" label="Alexander Cumin, Earl of Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="3837" end="3845" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680292" start="4007" end="4055" title="James Douglas, 7th Earl of Douglas" label="James Douglas, Earl of Avondale and Lord Balveny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568958" start="4186" end="4238" title="William Sinclair, 1st Earl of Caithness" label="William Sinclair, 3rd Earl of Orkney &amp;amp; Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="4288" end="4296" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146715" start="4365" end="4397" title="Patrick Hepburn, 1st Lord Hailes" label="Patrick Hepburn, 1st Lord Hailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q495643" start="4508" end="4541" title="George Gordon, 2nd Earl of Huntly" label="George Gordon, 2nd Earl of Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527317" start="4583" end="4609" title="Robert Lyle, 2nd Lord Lyle" label="Robert Lyle, 2nd Lord Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850543" start="4658" end="4684" title="John Lyon, 3rd Lord Glamis" label="John Lyon, 3rd Lord Glamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230177" start="4710" end="4742" title="John Drummond, 1st Lord Drummond" label="John Drummond, 1st Lord Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527317" start="4780" end="4806" title="Robert Lyle, 2nd Lord Lyle" label="Robert Lyle, 2nd Lord Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850543" start="4812" end="4838" title="John Lyon, 3rd Lord Glamis" label="John Lyon, 3rd Lord Glamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230177" start="4847" end="4879" title="John Drummond, 1st Lord Drummond" label="John Drummond, 1st Lord Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679300" start="4918" end="4927" title="Lord Gray" label="Lord Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242820" start="4933" end="4963" title="John Kennedy, 2nd Lord Kennedy" label="John Kennedy, 2nd Lord Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801768" start="4972" end="5006" title="Colin Campbell, 3rd Earl of Argyll" label="Colin Campbell, 3rd Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786299" start="5015" end="5046" title="Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie" label="Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664218" start="5072" end="5094" title="Abbot of Cambuskenneth" label="Abbot of Cambuskenneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627091" start="5103" end="5141" title="Archibald Campbell, 4th Earl of Argyll" label="Archibald Campbell, 4th Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556649" start="5154" end="5188" title="Colin Campbell, 6th Earl of Argyll" label="Colin Campbell, 6th Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556649" start="5223" end="5257" title="Colin Campbell, 6th Earl of Argyll" label="Colin Campbell, 6th Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102021" start="5285" end="5323" title="Archibald Campbell, 7th Earl of Argyll" label="Archibald Campbell, 7th Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450071" start="5529" end="5571" title="List of Senators of the College of Justice" label="List of Senators of the College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625193" start="5573" end="5609" title="List of Leading Scottish Legal Cases" label="List of Leading Scottish Legal Cases"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343756" wikidata="Q685074" url="?curid=343756" title="Southern ground hornbill">
<text>The southern ground hornbill (Bucorvus leadbeateri; formerly known as &quot;Bucorvus cafer&quot;) is one of two species of ground hornbill, both of which are found solely within Africa, and is the largest species in the hornbill order worldwide. It can be found in the southern regions of Africa, ranging from Kenya to South Africa. Within these regions, they inhabit both woodlands and savannas. The other species of the genus &quot;Bucorvus&quot; is the Abyssinian ground hornbill, &quot;B. abyssinicus&quot;.

Southern ground hornbills are carnivorous and hunt mostly on the ground. Their food ranges from insects to small vertebrates. Their nests are often found in high tree cavities or other shallow cavities, such as rock holes in cliff faces. These birds are a long-lived species, having lifespans in the range of 50–60 years, and up to 70 in captivity. In relation to their long lives, they do not reach sexual maturity until 4–6 years old, and begin breeding around 10 years old. Their sex can be identified by the colour of their throats: the male&#x27;s is pure red and the female&#x27;s is a deep violet-blue.

Southern ground hornbills are a culturally pervasive and important species in southern Africa. Kruger National Park, located within South Africa, lists southern ground hornbills as one of their ‘Big Six’ bird species. However, their numbers have been declining, due in part to persecution, habitat destruction, cultural beliefs, and other factors. They are listed globally as ‘Vulnerable’ by the IUCN as of 2018, and as ‘Endangered’ in South Africa, Lesotho, Namibia and Eswatini.

==Description==

This is a large bird, at long. Females weigh , while the larger males weigh . The average weight of eight females was whilst that of eight males was ; thus they average around 35% percent heavier than any Asian hornbill species. Wingspan is from . The wing chord is , the tail from , the tarsus from and the culmen from . Stevenson and Fanshawe report that the Abyssinian ground hornbill is the larger species on average, at , than the southern species, at , but published maximum weights and standard measurements indicate the southern species is slightly larger. Average weights are not known for the Abyssinian species.

The southern ground hornbill is black with vivid red patches of bare skin on the face and throat (yellow in juvenile birds), which are believed to keep dust out of the birds&#x27; eyes while they forage during the dry season. The white tips of the wings (primary feathers) seen in flight are another diagnostic characteristic. The beak is black and slightly curved and presents a casque, more developed in males. Female southern ground hornbills are smaller and have violet-blue skin on their throats. Juveniles to six years old lack the prominent red pouch, having a duller patch of grey in its place.

==Habitat and diet==

Southern ground hornbills can be found from northern Namibia and Angola to northern South Africa and southern Zimbabwe to Burundi and Kenya. They require a savanna habitat with large trees for nesting and dense but short grass for foraging.

The southern ground hornbill is a vulnerable species, mainly confined to national reserves and national parks. They live in groups of 5 to 10 individuals including adults and juveniles. Often, neighbouring groups engage in aerial pursuits. These birds are apex predator and thus ecologically important. They forage on the ground, where they feed on reptiles, frogs, snails, insects and mammals up to the size of hares. Southern ground hornbills rarely drink. Their range is limited at its western end by the lack of trees in which to build nests.

Southern ground hornbill groups are very vocal: contact is made by calls in chorus which can usually be heard at distances of up to . The calls allow each group to maintain its territory, which must be as large as even in the best habitat.

==Breeding and life cycle==
The southern ground hornbill is an obligate cooperative breeder, with each breeding pair always assisted by at least two other birds. Experiments in captivity have found that birds without six years experience as helpers at the nest are unable to breed successfully if they do become breeders. This suggests that unaided pairs cannot rear young and that the skill gained in helping as a juvenile is essential for rearing young as an adult.

In captivity, a maximum lifespan of 70 years is recorded, and it is generally believed that the life expectancy of a bird that survives long enough to fledge is as high as thirty years or more, which is comparable to that of more famously long-lived birds like the wandering albatross.

Ground hornbills are believed to reach maturity at six to seven years, but very few breed at this age. Nests are almost always deep hollows in very old trees, though there exist reports ground hornbills have on occasions nested on rock faces. One to three eggs are laid at the beginning of the wet season, but siblicide ensures that only one nestling is ever fledged. The eggs measure by and are pure white in colour but very rough in texture.

After a 40 to 45-day incubation period and an 85-day fledging period, the young remain dependent on their parents and helpers for between one and two years depending on climatic conditions, longer than any other bird. This means that ground hornbills can normally breed successfully only every third year. Triennial breeding is rare in birds: probably the only other example is the ornate hawk-eagle of Neotropical rainforests.

==Conservation==
The southern ground hornbill is classed as vulnerable to extinction globally; however, in South Africa, where most studies on the species have been carried out, it is listed as endangered. They have also been classified as endangered in Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland. Southern ground hornbills in these countries, along with Kenya, Tanzania, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Mozambique, require conservation interventions to help increase their numbers. The bird&#x27;s classification as endangered is heavily tied to its slow reproductive rates. Habitat loss, changes due to the agriculture, deforestation, electrocution from power lines, accidental poisoning, and persecution are the major factors that affect their populations.

Persecution and hunting of the southern ground hornbill by human populations have continued to be complex issues. Recent studies have found the species has been hunted more than previously believed, including in protected areas. The majority of this hunting has likely been opportunistic. Overall, hunting is likely not a key driver for their lowering numbers. However, it is still a factor of which to be aware when considering conservation efforts, especially because of their low reproductive rates and an incomplete knowledge about local hunting habits in their natural regions. Furthermore, the southern ground hornbill faces persecution due to behaviors like destroying windows in response to seeing its reflection. Annoyed homeowners in urban areas in South Africa have been known to kill birds that destroy property.

The role of southern ground hornbills in a variety of cultural beliefs also influence conservation efforts. Some of these beliefs benefit their preservation. An example is the Ndebele, who believe killing southern ground hornbills is taboo due to their negative associations. However, the birds are also used in traditional cultural practices and medicines which can be harmful. In some marketplaces and cultures, southern ground hornbills are used in traditional medicines, which often rely upon harvesting specific parts of the bird. To date, research suggests that cultural uses do not have a significant impact on their populations. For example, the Ndebele healers use the bird for traditional medicine, but must follow a strict ritual process that could take months or years to prepare. Additional research documents plant alternatives to southern ground hornbill use for cultural belief uses. While investigation into traditional medicine trade of the southern ground hornbill has occurred, the bushmeat trade remains poorly understood, and it has only been seen to occur in areas of Malawi.

This bird species is especially threatened by the loss of trees and general habitat loss, as they require vast amounts of space for their territories. The removal of large trees for agriculture or wood harvesting, disturbances near nesting grounds, agricultural changes, all deeply affect the ability of southern ground hornbills to flourish. Due to the encroachment of human populations, it is not unheard of to see a group&#x27;s territory encompass a variety of areas, from pristine habitats to commercial agricultural lands.

Southern ground hornbills can have clutches ranging from one to three eggs, but only one of these are raised. With only one egg being raised, conservationists have taken it as an opportunity to raise the remaining eggs in captivity. Rehabilitation projects, such the Mabula Ground Hornbill Project, have been hand-rearing these extra chicks with the goal of reintroducing them to the wild, although reintroducing this species has proven challenging.

==In culture==
The southern ground hornbill&#x27;s loud voice and large size have made it a focal point in many traditional African cultures. They have inspired a variety of cultural beliefs throughout many peoples that are within its broad historical range. However, the extent of these beliefs and whether they will persist into the future are uncertain, especially due to the modernization of Africa.

=== Associations with death ===
In several cultures, the southern ground hornbill is associated with death and unluckiness. Broadly speaking, some view them as a sign, or bringer, of death, destruction, loss, and deprivation. These beliefs have been most prevalent in South Africa, Zimbabwe, and Malawi and are spread across many countries and peoples. Some residents of Burundi, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, and Mozambique associate the bird as &quot;[an] unlucky and an aggressive bird associated with evil and death.&quot; Some in Tanzania also believe it to host angry spirits. Others in Zimbabwe believe it can bring misfortune and should not be approached. This has led to a range of reactions to the southern ground hornbill, from avoidance to killing.

For example, the Taveta people have a cultural belief that killing a southern ground will bring a fatal illness upon anyone who does so. For the Ndebele people, killing them is considered taboo and will bring death upon the killer. Furthermore, the Ndebele believe an elderly person will die if a southern ground hornbill comes near the home. The AmaXhosa people also have a taboo against killing them, as they may be messengers of death sent by a witch-doctor. In Namibia if you want to become rich, witch doctor is sending you to bring him this bird which is vey rare to find.

=== Associations with weather ===
The southern ground hornbill is well known for its associations with rain, drought, lightning and general weather forecasts. It is believed by some, such as the Ndebele and those who live in coastal Tanzania, that its early morning calls are a sign of rain. Cultures such as the Xhosa believe the southern ground hornbill can be used to bring rain and end droughts.

This association has led the southern ground hornbill to be attributed with the ability to provide protection from weather-related problems. It is believed that if the proper traditional ritual is used, the bird can protect against lightning and drought. Rituals differ per culture and necessity for protection, as such a variety of parts may be needed from the bird, and may also involve dancing and singing. This particular usage has been seen within areas of South Africa and Mozambique.

Due to their association with rain and drought, some cultures rely upon the southern ground hornbill as a timekeeper as well. They can mark both seasonal and daily changes, such as a change from the wet to dry season. Slight variations are found country to country. In Malawi, some believe that sightings of southern ground hornbills means the fields should be prepared. Some in Kenya and Tanzania use the bird as a marker for the dry season and thus time when to move cattle. Within areas of South Africa, their calls are associated with the start of the rainy season. These beliefs generally do not carry harmful consequences for southern ground hornbills, but killing, displacing, or otherwise using them to end or start rainy seasons has been reported. Those that claim to rely upon it for determining the weather have blamed climate change for confused predictions, claiming it affects the hornbill&#x27;s ability to call out at the traditional time.

=== Associations with altered perceptions ===
Possibly influenced by the southern ground hornbill ability to spot and hunt small creatures within tall grass, it has been associated with the ability to alter human perceptions. Though traditional rituals, the bird can be called on to improve or change a human&#x27;s ability to alter reality, create illusions, and expand awareness. In Zimbabwe, Malawi and South Africa the bird can be used in attempts to improve a human&#x27;s ability to find food, creatures and even enemies. Furthermore, it&#x27;s believed by some that the southern ground hornbill can be used to alter the perceptions of oneself. Thus, it has lent itself to be used in rituals to provide authority for leaders in certain cultures.

Other cultural uses or beliefs include ridding one of bad or evil spirits, taking revenge on others or instigating fights, empowering a person, and causing dreams to become reality.

==Gallery==
== References ==
* 

==External links==

* (Southern) Ground Hornbill – Species text in The Atlas of Southern African Birds.
* Southern ground hornbill videos, photos &amp; sounds on Birds of the World
* Southern ground hornbill &quot;Bucorvus cafer&quot; on BirdLife.org
* Mabula Ground Hornbill Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q685074" start="4" end="28" title="Southern ground hornbill" label="southern ground hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063141" start="123" end="138" title="ground hornbill" label="ground hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="178" end="184" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20740" start="220" end="234" title="Bucerotiformes" label="hornbill order"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="310" end="315" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="319" end="331" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="387" end="394" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q480086" start="456" end="482" title="Abyssinian ground hornbill" label="Abyssinian ground hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="543" end="554" title="carnivorous" label="carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q24451" start="1219" end="1239" title="Kruger National Park" label="Kruger National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="1414" end="1433" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="1520" end="1524" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1560" end="1572" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="1574" end="1581" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="1583" end="1590" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="1595" end="1603" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="2461" end="2471" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="2510" end="2517" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="2926" end="2933" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="2938" end="2944" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2957" end="2969" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="2983" end="2991" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="2995" end="3002" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="3007" end="3012" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="3210" end="3223" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="3371" end="3384" title="apex predator" label="apex predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="3464" end="3471" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="3474" end="3478" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="3481" end="3486" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="3489" end="3495" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="3501" end="3507" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="3527" end="3531" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427332" start="3976" end="3995" title="cooperative breeder" label="cooperative breeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822044" start="4145" end="4164" title="helpers at the nest" label="helpers at the nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="4469" end="4484" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208682" start="4638" end="4657" title="wandering albatross" label="wandering albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="4954" end="4964" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q838633" start="4970" end="4979" title="siblicide" label="siblicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q602388" start="5487" end="5504" title="ornate hawk-eagle" label="ornate hawk-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="5508" end="5519" title="Neotropical" label="Neotropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5641" end="5653" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="5788" end="5795" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="5797" end="5804" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="5809" end="5818" title="Swaziland" label="Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="5877" end="5882" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="5894" end="5900" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="5902" end="5908" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="5910" end="5918" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="5924" end="5934" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="7040" end="7052" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972827" start="7283" end="7290" title="Southern Ndebele people" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972827" start="7761" end="7768" title="Southern Ndebele people" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q649978" start="8109" end="8117" title="bushmeat" label="bushmeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="8198" end="8204" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="9861" end="9873" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="9875" end="9883" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="9889" end="9895" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="9964" end="9971" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="9973" end="9978" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="9980" end="9988" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="9990" end="9996" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="10002" end="10012" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689083" start="10367" end="10380" title="Taveta people" label="Taveta people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972827" start="10495" end="10502" title="Southern Ndebele people" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972827" start="10599" end="10606" title="Southern Ndebele people" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="10697" end="10705" title="AmaXhosa" label="AmaXhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q930402" start="10798" end="10810" title="Witch doctor" label="witch-doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972827" start="11125" end="11132" title="Southern Ndebele people" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="11163" end="11171" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="11243" end="11248" title="Xhosa people" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="11793" end="11805" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="11810" end="11820" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="12092" end="12098" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="12202" end="12207" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="12212" end="12220" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12316" end="12328" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="12653" end="12667" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="13165" end="13173" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="13175" end="13181" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="13186" end="13198" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343757" wikidata="Q578464" url="?curid=343757" title="Ceratogymna">
<text>Ceratogymna is a genus of large, primarily frugivorous hornbills (family Bucerotidae) found in the humid forests of Central and West Africa. They are sexually dimorphic: males are all black, while females have brown heads and a smaller casque. Unlike the members of the genus &quot;Bycanistes&quot;, the two species in the genus &quot;Ceratogymna&quot; have extensive, primarily blue, bare facial skin and dewlap, and the only white in their plumage is in the tail (although the yellow-casqued wattled hornbill has slight whitish speckling on the neck).

==Species==


The members of the genus &quot;Bycanistes&quot; have been included in this genus, but today most authorities consider the two separate.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="17" end="22" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470764" start="43" end="54" title="frugivorous" label="frugivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="73" end="84" title="Bucerotidae" label="Bucerotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="116" end="123" title="Central Africa" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="128" end="139" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="150" end="168" title="sexually dimorphic" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="236" end="242" title=":wikt:casque" label="casque"/>
<link wikidata="Q852482" start="282" end="292" title="Bycanistes" label="Bycanistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q381530" start="406" end="412" title="dewlap" label="dewlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="442" end="449" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q852482" start="600" end="610" title="Bycanistes" label="Bycanistes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343760" wikidata="Q592521" url="?curid=343760" title="Ocyceros">
<text>Ocyceros is a genus of birds in the family Bucerotidae. Established by Allan Octavian Hume in 1873, it contains several species that are limited to the Indian subcontinent.

==Description==
Hornbills in the genus &quot;Ocyceros&quot; are small Asian birds with curved triangular bills and grey plumage. As such, they are often called &quot;grey hornbills&quot;. They have black and grey eye rings and their eyes are usually dark with black irises. All of the species have different coloured bills: the Indian grey hornbill has a dark greyish bill, the Sri Lanka grey hornbill has a pale yellowish bill, and the Malabar grey hornbill has a more yellowish orange bill.

== Species ==
The genus contains three species:
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="14" end="19" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="43" end="54" title="Bucerotidae" label="Bucerotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q455438" start="71" end="90" title="Allan Octavian Hume" label="Allan Octavian Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="152" end="171" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="440" end="446" title="Iris (anatomy)" label="irises"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="459" end="466" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q223574" start="502" end="522" title="Indian grey hornbill" label="Indian grey hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q859861" start="552" end="575" title="Sri Lanka grey hornbill" label="Sri Lanka grey hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094387" start="611" end="632" title="Malabar grey hornbill" label="Malabar grey hornbill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343761" wikidata="Q289886" url="?curid=343761" title="Étienne Marc Quatremère">
<text>Étienne Marc Quatremère (12 July 1782, Paris18 September 1857, Paris) was a French Orientalist.

== Biography ==
Born into a Jansenist family, Étienne and his mother, who knew Latin, had to go into hiding in the countryside when his father, a clothing merchant made a member of the French nobility by king Louis XV of France with the mention by the king to continue in his trading and shop keeping however, was executed in 1793 during the French Revolution. Later he studied Arabic under Silvestre de Sacy, (1758–1838), a member of the French nobility since 1813 and the son of a public notary with Jewish roots, becoming later a rector at the University of Paris, in the School of Living Oriental Languages.

Employed in 1807 in the manuscript department of the imperial library, he passed to the chair of Greek in the university of Rouen in 1809, entered the Academy of Inscriptions in 1815, taught Hebrew and Aramaic in the Collège de France from 1819, and finally in 1838 became professor of Persian in the School of Living Oriental Languages, on the death of Silvestre de Sacy.

Quatremère&#x27;s first work was &quot;Recherches ... sur la langue et la littérature de l&#x27;Egypte&quot; (1808), showing that the language of ancient Egypt must be sought in Coptic.

His &quot;Mémoires géographiques et historiques sur l&#x27;Égypte… sur quelques contrées voisines&quot; was published in 1811. This publication forced Jean-François Champollion, the famous decoder of the Rosetta Stone, to publish, prematurely, an &quot;Introduction&quot; to his &quot;L&#x27;Égypte sous les pharaons&quot;. Since both works concern the Coptic names of Egyptian towns, and Champollion&#x27;s was published later, Champollion was accused by some of plagiarism. In fact &quot;neither he nor Quatremère had copied from one another, and very obvious differences of approach were apparent in their publications&quot;.

Quatremère edited and translated part of Al-Maqrizi&#x27;s, (1364–1442), &quot;Arabic History of the Memaluke Sultans&quot; (2 vols., 1837–41), &quot;not because he had all that much interest in the history of Mamluk Egypt, but rather because he was fascinated by the vocabulary of fifteenth-century Arabic and particularly in those lexicographic nuggets that had not been defined in the standard of Arabic dictionaries&quot;.

He published among other works &quot;Mémoires sur les Nabatéens&quot; (1835); a translation of Rashid-al-Din Hamadani&#x27;s, (1247–1318), &quot;Histoire des Mongols de la Perse&quot; (1836); &quot;Mémoire géographique et historique sur l&#x27;Egypte&quot; (1810); the text of Ibn Khaldun&#x27;s (1332–1406) &quot;Prolegomena&quot;; and a vast number of useful memoirs in the &quot;Journal asiatique&quot;. His numerous reviews in the &quot;Journal des savants&quot; are also worth mention.

Quatremère made great lexicographic collections in Oriental languages, fragments of which appear in the notes to his various works. His manuscript material for Syriac was utilized in Robert Payne Smith&#x27;s &quot;Thesaurus&quot;; of the slips he collected for a projected Arabic, Persian and Turkish lexicon some account is given in the preface to Dozy, &quot;Supplément aux dictionnaires arabes&quot;. They were acquired by the Munich Court Library in 1858 and are now being held by its successor, the Bavarian State Library.

A biographical notice by Barthélemy Sainte-Hilaire is prefixed to Quatremère&#x27;s &quot;Mélanges d&#x27;histoire et de philologie orientale&quot; (1861). Quatremère&#x27;s grave is in the 32nd division of the Père Lachaise Cemetery of Paris.

== Sources ==
* Lesley &amp; Roy Adkins (2000). &quot;The Keys of Egypt&quot;. London: HarperCollins.
* Robert Graham Irwin (2006). &quot;For Lust of Knowing&quot;. London: Allen Lane.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q289886" start="0" end="23" title="Étienne Marc Quatremère" label="Étienne Marc Quatremère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287" start="125" end="134" title="Jansenism" label="Jansenist"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="176" end="181" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450700" start="282" end="297" title="French nobility" label="French nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="306" end="324" title="Louis XV of France" label="Louis XV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="439" end="456" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="475" end="481" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q507774" start="488" end="505" title="Silvestre de Sacy" label="Silvestre de Sacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="599" end="605" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="630" end="636" title="Rector (academia)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="644" end="663" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430113" start="672" end="707" title="Institut national des langues et civilisations orientales" label="School of Living Oriental Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="807" end="812" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="834" end="839" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q337526" start="861" end="884" title="Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres" label="Academy of Inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="901" end="907" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="912" end="919" title="Aramaic language" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="927" end="944" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="996" end="1003" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q507774" start="1064" end="1081" title="Silvestre de Sacy" label="Silvestre de Sacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1238" end="1243" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="1262" end="1268" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q260" start="1422" end="1447" title="Jean-François Champollion" label="Jean-François Champollion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48584" start="1475" end="1488" title="Rosetta Stone" label="Rosetta Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q293604" start="1942" end="1952" title="Al-Maqrizi" label="Al-Maqrizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="2111" end="2117" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q328782" start="2424" end="2446" title="Rashid-al-Din Hamadani" label="Rashid-al-Din Hamadani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="2606" end="2617" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q927072" start="2770" end="2789" title="Journal des sçavans" label="Journal des savants"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="2981" end="2987" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158465" start="3004" end="3022" title="Robert Payne Smith" label="Robert Payne Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3095" end="3101" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="3115" end="3122" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q708843" start="3171" end="3175" title="Reinhart Dozy" label="Dozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q256507" start="3326" end="3348" title="Bavarian State Library" label="Bavarian State Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332164" start="3376" end="3401" title="Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire" label="Barthélemy Sainte-Hilaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q534258" start="3700" end="3719" title="Robert Graham Irwin" label="Robert Graham Irwin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343763" wikidata="Q257822" url="?curid=343763" title="Penelopides">
<text>Penelopides is the genus of relatively small, primarily frugivorous hornbills restricted to forested areas of the Philippines. Their common name, tarictic hornbills, is an onomatopoetic reference to the main call of several of them. They have a ridged plate-like structure on the base of their mandible. All are sexually dimorphic: males of all species are whitish-buff and black, while females of all except the Mindoro hornbill are primarily black.

==Taxonomy==
The genus &quot;Penelopides&quot; was introduced in 1849 by the German naturalist Ludwig Reichenbach in a plate of the hornbills. The type species was subsequently designated as the Visayan hornbill (&quot;Penelopides panini&quot;) by the English zoologist George Gray. The origin of Reichenbach&#x27;s generic name is uncertain. It may be a combination of the Latin
&quot;pene&quot; meaning &quot;almost&quot; or &quot;nearly&quot;, the Ancient Greek &quot;lophos&quot; meaning &quot;crest&quot; and &quot;-oidēs&quot; &quot;resembling&quot;.

While the taxonomic history of the Sulawesi hornbill has been uneventful, the number of species in the Philippine Archipelago has been greatly debated. Traditionally, only a single Philippine species was recognized, the tarictic hornbill (&quot;P. panini&quot;). Following a review, it was recommended that it should be split into four allopatric species, the Visayan (&quot;P. panini&quot;), Luzon (&quot;P. manillae&quot;), Mindanao (&quot;P. affinis&quot;), and Mindoro (&quot;P. mindorensis&quot;). Today most authorities accept this split, although some have recommended splitting the Samar (&quot;P. samarensis&quot;) from the Mindanao.

The genus contains five species:
==References==
== Further reading ==
* Kemp, A. C. (2001). Family Bucerotidae (Hornbills). pp. 436–523 in: del Hoyo, J., Elliott, A., &amp; Sargatal, J. eds. (2001). &quot;Handbook of the Birds of the World.&quot; Vol. 6. Mousebirds to Hornbills. Lynx Edicions, Barcelona. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="19" end="24" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470764" start="56" end="67" title="frugivorous" label="frugivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="68" end="76" title="hornbill" label="hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="114" end="125" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="133" end="144" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q257822" start="146" end="164" title="Penelopides" label="tarictic hornbills"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="172" end="185" title="onomatopoetic" label="onomatopoetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="312" end="330" title="sexually dimorphic" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58053" start="547" end="565" title="Ludwig Reichenbach" label="Ludwig Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="599" end="611" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q647138" start="647" end="663" title="Visayan hornbill" label="Visayan hornbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q310456" start="722" end="733" title="George Robert Gray" label="George Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="903" end="916" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="1020" end="1029" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389438" start="1113" end="1135" title="Philippine Archipelago" label="Philippine Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q853848" start="1346" end="1356" title="allopatric" label="allopatric"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343764" wikidata="Q3359326" url="?curid=343764" title="List of cosmonauts">
<text>This is a list of [[cosmonaut]]s who have taken part in the missions of the Soviet space program and the Russian Federal Space Agency, including ethnic Russians and people of other ethnicities.

Soviet and Russian cosmonauts born outside Russia are marked with an asterisk and their place of birth is shown in an additional list.

For the full plain lists of Russian and Soviet cosmonauts in Wikipedia, see Category:Russian cosmonauts

Five female cosmonauts have flown on the Soviet/Russian program: Valentina Tereshkova, Svetlana Savitskaya, Yelena Kondakova, Yelena Serova and Anna Kikina.
==Russian and Soviet cosmonauts==

===A===
* Viktor Mikhaylovich Afanasyev — Soyuz TM-11, Soyuz TM-18, Soyuz TM-29, Soyuz TM-33/32
* Vladimir Aksyonov (1935–2024) — Soyuz 22, Soyuz T-2
* Aleksandr Pavlovich Aleksandrov — Soyuz T-9, Soyuz TM-3
* Ivan Anikeyev (1933–1992) — Expelled from Vostok program; no flights.
*Oleg Artemyev* — Soyuz TMA-12M, Soyuz MS-08, Soyuz MS-21
* Anatoly Artsebarsky* — Soyuz TM-12
* Yuri Artyukhin (1930–1998) — Soyuz 14
* Oleg Atkov — Soyuz T-10/11
* Toktar Aubakirov* — Soyuz TM-13/12
* Sergei Avdeyev — Soyuz TM-15, Soyuz TM-22

===B===

* Aleksandr Balandin — Soyuz TM-9
* Yuri Baturin — Soyuz TM-28/27, Soyuz TM-32/31
* Pavel Belyayev (1925–1970) — Voskhod 2
* Georgi Beregovoi* (1921–1995) — Soyuz 3
* Anatoly Berezovoy (1942–2014) — Soyuz T-5/7
* Valentin Bondarenko (1937–1961) — No flights.
* Andrei Borisenko — Soyuz TMA-21
* Konstantin Borisov — SpaceX Crew-7
* Nikolai Budarin — STS-71/Soyuz TM-21, Soyuz TM-27, STS-113/Soyuz TMA-1
* Valery Bykovsky (1934–2019) — Vostok 5, Soyuz 22, Soyuz 31/29
====C====
* Nikolai Chub — Soyuz MS-24/MS-25 (2023)

===D===

* Vladimir Dezhurov — Soyuz TM-21/STS-71
* Georgy Dobrovolsky* (1928–1971), Died on reentry. — Soyuz 11
* Pyotr Dubrov — Soyuz MS-18/Soyuz MS-19 (2021-22)
* Lev Dyomin (1926–1998) — Soyuz 15
* Vladimir Dzhanibekov* — Soyuz 27/26, Soyuz 39, Soyuz T-12, Soyuz T-13

===F===
* Andrey Fedyaev — SpaceX Crew-6
* Konstantin Feoktistov (1926–2009) — Voskhod 1
* Valentin Filatyev (1930–1990) — Expelled from Vostok program; no flights.
* Anatoly Filipchenko (1928–2022) — Soyuz 7, Soyuz 16

===G===
* Yuri Gagarin (1934–1968), First person in space. — Vostok 1
* Yuri Gidzenko* — Soyuz TM-22, Soyuz TM-31/STS-102, Soyuz TM-34/Soyuz TM-33
* Yuri Glazkov (1939–2008) — Soyuz 24
* Viktor Gorbatko (1934–2017) — Soyuz 7, Soyuz 24, Soyuz 37/36
* Aleksandr Gorbunov — SpaceX Crew-9
* Alexander Grebenkin — SpaceX Crew-8
* Georgi Grechko (1931–2017) — Soyuz 17, Soyuz 26/27, Soyuz T-14/13
* Aleksei Gubarev (1931–2015) — Soyuz 17, Soyuz 28

===I===
* Aleksandr Ivanchenkov — Soyuz 29/31, Soyuz T-6,
* Anatoli Ivanishin — Soyuz TMA-22, Soyuz MS-01, Soyuz MS-16,

===K===
* Aleksandr Kaleri* — Soyuz TM-14, Soyuz TM-24, Soyuz TM-30, Soyuz TMA-3, Soyuz TMA-01M
* Yevgeny Khrunov (1933–2000) — Soyuz 5/4
* Anna Kikina — SpaceX Crew-5
* Leonid Kizim* (1941–2010) — Soyuz T-3, Soyuz T-10/11, Soyuz T-15
* Pyotr Klimuk* — Soyuz 13, Soyuz 18, Soyuz 30
* Vladimir Komarov (1927–1967), Died on reentry. — Voskhod 1, Soyuz 1
* Yelena V. Kondakova — Soyuz TM-20/STS-84
* Dmitri Kondratyev — Soyuz TMA-20
* Oleg Kononenko* — Soyuz TMA-12, Soyuz TMA-03M, Soyuz TMA-17M, Soyuz MS-11, Soyuz MS-24/MS-25
* Mikhail Korniyenko — Soyuz TMA-18, Soyuz TMA-16M
*Sergey Korsakov* — Soyuz MS-21
* Valery Korzun — Soyuz TM-24, STS-111/113
* Oleg Kotov* — Soyuz TMA-10, Soyuz TMA-17, Soyuz TMA-10M
* Vladimir Kovalyonok* — Soyuz 25, Soyuz 29/31, Soyuz T-4
* Konstantin Kozeyev — Soyuz TM-33/32
* Sergei Krikalev — Soyuz TM-7, Soyuz TM-12/ Soyuz TM-13, STS-60, STS-88, Soyuz TM-31/STS-102, Soyuz TMA-6
* Valeri Kubasov (1935–2014) — Soyuz 6, Soyuz 19, Soyuz 36/35
* Sergey Kud-Sverchkov — Soyuz MS-16

===L===
* Aleksandr Laveykin — Soyuz TM-2
* Vasili Lazarev (1928–1990) — Soyuz 12, Soyuz 18a
* Aleksandr Lazutkin — Soyuz TM-25
* Valentin Lebedev — Soyuz 13, Soyuz T-5/7
* Alexei Leonov (1934–2019) — Voskhod 2 (first walk in space), Soyuz 19
* Anatoli Levchenko* (1941–1988) — Soyuz TM-4/3
* Yuri Lonchakov* — STS-100, Soyuz TMA-1/TM-34, Soyuz TMA-13
* Vladimir Lyakhov* (1941–2018) — Soyuz 32/34, Soyuz T-9, Soyuz TM-6/5

===M===
* Oleg Makarov (1933–2003) — Soyuz 12, Soyuz 18a, Soyuz 27/26, Soyuz T-3
* Yuri Malenchenko* — Soyuz TM-19, STS-106, Soyuz TMA-2, Soyuz TMA-11, Soyuz TMA-05M, Soyuz TMA-19M,
* Yury Malyshev (1941–1999) — Soyuz T-2, Soyuz T-11/10
* Gennadi Manakov (1950–2019) — Soyuz TM-10, Soyuz TM-16
* Musa Manarov* — Soyuz TM-4/6, Soyuz TM-11
*Denis Matveev — Soyuz MS-21
* Alexander Misurkin — Soyuz TMA-08M, Soyuz MS-06, Soyuz MS-20
* Boris Morukov (1950–2015) — STS-106
* Talgat Musabayev* — Soyuz TM-19, Soyuz TM-27, Soyuz TM-32/31

===N===
* Grigori Nelyubov (1934–1966) — Expelled from Vostok program, no flights.
* Andriyan Nikolayev (1929–2004) — Vostok 3, Soyuz 9
* Oleg Novitski* — Soyuz TMA-06M, Soyuz MS-03, Soyuz MS-18, Soyuz MS-25/MS-24

===O===
* Yuri Onufrienko* — Soyuz TM-23, STS-108/111
* Aleksey Ovchinin — Soyuz TMA-20M, Soyuz MS-10, Soyuz MS-12, Soyuz MS-26

===P===

* Gennady Padalka — Soyuz TM-28, Soyuz TMA-4, Soyuz TMA-14, Soyuz TMA-04M, Soyuz TMA-16M
* Viktor Patsayev* (1933–1971), Died on reentry. — Soyuz 11
* Dmitry Petelin — Soyuz MS-22/MS-23
* Oleg Platonov — 
* Aleksandr Poleshchuk — Soyuz TM-16
* Valeri Polyakov (1942–2022) — Soyuz TM-6/7, Soyuz TM-18/20
* Leonid Popov* — Soyuz 35/37, Soyuz 40, Soyuz T-7/5
* Pavel Popovich* (1930–2009) — Vostok 4, Soyuz 14
* Sergey Prokopyev — Soyuz MS-09, Soyuz MS-22/MS-23

===R===
* Sergei Revin — Soyuz TMA-04M
* Roman Romanenko — Soyuz TMA-15, Soyuz TMA-07M
* Yuri Romanenko — Soyuz 26/27, Soyuz 38, Soyuz TM-2/3
* Valery Rozhdestvensky (1939–2011) — Soyuz 23
* Nikolai Rukavishnikov (1932–2002) — Soyuz 10, Soyuz 16, Soyuz 33
* Sergei Ryazanski — Soyuz TMA-10M, Soyuz MS-05
* Valery Ryumin (1939–2022) — Soyuz 25, Soyuz 32/34, Soyuz 35/37, STS-91
* Sergei Ryzhikov — Soyuz MS-02, Soyuz MS-16

===S===
* Aleksandr Samokutyayev — Soyuz TMA-21, Soyuz TMA-14M
* Gennadi Sarafanov (1942–2005) — Soyuz 15
* Viktor Savinykh — Soyuz T-4, Soyuz T-13/14, Soyuz TM-3,
* Svetlana Savitskaya — Soyuz T-7/5, Soyuz T-12
* Aleksandr Serebrov (1944–2013) — Soyuz T-7/5, Soyuz T-8, Soyuz TM-8, Soyuz TM-17
* Yelena Serova — Soyuz TMA-14M
* Vitali Sevastyanov (1935–2010) — Soyuz 9, Soyuz 18
* Yuri Shargin — Soyuz TMA-5/4
* Salizhan Sharipov* — STS-89, Soyuz TMA-5
* Vladimir Shatalov* (1927–2021) — Soyuz 4, Soyuz 8, Soyuz 10
* Klim Shipenko — Soyuz MS-19
* Anton Shkaplerov — Soyuz TMA-22, Soyuz TMA-15M, Soyuz MS-07, Soyuz MS-19
*Georgi Shonin* (1935–1997) — Soyuz 6
* Oleg Skripochka — Soyuz TMA-01M, Soyuz TMA-20M, Soyuz MS-15
* Aleksandr Skvortsov — Soyuz TMA-18, Soyuz TMA-12M, Soyuz MS-13
* Anatoly Solovyev* — Soyuz TM-5/4, Soyuz TM-9, Soyuz TM-15, STS-71/Soyuz TM-21, Soyuz TM-26
* Vladimir Solovyov — Soyuz T-10/11, Soyuz T-15
* Gennadi Strekalov (1940–2004) — Soyuz T-3, Soyuz T-8, Soyuz T-11/10, Soyuz TM-10, Soyuz TM-21/STS-71
* Maksim Surayev — Soyuz TMA-16, Soyuz TMA-13M

===T===

* Yevgeni Tarelkin — Soyuz TMA-06M
* Valentina Tereshkova, First woman in space. — Vostok 6
* Gherman Titov (1935–2000) — Vostok 2
* Vladimir Titov — Soyuz T-8, Soyuz TM-4/6, STS-63, STS-86
* Valeri Tokarev — STS-96, Soyuz TMA-7
* Sergei Treshchov — STS-111/113
* Vasili Tsibliyev* — Soyuz TM-17, Soyuz TM-25
* Mikhail Tyurin — STS-105/108, Soyuz TMA-9, Soyuz TMA-11M

===U===
* Yuri Usachov — Soyuz TM-18, Soyuz TM-23, STS-101, STS-102/STS-105

===V===

* Vladimir Vasyutin* (1952–2002) — Soyuz T-14
* Ivan Vagner Soyuz MS-16
* Aleksandr Viktorenko* — Soyuz TM-3/2, Soyuz TM-8, Soyuz TM-14, Soyuz TM-20
* Pavel Vinogradov — Soyuz TM-26, Soyuz TMA-8, Soyuz TMA-08M
* Igor Volk* (1937–2017) — Soyuz T-12
* Alexander Volkov* — Soyuz T-14, Soyuz TM-7, Soyuz TM-13, Soyuz TM-13
* Sergei Aleksandrovich Volkov* — Soyuz TMA-12, Soyuz TMA-02M
* Vladislav Volkov (1935–1971), Died on reentry. — Soyuz 7, Soyuz 11
* Boris Volynov — Soyuz 5, Soyuz 21
* Sergei Vozovikov (1958–1993), drowned during survival training program — No flights.

===Y===

* Boris Yegorov (1937–1994) — Voskhod 1
* Aleksei Yeliseyev — Soyuz 5/4, Soyuz 8, Soyuz 10
* Fyodor Yurchikhin* — STS-112, Soyuz TMA-10, Soyuz TMA-19, Soyuz TMA-09M, Soyuz MS-04

===Z===
* Dmitri Zaikin (1932–2013) — No flights.
* Sergei Zalyotin — Soyuz TM-30, Soyuz TMA-1/TM-34
* Vitali Zholobov* — Soyuz 21
* Vyacheslav Zudov — Soyuz 23

==Eastern Bloc cosmonauts==
From 1978–1988, the Soviet Union transported 11 citizens of 10 nations closely allied to the USSR in the Soyuz crewed vehicle. All of them flew as a result of the Interkosmos program. These space travelers have usually been referred to as &quot;cosmonauts&quot;.

* Afghanistan: Abdul Ahad Mohmand — Soyuz TM-6/5
* Bulgaria:
** Aleksandar Panayotov Aleksandrov — Soyuz TM-5/4
** Georgi Ivanov — Soyuz 33
* Cuba: Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez — Soyuz 38
* Czechoslovakia: Vladimír Remek — Soyuz 28
* East Germany: Sigmund Jähn (1937–2019) — Soyuz 31/29
* Hungary: Bertalan Farkas — Soyuz 36/35
* Mongolia: Jügderdemidiin Gürragchaa — Soyuz 39
* Poland: Mirosław Hermaszewski (1941–2022)— Soyuz 30
* Romania: Dumitru Prunariu — Soyuz 40
* Vietnam: Phạm Tuân — Soyuz 37/36

==Other cosmonauts==
In 1982, as an extension of the Intercosmos program, the Soviet Union began to fly the citizens of countries not part of the Soviet bloc, starting with Jean-Loup Chrétien of France. The USSR and later Russia have transported 49 citizens of 18 other nations on the Soyuz vehicle, usually as part of a commercial arrangement, including seven space tourists flying through the Space Adventures contract. Since 2001, the Soyuz has been used to transport ESA, JAXA, and NASA astronauts to the International Space Station. These space travelers are not always referred to as &quot;cosmonauts&quot;, especially if they belong to another space program; e.g., NASA employees are almost always referred to as &quot;astronauts&quot;, even if they are flying on a Russian vehicle.

===Africa===
* South Africa: &quot;Mark Shuttleworth&quot; (Space Adventures) — Soyuz TM-34/33

===Americas===
* Brazil: Marcos Pontes — Soyuz TMA-8
* Canada:
** &quot;Guy Laliberté&quot; (Space Adventures) — Soyuz TMA-16/14
** Chris Hadfield — Soyuz TMA-07M
** Robert Thirsk — Soyuz TMA-15
* United States:
** Joseph M. Acaba — Soyuz TMA-04M
** &quot;Anousheh Ansari&quot;* (Space Adventures) — Soyuz TMA-9/8
** Michael R. Barratt — Soyuz TMA-14
** Ken Bowersox — Soyuz TMA-1 (landing only)
** Daniel C. Burbank — Soyuz TMA-22
** Leroy Chiao — Soyuz TMA-5
** Timothy Creamer — Soyuz TMA-17
** Tracy Caldwell Dyson — Soyuz TMA-18
** Catherine Coleman — Soyuz TMA-20
** Michael Fincke — Soyuz TMA-4, Soyuz TMA-13
** Michael Foale* — Soyuz TMA-3
** Kevin A. Ford — Soyuz TMA-06M
** Michael E. Fossum — Soyuz TMA-02M
** Ronald J. Garan, Jr. — Soyuz TMA-21
** &quot;Richard Garriott&quot;* (Space Adventures) — Soyuz TMA-13/12
** Michael S. Hopkins — Soyuz TMA-10M
** Scott Kelly — Soyuz TMA-01M, Soyuz TMA-16M
** Kjell N. Lindgren — Soyuz TMA-17M
** Michael Lopez-Alegria* — Soyuz TMA-9
** Ed Lu — Soyuz TMA-2
** Thomas Marshburn — Soyuz TMA-07M
** Richard Mastracchio — Soyuz TMA-11M
** William S. McArthur — Soyuz TMA-7
** Karen Nyberg — Soyuz TMA-09M
** &quot;Gregory Olsen&quot; (Space Adventures) — Soyuz TMA-7/6
** Donald Pettit — Soyuz TMA-1 (landing only), Soyuz TMA-03M
** John L. Phillips — Soyuz TMA-6
** William Shepherd — Soyuz TM-31 (launch only)
** &quot;Charles Simonyi&quot;* (Space Adventures) — Soyuz TMA-10/9, Soyuz TMA-14/13
** Norman Thagard — Soyuz TM-21 (launch only)
** &quot;Dennis Tito&quot; (Space Adventures) — Soyuz TM-32/31
** Terry W. Virts — Soyuz TMA-15M
** Shannon Walker — Soyuz TMA-19
** Douglas H. Wheelock — Soyuz TMA-19
** Peggy Whitson — Soyuz TMA-11
** Jeffrey Williams — Soyuz TMA-8, Soyuz TMA-16
** Sunita Williams — Soyuz TMA-05M
** Barry E. Wilmore — Soyuz TMA-14M
** Gregory R. Wiseman — Soyuz TMA-13M

===Asia===
* India: Rakesh Sharma (Intercosmos) — Soyuz T-11/10
* Japan:
** &quot;Toyohiro Akiyama&quot; — Soyuz TM-11/10
** Akihiko Hoshide — Soyuz TMA-05M
** Soichi Noguchi — Soyuz TMA-17
** Satoshi Furukawa — Soyuz TMA-02M
** Koichi Wakata — Soyuz TMA-11M
** Kimiya Yui — Soyuz TMA-17M
* Malaysia: Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor — Soyuz TMA-11/10
* South Korea: Yi So-yeon — Soyuz TMA-12/11
* Syria: Muhammed Faris (Intercosmos) — Soyuz TM-3/2

===Europe===
* Austria: Franz Viehböck — Soyuz TM-13/12
* Belgium: Frank De Winne, EAC — Soyuz TMA-1/TM-34, Soyuz TMA-15
* France:
** Jean-Loup Chrétien, CNES (Intercosmos) — Soyuz T-6, Soyuz TM-7/6
** Léopold Eyharts, EAC — Soyuz TM-27/26
** Claudie André-Deshays Haigneré, EAC — Soyuz TM-24/23, Soyuz TM-33/32
** Jean-Pierre Haigneré, EAC — Soyuz TM-17/16, Soyuz TM-29
** Michel Tognini, EAC — Soyuz TM-15/14
* Germany:
** Reinhold Ewald, EAC — Soyuz TM-25/24
** Klaus-Dietrich Flade — Soyuz TM-14/13
** Alexander Gerst — Soyuz TMA-13M
** Ulf Merbold, EAC — Soyuz TM-20/19
** Thomas Reiter, EAC — Soyuz TM-22
* Italy:
** Samantha Cristoforetti, EAC — Soyuz TMA-15M
** Roberto Vittori, EAC — Soyuz TM-34/33, Soyuz TMA-6/5
** Paolo Nespoli, EAC — Soyuz TMA-20
** Luca Parmitano, EAC — Soyuz TMA-09M
* The Netherlands: André Kuipers, EAC — Soyuz TMA-4/3, Soyuz TMA-03M
* Slovakia: Ivan Bella — Soyuz TM-29/28
* Spain: Pedro Duque, EAC — Soyuz TMA-3/2
* United Kingdom: 
** &quot;Helen Sharman&quot; — Soyuz TM-12/11
** Timothy Peake, EAC — Soyuz TMA-19M

==Soviet and Russian cosmonauts born outside Russia==
All Soviet and RKA cosmonauts have been born within the borders of the U.S.S.R.; no cosmonaut who was born in independent Russia has yet flown. Many cosmonauts, however, were born in Soviet territories outside the boundaries of Russia, and may be claimed by various Soviet successor states as nationals of those states. All claimed Soviet or Russian citizenship at the time of their space flights.

=== Azerbaidzhan S.S.R. / Azerbaijan ===

* Musa Manarov, born in Baku, Azerbaijan 

=== Byelorussian S.S.R. / Belarus ===

* Pyotr Klimuk, born in Komarovka, Belarus 
* Vladimir Kovalyonok, born in Beloye, Belarus 
* Oleg Novitski, born in Chervyen&#x27;, Belarus 

=== Georgian S.S.R. / Georgia ===

* Fyodor Yurchikhin, born in Batumi, Georgia 

===Kazakh S.S.R. / Kazakhstan ===

* Toktar Aubakirov, born in Karaganda, Kazakhstan 
* Yuri Lonchakov, born in Balkhash, Kazakhstan 
* Talgat Musabayev, born in Kargaly, Kazakhstan 
* Viktor Patsayev (1933—1971), born in Aktyubinsk, Kazakhstan 
* Dmitry Petelin, born in Kustanai, Kazakhstan
* Vladimir Shatalov (1927—2021), born in Petropavlovsk, Kazakhstan 
* Aleksandr Viktorenko, born in Olginka, Kazakhstan 

=== Kirghiz S.S.R. / Kyrgyzstan ===

* Salizhan Sharipov, born in Uzgen, Kyrgyzstan 
*Sergey Korsakov, born in Krunze, Kyrgyzstan 

=== Latvian S.S.R. / Latvia ===

* Aleksandr Kaleri, born in Jūrmala, Latvia 
* Anatoly Solovyev, born in Riga, Latvia 
* Oleg Artemyev, born in Riga, Latvia 

=== Turkmen S.S.R. / Turkmenistan ===

* Oleg Kononenko, born in Chardzhou, Turkmenistan 

=== Ukrainian S.S.R. / Ukraine ===

* Anatoly Artsebarsky, born in Prosyana, Ukraine 
* Georgi Beregovoi (1921-1995), born in Federivka, Ukraine 
* Georgiy Dobrovolskiy (1928-1971), born in Odessa, Ukraine 
* Yuri Gidzenko, born in Yelanets, Ukraine 
* Leonid Kizim (1941-2010), born in Krasnyi Lyman, Ukraine 
* Oleg Kotov, born in Simferopol, Ukraine 
* Anatoli Levchenko (1941-1988), born in Krasnokutsk, Ukraine 
* Vladimir Lyakhov (1941-2018), born in Antratsyt, Ukraine 
* Yuri Malenchenko, born in Svitlovodsk, Ukraine 
* Yuri Onufriyenko, born in Ryasne, Ukraine 
* Leonid Popov, born in Oleksandriia, Ukraine 
* Pavel Popovich (1930-2009), born in Uzyn, Ukraine. 
* Georgi Shonin (1935-1997), born in Rovenky, Ukraine 
* Vasili Tsibliyev, born in Horikhivka, Ukraine 
* Vladimir Vasyutin (1952-2002), born in Kharkiv, Ukraine 
* Igor Volk (1937-2017), born in Zmiiv, Ukraine 
* Aleksandr Volkov, born in Horlivka, Ukraine 
* Sergei Aleksandrovich Volkov, born in Chuhuiv, Ukraine 
* Vitali Zholobov, born in Zburyivka, Ukraine 

===Uzbek S.S.R. / Uzbekistan ===

* Vladimir Dzhanibekov, born in Iskandar, Uzbekistan 

==See also==
* List of Russian aviators
* List of Russian explorers
* List of Russian inventors
* List of Soviet human spaceflight missions
* List of Russian human spaceflight missions

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3359326" start="10" end="32" title="List of cosmonauts" label="list of [[cosmonaut]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="76" end="96" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="105" end="133" title="Russian Federal Space Agency" label="Russian Federal Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="152" end="160" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190212" start="264" end="272" title="asterisk" label="asterisk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="310" end="328" title="#Soviet and Russian cosmonauts born outside Russia" label="an additional list"/>
<link wikidata="" start="407" end="434" title=":Category:Russian cosmonauts" label="Category:Russian cosmonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352451" start="580" end="591" title="Anna Kikina" label="Anna Kikina"/>
<link wikidata="Q471486" start="638" end="667" title="Viktor Mikhaylovich Afanasyev" label="Viktor Mikhaylovich Afanasyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q577280" start="670" end="681" title="Soyuz TM-11" label="Soyuz TM-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q645825" start="683" end="694" title="Soyuz TM-18" label="Soyuz TM-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051236" start="696" end="707" title="Soyuz TM-29" label="Soyuz TM-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753202" start="709" end="720" title="Soyuz TM-33" label="Soyuz TM-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424029" start="721" end="723" title="Soyuz TM-32" label="32"/>
<link wikidata="Q468250" start="726" end="743" title="Vladimir Aksyonov" label="Vladimir Aksyonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q285802" start="758" end="766" title="Soyuz 22" label="Soyuz 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q690951" start="768" end="777" title="Soyuz T-2" label="Soyuz T-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q466483" start="780" end="811" title="Aleksandr Pavlovich Aleksandrov" label="Aleksandr Pavlovich Aleksandrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q633696" start="814" end="823" title="Soyuz T-9" label="Soyuz T-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q847619" start="825" end="835" title="Soyuz TM-3" label="Soyuz TM-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624210" start="838" end="851" title="Ivan Anikeyev" label="Ivan Anikeyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086024" start="909" end="922" title="Oleg Artemyev" label="Oleg Artemyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q339244" start="926" end="939" title="Soyuz TMA-12M" label="Soyuz TMA-12M"/>
<link wikidata="Q21395453" start="941" end="952" title="Soyuz MS-08" label="Soyuz MS-08"/>
<link wikidata="Q100375849" start="954" end="965" title="Soyuz MS-21" label="Soyuz MS-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q487984" start="968" end="987" title="Anatoly Artsebarsky" label="Anatoly Artsebarsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q677528" start="991" end="1002" title="Soyuz TM-12" label="Soyuz TM-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q451259" start="1005" end="1019" title="Yuri Artyukhin" label="Yuri Artyukhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q545595" start="1034" end="1042" title="Soyuz 14" label="Soyuz 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q708484" start="1045" end="1055" title="Oleg Atkov" label="Oleg Atkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q383601" start="1058" end="1068" title="Soyuz T-10" label="Soyuz T-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="1069" end="1071" title="Soyuz T-11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q468258" start="1074" end="1090" title="Toktar Aubakirov" label="Toktar Aubakirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q677519" start="1094" end="1105" title="Soyuz TM-13" label="Soyuz TM-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q677528" start="1106" end="1108" title="Soyuz TM-12" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q453764" start="1111" end="1125" title="Sergei Avdeyev" label="Sergei Avdeyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540622" start="1128" end="1139" title="Soyuz TM-15" label="Soyuz TM-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q700729" start="1141" end="1152" title="Soyuz TM-22" label="Soyuz TM-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q725659" start="1165" end="1183" title="Aleksandr Nikolayevich Balandin" label="Aleksandr Balandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475435" start="1186" end="1196" title="Soyuz TM-9" label="Soyuz TM-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q520760" start="1199" end="1211" title="Yuri Baturin" label="Yuri Baturin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072785" start="1214" end="1225" title="Soyuz TM-28" label="Soyuz TM-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q643774" start="1226" end="1228" title="Soyuz TM-27" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424029" start="1230" end="1241" title="Soyuz TM-32" label="Soyuz TM-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423493" start="1242" end="1244" title="Soyuz TM-31" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q157931" start="1247" end="1261" title="Pavel Belyayev" label="Pavel Belyayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q722791" start="1276" end="1285" title="Voskhod 2" label="Voskhod 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q364451" start="1288" end="1304" title="Georgi Beregovoi" label="Georgi Beregovoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q619811" start="1320" end="1327" title="Soyuz 3" label="Soyuz 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q465724" start="1330" end="1347" title="Anatoly Berezovoy" label="Anatoly Berezovoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q914983" start="1362" end="1371" title="Soyuz T-5" label="Soyuz T-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q653395" start="1372" end="1373" title="Soyuz T-7" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q538639" start="1376" end="1395" title="Valentin Bondarenko" label="Valentin Bondarenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q502101" start="1424" end="1440" title="Andrei Borisenko" label="Andrei Borisenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q257079" start="1443" end="1455" title="Soyuz TMA-21" label="Soyuz TMA-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q109493060" start="1458" end="1476" title="Konstantin Borisov" label="Konstantin Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q110831308" start="1479" end="1492" title="SpaceX Crew-7" label="SpaceX Crew-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q641389" start="1495" end="1510" title="Nikolai Budarin" label="Nikolai Budarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q633907" start="1513" end="1519" title="STS-71" label="STS-71"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424853" start="1520" end="1531" title="Soyuz TM-21" label="Soyuz TM-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q643774" start="1533" end="1544" title="Soyuz TM-27" label="Soyuz TM-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135865" start="1546" end="1553" title="STS-113" label="STS-113"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423640" start="1554" end="1565" title="Soyuz TMA-1" label="Soyuz TMA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q159681" start="1568" end="1583" title="Valery Bykovsky" label="Valery Bykovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q257797" start="1598" end="1606" title="Vostok 5" label="Vostok 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q285802" start="1608" end="1616" title="Soyuz 22" label="Soyuz 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q916974" start="1618" end="1626" title="Soyuz 31" label="Soyuz 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q915385" start="1627" end="1629" title="Soyuz 29" label="29"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379072" start="1642" end="1654" title="Nikolai Chub" label="Nikolai Chub"/>
<link wikidata="Q110622389" start="1657" end="1668" title="Soyuz MS-24" label="Soyuz MS-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q116178269" start="1669" end="1674" title="Soyuz MS-25" label="MS-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q535831" start="1694" end="1711" title="Vladimir Dezhurov" label="Vladimir Dezhurov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424853" start="1714" end="1725" title="Soyuz TM-21" label="Soyuz TM-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q633907" start="1726" end="1732" title="STS-71" label="STS-71"/>
<link wikidata="Q355433" start="1735" end="1753" title="Georgy Dobrovolsky" label="Georgy Dobrovolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q648581" start="1787" end="1795" title="Soyuz 11" label="Soyuz 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q85859878" start="1798" end="1810" title="Pyotr Dubrov" label="Pyotr Dubrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q69637833" start="1813" end="1824" title="Soyuz MS-18" label="Soyuz MS-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q86675323" start="1825" end="1836" title="Soyuz MS-19" label="Soyuz MS-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q450834" start="1849" end="1859" title="Lev Dyomin" label="Lev Dyomin"/>
<link wikidata="Q836053" start="1874" end="1882" title="Soyuz 15" label="Soyuz 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q466513" start="1885" end="1905" title="Vladimir Dzhanibekov" label="Vladimir Dzhanibekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q734249" start="1909" end="1917" title="Soyuz 27" label="Soyuz 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q847024" start="1918" end="1920" title="Soyuz 26" label="26"/>
<link wikidata="Q241736" start="1922" end="1930" title="Soyuz 39" label="Soyuz 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q787254" start="1932" end="1942" title="Soyuz T-12" label="Soyuz T-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q903412" start="1944" end="1954" title="Soyuz T-13" label="Soyuz T-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q85867505" start="1966" end="1980" title="Andrey Fedyaev" label="Andrey Fedyaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q110156739" start="1983" end="1996" title="SpaceX Crew-6" label="SpaceX Crew-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q320068" start="1999" end="2020" title="Konstantin Feoktistov" label="Konstantin Feoktistov"/>
<link wikidata="Q750101" start="2035" end="2044" title="Voskhod 1" label="Voskhod 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361286" start="2047" end="2064" title="Valentin Filatyev" label="Valentin Filatyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q488043" start="2123" end="2142" title="Anatoly Filipchenko" label="Anatoly Filipchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q753539" start="2157" end="2164" title="Soyuz 7" label="Soyuz 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q847013" start="2166" end="2174" title="Soyuz 16" label="Soyuz 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="2186" end="2198" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182524" start="2237" end="2245" title="Vostok 1" label="Vostok 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q448491" start="2248" end="2261" title="Yuri Gidzenko" label="Yuri Gidzenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q700729" start="2265" end="2276" title="Soyuz TM-22" label="Soyuz TM-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423493" start="2278" end="2289" title="Soyuz TM-31" label="Soyuz TM-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q384250" start="2290" end="2297" title="STS-102" label="STS-102"/>
<link wikidata="Q921112" start="2299" end="2310" title="Soyuz TM-34" label="Soyuz TM-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753202" start="2311" end="2322" title="Soyuz TM-33" label="Soyuz TM-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q465461" start="2325" end="2337" title="Yuri Glazkov" label="Yuri Glazkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q903796" start="2352" end="2360" title="Soyuz 24" label="Soyuz 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q348205" start="2363" end="2378" title="Viktor Gorbatko" label="Viktor Gorbatko"/>
<link wikidata="Q753539" start="2393" end="2400" title="Soyuz 7" label="Soyuz 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q903796" start="2402" end="2410" title="Soyuz 24" label="Soyuz 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q847126" start="2412" end="2420" title="Soyuz 37" label="Soyuz 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q683815" start="2421" end="2423" title="Soyuz 36" label="36"/>
<link wikidata="Q109493064" start="2426" end="2444" title="Aleksandr Gorbunov" label="Aleksandr Gorbunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q115651848" start="2447" end="2460" title="SpaceX Crew-9" label="SpaceX Crew-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q109490394" start="2463" end="2482" title="Alexander Grebenkin" label="Alexander Grebenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q115651849" start="2485" end="2498" title="SpaceX Crew-8" label="SpaceX Crew-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q434555" start="2501" end="2515" title="Georgi Grechko" label="Georgi Grechko"/>
<link wikidata="Q531246" start="2530" end="2538" title="Soyuz 17" label="Soyuz 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q847024" start="2540" end="2548" title="Soyuz 26" label="Soyuz 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q734249" start="2549" end="2551" title="Soyuz 27" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q144502" start="2553" end="2563" title="Soyuz T-14" label="Soyuz T-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q903412" start="2564" end="2566" title="Soyuz T-13" label="13"/>
<link wikidata="Q465748" start="2569" end="2584" title="Aleksei Gubarev" label="Aleksei Gubarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q531246" start="2599" end="2607" title="Soyuz 17" label="Soyuz 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q617708" start="2609" end="2617" title="Soyuz 28" label="Soyuz 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q446531" start="2629" end="2650" title="Aleksandr Ivanchenkov" label="Aleksandr Ivanchenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q915385" start="2653" end="2661" title="Soyuz 29" label="Soyuz 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q916974" start="2662" end="2664" title="Soyuz 31" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q739906" start="2666" end="2675" title="Soyuz T-6" label="Soyuz T-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q487622" start="2679" end="2696" title="Anatoli Ivanishin" label="Anatoli Ivanishin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137089" start="2699" end="2711" title="Soyuz TMA-22" label="Soyuz TMA-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q15971488" start="2713" end="2724" title="Soyuz MS-01" label="Soyuz MS-01"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633640" start="2726" end="2737" title="Soyuz MS-16" label="Soyuz MS-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q345288" start="2750" end="2766" title="Aleksandr Kaleri" label="Aleksandr Kaleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q611541" start="2770" end="2781" title="Soyuz TM-14" label="Soyuz TM-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q533568" start="2783" end="2794" title="Soyuz TM-24" label="Soyuz TM-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q509490" start="2796" end="2807" title="Soyuz TM-30" label="Soyuz TM-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424715" start="2809" end="2820" title="Soyuz TMA-3" label="Soyuz TMA-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q518760" start="2822" end="2835" title="Soyuz TMA-01M" label="Soyuz TMA-01M"/>
<link wikidata="Q455669" start="2838" end="2853" title="Yevgeny Khrunov" label="Yevgeny Khrunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q748593" start="2868" end="2875" title="Soyuz 5" label="Soyuz 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q619807" start="2876" end="2877" title="Soyuz 4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352451" start="2880" end="2891" title="Anna Kikina" label="Anna Kikina"/>
<link wikidata="Q108817462" start="2894" end="2907" title="SpaceX Crew-5" label="SpaceX Crew-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q360060" start="2910" end="2922" title="Leonid Kizim" label="Leonid Kizim"/>
<link wikidata="Q915432" start="2938" end="2947" title="Soyuz T-3" label="Soyuz T-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q383601" start="2949" end="2959" title="Soyuz T-10" label="Soyuz T-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="2960" end="2962" title="Soyuz T-11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q841796" start="2964" end="2974" title="Soyuz T-15" label="Soyuz T-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q434546" start="2977" end="2989" title="Pyotr Klimuk" label="Pyotr Klimuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q841182" start="2993" end="3001" title="Soyuz 13" label="Soyuz 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q682890" start="3003" end="3011" title="Soyuz 18" label="Soyuz 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q847719" start="3013" end="3021" title="Soyuz 30" label="Soyuz 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865" start="3024" end="3040" title="Vladimir Mikhaylovich Komarov" label="Vladimir Komarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q750101" start="3073" end="3082" title="Voskhod 1" label="Voskhod 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q211254" start="3084" end="3091" title="Soyuz 1" label="Soyuz 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q255764" start="3094" end="3113" title="Yelena Kondakova" label="Yelena V. Kondakova"/>
<link wikidata="Q700126" start="3116" end="3127" title="Soyuz TM-20" label="Soyuz TM-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q370277" start="3128" end="3134" title="STS-84" label="STS-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q722142" start="3137" end="3154" title="Dmitri Kondratyev" label="Dmitri Kondratyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q857030" start="3157" end="3169" title="Soyuz TMA-20" label="Soyuz TMA-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q375659" start="3172" end="3186" title="Oleg Kononenko" label="Oleg Kononenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q493983" start="3190" end="3202" title="Soyuz TMA-12" label="Soyuz TMA-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138999" start="3204" end="3217" title="Soyuz TMA-03M" label="Soyuz TMA-03M"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308431" start="3219" end="3232" title="Soyuz TMA-17M" label="Soyuz TMA-17M"/>
<link wikidata="Q28666067" start="3234" end="3245" title="Soyuz MS-11" label="Soyuz MS-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q110622389" start="3247" end="3258" title="Soyuz MS-24" label="Soyuz MS-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q116178269" start="3259" end="3264" title="Soyuz MS-25" label="MS-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q520334" start="3267" end="3285" title="Mikhail Korniyenko" label="Mikhail Korniyenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q857018" start="3288" end="3300" title="Soyuz TMA-18" label="Soyuz TMA-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298031" start="3302" end="3315" title="Soyuz TMA-16M" label="Soyuz TMA-16M"/>
<link wikidata="Q85861593" start="3317" end="3332" title="Sergey Korsakov (cosmonaut)" label="Sergey Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q100375849" start="3336" end="3347" title="Soyuz MS-21" label="Soyuz MS-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q709634" start="3350" end="3363" title="Valery Korzun" label="Valery Korzun"/>
<link wikidata="Q533568" start="3366" end="3377" title="Soyuz TM-24" label="Soyuz TM-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090911" start="3379" end="3386" title="STS-111" label="STS-111"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135865" start="3387" end="3390" title="STS-113" label="113"/>
<link wikidata="Q342338" start="3393" end="3403" title="Oleg Kotov" label="Oleg Kotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q507375" start="3407" end="3419" title="Soyuz TMA-10" label="Soyuz TMA-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q728886" start="3421" end="3433" title="Soyuz TMA-17" label="Soyuz TMA-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887840" start="3435" end="3448" title="Soyuz TMA-10M" label="Soyuz TMA-10M"/>
<link wikidata="Q314921" start="3451" end="3470" title="Vladimir Kovalyonok" label="Vladimir Kovalyonok"/>
<link wikidata="Q846547" start="3474" end="3482" title="Soyuz 25" label="Soyuz 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q915385" start="3484" end="3492" title="Soyuz 29" label="Soyuz 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q916974" start="3493" end="3495" title="Soyuz 31" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q676306" start="3497" end="3506" title="Soyuz T-4" label="Soyuz T-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q535234" start="3509" end="3527" title="Konstantin Kozeyev" label="Konstantin Kozeyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753202" start="3530" end="3541" title="Soyuz TM-33" label="Soyuz TM-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424029" start="3542" end="3544" title="Soyuz TM-32" label="32"/>
<link wikidata="Q313815" start="3547" end="3562" title="Sergei Krikalev" label="Sergei Krikalev"/>
<link wikidata="Q767583" start="3565" end="3575" title="Soyuz TM-7" label="Soyuz TM-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q677528" start="3577" end="3588" title="Soyuz TM-12" label="Soyuz TM-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q677519" start="3590" end="3601" title="Soyuz TM-13" label="Soyuz TM-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q844966" start="3603" end="3609" title="STS-60" label="STS-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q717831" start="3611" end="3617" title="STS-88" label="STS-88"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423493" start="3619" end="3630" title="Soyuz TM-31" label="Soyuz TM-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q384250" start="3631" end="3638" title="STS-102" label="STS-102"/>
<link wikidata="Q647619" start="3640" end="3651" title="Soyuz TMA-6" label="Soyuz TMA-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q432752" start="3654" end="3668" title="Valeri Kubasov" label="Valeri Kubasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q753542" start="3683" end="3690" title="Soyuz 6" label="Soyuz 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q208759" start="3692" end="3700" title="Soyuz 19" label="Soyuz 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q683815" start="3702" end="3710" title="Soyuz 36" label="Soyuz 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q735920" start="3711" end="3713" title="Soyuz 35" label="35"/>
<link wikidata="Q26776784" start="3716" end="3736" title="Sergey Kud-Sverchkov" label="Sergey Kud-Sverchkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633640" start="3739" end="3750" title="Soyuz MS-16" label="Soyuz MS-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q708452" start="3762" end="3780" title="Aleksandr Laveykin" label="Aleksandr Laveykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q738200" start="3783" end="3793" title="Soyuz TM-2" label="Soyuz TM-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q365317" start="3796" end="3810" title="Vasili Lazarev" label="Vasili Lazarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q543643" start="3825" end="3833" title="Soyuz 12" label="Soyuz 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q902812" start="3835" end="3844" title="Soyuz 18a" label="Soyuz 18a"/>
<link wikidata="Q620632" start="3847" end="3865" title="Aleksandr Lazutkin" label="Aleksandr Lazutkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q516698" start="3868" end="3879" title="Soyuz TM-25" label="Soyuz TM-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q535157" start="3882" end="3898" title="Valentin Lebedev" label="Valentin Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q841182" start="3901" end="3909" title="Soyuz 13" label="Soyuz 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q914983" start="3911" end="3920" title="Soyuz T-5" label="Soyuz T-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q653395" start="3921" end="3922" title="Soyuz T-7" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q154269" start="3925" end="3938" title="Alexei Leonov" label="Alexei Leonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q722791" start="3953" end="3962" title="Voskhod 2" label="Voskhod 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q208759" start="3986" end="3994" title="Soyuz 19" label="Soyuz 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q488008" start="3997" end="4014" title="Anatoli Levchenko" label="Anatoli Levchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q904285" start="4030" end="4040" title="Soyuz TM-4" label="Soyuz TM-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q847619" start="4041" end="4042" title="Soyuz TM-3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q539358" start="4045" end="4059" title="Yuri Lonchakov" label="Yuri Lonchakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q860236" start="4063" end="4070" title="STS-100" label="STS-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423640" start="4072" end="4083" title="Soyuz TMA-1" label="Soyuz TMA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q921112" start="4084" end="4089" title="Soyuz TM-34" label="TM-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q757035" start="4091" end="4103" title="Soyuz TMA-13" label="Soyuz TMA-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q449577" start="4106" end="4122" title="Vladimir Lyakhov" label="Vladimir Lyakhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q915362" start="4138" end="4146" title="Soyuz 32" label="Soyuz 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q734847" start="4147" end="4149" title="Soyuz 34" label="34"/>
<link wikidata="Q633696" start="4151" end="4160" title="Soyuz T-9" label="Soyuz T-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q238773" start="4162" end="4172" title="Soyuz TM-6" label="Soyuz TM-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q261401" start="4173" end="4174" title="Soyuz TM-5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q467623" start="4186" end="4198" title="Oleg Grigoryevich Makarov" label="Oleg Makarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q543643" start="4213" end="4221" title="Soyuz 12" label="Soyuz 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q902812" start="4223" end="4232" title="Soyuz 18a" label="Soyuz 18a"/>
<link wikidata="Q734249" start="4234" end="4242" title="Soyuz 27" label="Soyuz 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q847024" start="4243" end="4245" title="Soyuz 26" label="26"/>
<link wikidata="Q915432" start="4247" end="4256" title="Soyuz T-3" label="Soyuz T-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q342953" start="4259" end="4275" title="Yuri Malenchenko" label="Yuri Malenchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q700718" start="4279" end="4290" title="Soyuz TM-19" label="Soyuz TM-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q261856" start="4292" end="4299" title="STS-106" label="STS-106"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424721" start="4301" end="4312" title="Soyuz TMA-2" label="Soyuz TMA-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q562173" start="4314" end="4326" title="Soyuz TMA-11" label="Soyuz TMA-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q796537" start="4328" end="4341" title="Soyuz TMA-05M" label="Soyuz TMA-05M"/>
<link wikidata="Q14288150" start="4343" end="4356" title="Soyuz TMA-19M" label="Soyuz TMA-19M"/>
<link wikidata="Q535280" start="4360" end="4373" title="Yury Malyshev (cosmonaut)" label="Yury Malyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q690951" start="4388" end="4397" title="Soyuz T-2" label="Soyuz T-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="4399" end="4409" title="Soyuz T-11" label="Soyuz T-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q383601" start="4410" end="4412" title="Soyuz T-10" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q956160" start="4415" end="4430" title="Gennadi Manakov" label="Gennadi Manakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q367014" start="4445" end="4456" title="Soyuz TM-10" label="Soyuz TM-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540599" start="4458" end="4469" title="Soyuz TM-16" label="Soyuz TM-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q467732" start="4472" end="4484" title="Musa Manarov" label="Musa Manarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q904285" start="4488" end="4498" title="Soyuz TM-4" label="Soyuz TM-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q238773" start="4499" end="4500" title="Soyuz TM-6" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q577280" start="4502" end="4513" title="Soyuz TM-11" label="Soyuz TM-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q21106378" start="4515" end="4528" title="Denis Matveev" label="Denis Matveev"/>
<link wikidata="Q100375849" start="4531" end="4542" title="Soyuz MS-21" label="Soyuz MS-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655329" start="4545" end="4563" title="Alexander Misurkin" label="Alexander Misurkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773494" start="4566" end="4579" title="Soyuz TMA-08M" label="Soyuz TMA-08M"/>
<link wikidata="Q20980629" start="4581" end="4592" title="Soyuz MS-06" label="Soyuz MS-06"/>
<link wikidata="Q95977777" start="4594" end="4605" title="Soyuz MS-20" label="Soyuz MS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q281604" start="4608" end="4621" title="Boris Morukov" label="Boris Morukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q261856" start="4636" end="4643" title="STS-106" label="STS-106"/>
<link wikidata="Q560360" start="4646" end="4662" title="Talgat Musabayev" label="Talgat Musabayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q700718" start="4666" end="4677" title="Soyuz TM-19" label="Soyuz TM-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q643774" start="4679" end="4690" title="Soyuz TM-27" label="Soyuz TM-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424029" start="4692" end="4703" title="Soyuz TM-32" label="Soyuz TM-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423493" start="4704" end="4706" title="Soyuz TM-31" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376859" start="4718" end="4734" title="Grigori Nelyubov" label="Grigori Nelyubov"/>
<link wikidata="Q312474" start="4793" end="4811" title="Andriyan Nikolayev" label="Andriyan Nikolayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878176" start="4826" end="4834" title="Vostok 3" label="Vostok 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q753546" start="4836" end="4843" title="Soyuz 9" label="Soyuz 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q963226" start="4846" end="4859" title="Oleg Novitskiy" label="Oleg Novitski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458391" start="4863" end="4876" title="Soyuz TMA-06M" label="Soyuz TMA-06M"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341436" start="4878" end="4889" title="Soyuz MS-03" label="Soyuz MS-03"/>
<link wikidata="Q69637833" start="4891" end="4902" title="Soyuz MS-18" label="Soyuz MS-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q116178269" start="4904" end="4915" title="Soyuz MS-25" label="Soyuz MS-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q110622389" start="4916" end="4921" title="Soyuz MS-24" label="MS-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q708489" start="4933" end="4948" title="Yuri Onufrienko" label="Yuri Onufrienko"/>
<link wikidata="Q748738" start="4952" end="4963" title="Soyuz TM-23" label="Soyuz TM-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q671647" start="4965" end="4972" title="STS-108" label="STS-108"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090911" start="4973" end="4976" title="STS-111" label="111"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715991" start="4979" end="4995" title="Aleksey Ovchinin" label="Aleksey Ovchinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258498" start="4998" end="5011" title="Soyuz TMA-20M" label="Soyuz TMA-20M"/>
<link wikidata="Q25708277" start="5013" end="5024" title="Soyuz MS-10" label="Soyuz MS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017947" start="5026" end="5037" title="Soyuz MS-12" label="Soyuz MS-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q116178276" start="5039" end="5050" title="Soyuz MS-26" label="Soyuz MS-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q362998" start="5063" end="5078" title="Gennady Padalka" label="Gennady Padalka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072785" start="5081" end="5092" title="Soyuz TM-28" label="Soyuz TM-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353793" start="5094" end="5105" title="Soyuz TMA-4" label="Soyuz TMA-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q840706" start="5107" end="5119" title="Soyuz TMA-14" label="Soyuz TMA-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386575" start="5121" end="5134" title="Soyuz TMA-04M" label="Soyuz TMA-04M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298031" start="5136" end="5149" title="Soyuz TMA-16M" label="Soyuz TMA-16M"/>
<link wikidata="Q358525" start="5152" end="5167" title="Viktor Patsayev" label="Viktor Patsayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q648581" start="5201" end="5209" title="Soyuz 11" label="Soyuz 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379760" start="5212" end="5226" title="Dmitry Petelin" label="Dmitry Petelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q106823124" start="5229" end="5240" title="Soyuz MS-22" label="Soyuz MS-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q110535392" start="5241" end="5246" title="Soyuz MS-23" label="MS-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q711010" start="5268" end="5288" title="Aleksandr Poleshchuk" label="Aleksandr Poleshchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540599" start="5291" end="5302" title="Soyuz TM-16" label="Soyuz TM-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q317792" start="5305" end="5320" title="Valeri Polyakov" label="Valeri Polyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q238773" start="5335" end="5345" title="Soyuz TM-6" label="Soyuz TM-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q767583" start="5346" end="5347" title="Soyuz TM-7" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q645825" start="5349" end="5360" title="Soyuz TM-18" label="Soyuz TM-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q700126" start="5361" end="5363" title="Soyuz TM-20" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q433046" start="5366" end="5378" title="Leonid Popov" label="Leonid Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q735920" start="5382" end="5390" title="Soyuz 35" label="Soyuz 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q847126" start="5391" end="5393" title="Soyuz 37" label="37"/>
<link wikidata="Q601397" start="5395" end="5403" title="Soyuz 40" label="Soyuz 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q653395" start="5405" end="5414" title="Soyuz T-7" label="Soyuz T-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q914983" start="5415" end="5416" title="Soyuz T-5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q118490" start="5419" end="5433" title="Pavel Popovich" label="Pavel Popovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878176" start="5449" end="5457" title="Vostok 4" label="Vostok 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q545595" start="5459" end="5467" title="Soyuz 14" label="Soyuz 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q21154027" start="5470" end="5486" title="Sergey Prokopyev (cosmonaut)" label="Sergey Prokopyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q23937039" start="5489" end="5500" title="Soyuz MS-09" label="Soyuz MS-09"/>
<link wikidata="Q106823124" start="5502" end="5513" title="Soyuz MS-22" label="Soyuz MS-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q110535392" start="5514" end="5519" title="Soyuz MS-23" label="MS-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q975217" start="5531" end="5543" title="Sergei Revin" label="Sergei Revin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386575" start="5546" end="5559" title="Soyuz TMA-04M" label="Soyuz TMA-04M"/>
<link wikidata="Q457064" start="5562" end="5577" title="Roman Romanenko" label="Roman Romanenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q534559" start="5580" end="5592" title="Soyuz TMA-15" label="Soyuz TMA-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q968429" start="5594" end="5607" title="Soyuz TMA-07M" label="Soyuz TMA-07M"/>
<link wikidata="Q446720" start="5610" end="5624" title="Yuri Romanenko" label="Yuri Romanenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q847024" start="5627" end="5635" title="Soyuz 26" label="Soyuz 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q734249" start="5636" end="5638" title="Soyuz 27" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q847009" start="5640" end="5648" title="Soyuz 38" label="Soyuz 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q738200" start="5650" end="5660" title="Soyuz TM-2" label="Soyuz TM-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q847619" start="5661" end="5662" title="Soyuz TM-3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q360038" start="5665" end="5686" title="Valery Rozhdestvensky" label="Valery Rozhdestvensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q509384" start="5701" end="5709" title="Soyuz 23" label="Soyuz 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q266359" start="5712" end="5733" title="Nikolai Rukavishnikov" label="Nikolai Rukavishnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q662021" start="5748" end="5756" title="Soyuz 10" label="Soyuz 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q847013" start="5758" end="5766" title="Soyuz 16" label="Soyuz 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q903151" start="5768" end="5776" title="Soyuz 33" label="Soyuz 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329196" start="5779" end="5795" title="Sergey Ryazansky" label="Sergei Ryazanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887840" start="5798" end="5811" title="Soyuz TMA-10M" label="Soyuz TMA-10M"/>
<link wikidata="Q20667807" start="5813" end="5824" title="Soyuz MS-05" label="Soyuz MS-05"/>
<link wikidata="Q472497" start="5827" end="5840" title="Valery Ryumin" label="Valery Ryumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q846547" start="5855" end="5863" title="Soyuz 25" label="Soyuz 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q915362" start="5865" end="5873" title="Soyuz 32" label="Soyuz 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q734847" start="5874" end="5876" title="Soyuz 34" label="34"/>
<link wikidata="Q735920" start="5878" end="5886" title="Soyuz 35" label="Soyuz 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q847126" start="5887" end="5889" title="Soyuz 37" label="37"/>
<link wikidata="Q721238" start="5891" end="5897" title="STS-91" label="STS-91"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454059" start="5900" end="5915" title="Sergey Nikolayevich Ryzhikov" label="Sergei Ryzhikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341312" start="5918" end="5929" title="Soyuz MS-02" label="Soyuz MS-02"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633640" start="5931" end="5942" title="Soyuz MS-16" label="Soyuz MS-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q928034" start="5954" end="5976" title="Aleksandr Samokutyayev" label="Aleksandr Samokutyayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q257079" start="5979" end="5991" title="Soyuz TMA-21" label="Soyuz TMA-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633048" start="5993" end="6006" title="Soyuz TMA-14M" label="Soyuz TMA-14M"/>
<link wikidata="Q472491" start="6009" end="6026" title="Gennadi Sarafanov" label="Gennadi Sarafanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q836053" start="6041" end="6049" title="Soyuz 15" label="Soyuz 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q431006" start="6052" end="6067" title="Viktor Savinykh" label="Viktor Savinykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q676306" start="6070" end="6079" title="Soyuz T-4" label="Soyuz T-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q903412" start="6081" end="6091" title="Soyuz T-13" label="Soyuz T-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q144502" start="6092" end="6094" title="Soyuz T-14" label="14"/>
<link wikidata="Q847619" start="6096" end="6106" title="Soyuz TM-3" label="Soyuz TM-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q152318" start="6110" end="6129" title="Svetlana Savitskaya" label="Svetlana Savitskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q653395" start="6132" end="6141" title="Soyuz T-7" label="Soyuz T-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q914983" start="6142" end="6143" title="Soyuz T-5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q787254" start="6145" end="6155" title="Soyuz T-12" label="Soyuz T-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q362819" start="6158" end="6176" title="Aleksandr Serebrov" label="Aleksandr Serebrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q653395" start="6191" end="6200" title="Soyuz T-7" label="Soyuz T-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q914983" start="6201" end="6202" title="Soyuz T-5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q780047" start="6204" end="6213" title="Soyuz T-8" label="Soyuz T-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424265" start="6215" end="6225" title="Soyuz TM-8" label="Soyuz TM-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540613" start="6227" end="6238" title="Soyuz TM-17" label="Soyuz TM-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492123" start="6241" end="6254" title="Yelena Serova" label="Yelena Serova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633048" start="6257" end="6270" title="Soyuz TMA-14M" label="Soyuz TMA-14M"/>
<link wikidata="Q252726" start="6273" end="6291" title="Vitali Sevastyanov" label="Vitali Sevastyanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q753546" start="6306" end="6313" title="Soyuz 9" label="Soyuz 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q682890" start="6315" end="6323" title="Soyuz 18" label="Soyuz 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q730170" start="6326" end="6338" title="Yuri Shargin" label="Yuri Shargin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130109" start="6341" end="6352" title="Soyuz TMA-5" label="Soyuz TMA-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353793" start="6353" end="6354" title="Soyuz TMA-4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q730220" start="6357" end="6374" title="Salizhan Sharipov" label="Salizhan Sharipov"/>
<link wikidata="Q717836" start="6378" end="6384" title="STS-89" label="STS-89"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130109" start="6386" end="6397" title="Soyuz TMA-5" label="Soyuz TMA-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q313399" start="6400" end="6417" title="Vladimir Shatalov" label="Vladimir Shatalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q619807" start="6433" end="6440" title="Soyuz 4" label="Soyuz 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q663818" start="6442" end="6449" title="Soyuz 8" label="Soyuz 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q662021" start="6451" end="6459" title="Soyuz 10" label="Soyuz 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q27990623" start="6462" end="6475" title="Klim Shipenko" label="Klim Shipenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q86675323" start="6478" end="6489" title="Soyuz MS-19" label="Soyuz MS-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q592219" start="6492" end="6508" title="Anton Shkaplerov" label="Anton Shkaplerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137089" start="6511" end="6523" title="Soyuz TMA-22" label="Soyuz TMA-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q610681" start="6525" end="6538" title="Soyuz TMA-15M" label="Soyuz TMA-15M"/>
<link wikidata="Q21392568" start="6540" end="6551" title="Soyuz MS-07" label="Soyuz MS-07"/>
<link wikidata="Q86675323" start="6553" end="6564" title="Soyuz MS-19" label="Soyuz MS-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q434409" start="6566" end="6579" title="Georgi Shonin" label="Georgi Shonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753542" start="6595" end="6602" title="Soyuz 6" label="Soyuz 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q927249" start="6605" end="6620" title="Oleg Skripochka" label="Oleg Skripochka"/>
<link wikidata="Q518760" start="6623" end="6636" title="Soyuz TMA-01M" label="Soyuz TMA-01M"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258498" start="6638" end="6651" title="Soyuz TMA-20M" label="Soyuz TMA-20M"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816787" start="6653" end="6664" title="Soyuz MS-15" label="Soyuz MS-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q555679" start="6667" end="6686" title="Aleksandr Skvortsov (cosmonaut)" label="Aleksandr Skvortsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q857018" start="6689" end="6701" title="Soyuz TMA-18" label="Soyuz TMA-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q339244" start="6703" end="6716" title="Soyuz TMA-12M" label="Soyuz TMA-12M"/>
<link wikidata="Q28666241" start="6718" end="6729" title="Soyuz MS-13" label="Soyuz MS-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q447311" start="6732" end="6748" title="Anatoly Solovyev" label="Anatoly Solovyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q261401" start="6752" end="6762" title="Soyuz TM-5" label="Soyuz TM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q904285" start="6763" end="6764" title="Soyuz TM-4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475435" start="6766" end="6776" title="Soyuz TM-9" label="Soyuz TM-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540622" start="6778" end="6789" title="Soyuz TM-15" label="Soyuz TM-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q633907" start="6791" end="6797" title="STS-71" label="STS-71"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424853" start="6798" end="6809" title="Soyuz TM-21" label="Soyuz TM-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753031" start="6811" end="6822" title="Soyuz TM-26" label="Soyuz TM-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q535172" start="6825" end="6842" title="Vladimir Solovyov (cosmonaut)" label="Vladimir Solovyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q383601" start="6845" end="6855" title="Soyuz T-10" label="Soyuz T-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="6856" end="6858" title="Soyuz T-11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q841796" start="6860" end="6870" title="Soyuz T-15" label="Soyuz T-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q470256" start="6873" end="6890" title="Gennadi Strekalov" label="Gennadi Strekalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q915432" start="6905" end="6914" title="Soyuz T-3" label="Soyuz T-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q780047" start="6916" end="6925" title="Soyuz T-8" label="Soyuz T-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="6927" end="6937" title="Soyuz T-11" label="Soyuz T-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q383601" start="6938" end="6940" title="Soyuz T-10" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q367014" start="6942" end="6953" title="Soyuz TM-10" label="Soyuz TM-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424853" start="6955" end="6966" title="Soyuz TM-21" label="Soyuz TM-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q633907" start="6967" end="6973" title="STS-71" label="STS-71"/>
<link wikidata="Q461807" start="6976" end="6990" title="Maksim Surayev" label="Maksim Surayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q846318" start="6993" end="7005" title="Soyuz TMA-16" label="Soyuz TMA-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628242" start="7007" end="7020" title="Soyuz TMA-13M" label="Soyuz TMA-13M"/>
<link wikidata="Q261731" start="7033" end="7049" title="Evgeny Tarelkin" label="Yevgeni Tarelkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458391" start="7052" end="7065" title="Soyuz TMA-06M" label="Soyuz TMA-06M"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="7068" end="7088" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q269668" start="7114" end="7122" title="Vostok 6" label="Vostok 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q152298" start="7125" end="7138" title="Gherman Titov" label="Gherman Titov"/>
<link wikidata="Q221678" start="7153" end="7161" title="Vostok 2" label="Vostok 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q466069" start="7164" end="7178" title="Vladimir Titov (cosmonaut)" label="Vladimir Titov"/>
<link wikidata="Q780047" start="7181" end="7190" title="Soyuz T-8" label="Soyuz T-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q904285" start="7192" end="7202" title="Soyuz TM-4" label="Soyuz TM-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q238773" start="7203" end="7204" title="Soyuz TM-6" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143978" start="7206" end="7212" title="STS-63" label="STS-63"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340837" start="7214" end="7220" title="STS-86" label="STS-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q448872" start="7223" end="7237" title="Valeri Tokarev" label="Valeri Tokarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340868" start="7240" end="7246" title="STS-96" label="STS-96"/>
<link wikidata="Q965236" start="7248" end="7259" title="Soyuz TMA-7" label="Soyuz TMA-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q727902" start="7262" end="7278" title="Sergei Treshchov" label="Sergei Treshchov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090911" start="7281" end="7288" title="STS-111" label="STS-111"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135865" start="7289" end="7292" title="STS-113" label="113"/>
<link wikidata="Q728371" start="7295" end="7311" title="Vasili Tsibliyev" label="Vasili Tsibliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540613" start="7315" end="7326" title="Soyuz TM-17" label="Soyuz TM-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q516698" start="7328" end="7339" title="Soyuz TM-25" label="Soyuz TM-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q362180" start="7342" end="7356" title="Mikhail Tyurin" label="Mikhail Tyurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q430622" start="7359" end="7366" title="STS-105" label="STS-105"/>
<link wikidata="Q671647" start="7367" end="7370" title="STS-108" label="108"/>
<link wikidata="Q591584" start="7372" end="7383" title="Soyuz TMA-9" label="Soyuz TMA-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254245" start="7385" end="7398" title="Soyuz TMA-11M" label="Soyuz TMA-11M"/>
<link wikidata="Q376688" start="7410" end="7422" title="Yuri Usachov" label="Yuri Usachov"/>
<link wikidata="Q645825" start="7425" end="7436" title="Soyuz TM-18" label="Soyuz TM-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q748738" start="7438" end="7449" title="Soyuz TM-23" label="Soyuz TM-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q765187" start="7451" end="7458" title="STS-101" label="STS-101"/>
<link wikidata="Q384250" start="7460" end="7467" title="STS-102" label="STS-102"/>
<link wikidata="Q430622" start="7468" end="7475" title="STS-105" label="STS-105"/>
<link wikidata="Q708689" start="7488" end="7505" title="Vladimir Vasyutin" label="Vladimir Vasyutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q144502" start="7521" end="7531" title="Soyuz T-14" label="Soyuz T-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q21856852" start="7534" end="7545" title="Ivan Vagner" label="Ivan Vagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633640" start="7546" end="7557" title="Soyuz MS-16" label="Soyuz MS-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q221615" start="7560" end="7580" title="Aleksandr Viktorenko" label="Aleksandr Viktorenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q847619" start="7584" end="7594" title="Soyuz TM-3" label="Soyuz TM-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q738200" start="7595" end="7596" title="Soyuz TM-2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424265" start="7598" end="7608" title="Soyuz TM-8" label="Soyuz TM-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q611541" start="7610" end="7621" title="Soyuz TM-14" label="Soyuz TM-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q700126" start="7623" end="7634" title="Soyuz TM-20" label="Soyuz TM-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q466075" start="7637" end="7653" title="Pavel Vinogradov" label="Pavel Vinogradov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753031" start="7656" end="7667" title="Soyuz TM-26" label="Soyuz TM-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231148" start="7669" end="7680" title="Soyuz TMA-8" label="Soyuz TMA-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773494" start="7682" end="7695" title="Soyuz TMA-08M" label="Soyuz TMA-08M"/>
<link wikidata="Q280301" start="7698" end="7707" title="Igor Volk" label="Igor Volk"/>
<link wikidata="Q787254" start="7723" end="7733" title="Soyuz T-12" label="Soyuz T-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q446233" start="7736" end="7752" title="Aleksandr Volkov (cosmonaut)" label="Alexander Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q144502" start="7756" end="7766" title="Soyuz T-14" label="Soyuz T-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q767583" start="7768" end="7778" title="Soyuz TM-7" label="Soyuz TM-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q677519" start="7780" end="7791" title="Soyuz TM-13" label="Soyuz TM-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q677519" start="7793" end="7804" title="Soyuz TM-13" label="Soyuz TM-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q283544" start="7807" end="7835" title="Sergei Aleksandrovich Volkov" label="Sergei Aleksandrovich Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q493983" start="7839" end="7851" title="Soyuz TMA-12" label="Soyuz TMA-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q832305" start="7853" end="7866" title="Soyuz TMA-02M" label="Soyuz TMA-02M"/>
<link wikidata="Q345658" start="7869" end="7885" title="Vladislav Volkov" label="Vladislav Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q753539" start="7918" end="7925" title="Soyuz 7" label="Soyuz 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q648581" start="7927" end="7935" title="Soyuz 11" label="Soyuz 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q448538" start="7938" end="7951" title="Boris Volynov" label="Boris Volynov"/>
<link wikidata="Q748593" start="7954" end="7961" title="Soyuz 5" label="Soyuz 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q426781" start="7963" end="7971" title="Soyuz 21" label="Soyuz 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479773" start="7974" end="7990" title="Sergei Vozovikov" label="Sergei Vozovikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q352137" start="8071" end="8084" title="Boris Yegorov" label="Boris Yegorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q750101" start="8099" end="8108" title="Voskhod 1" label="Voskhod 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q381541" start="8111" end="8128" title="Aleksei Yeliseyev" label="Aleksei Yeliseyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q748593" start="8131" end="8138" title="Soyuz 5" label="Soyuz 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q619807" start="8139" end="8140" title="Soyuz 4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q663818" start="8142" end="8149" title="Soyuz 8" label="Soyuz 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q662021" start="8151" end="8159" title="Soyuz 10" label="Soyuz 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q347977" start="8162" end="8179" title="Fyodor Yurchikhin" label="Fyodor Yurchikhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q281633" start="8183" end="8190" title="STS-112" label="STS-112"/>
<link wikidata="Q507375" start="8192" end="8204" title="Soyuz TMA-10" label="Soyuz TMA-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q838546" start="8206" end="8218" title="Soyuz TMA-19" label="Soyuz TMA-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118077" start="8220" end="8233" title="Soyuz TMA-09M" label="Soyuz TMA-09M"/>
<link wikidata="Q18401197" start="8235" end="8246" title="Soyuz MS-04" label="Soyuz MS-04"/>
<link wikidata="Q905516" start="8258" end="8271" title="Dmitri Zaikin" label="Dmitri Zaikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203026" start="8300" end="8315" title="Sergei Zalyotin" label="Sergei Zalyotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q509490" start="8318" end="8329" title="Soyuz TM-30" label="Soyuz TM-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423640" start="8331" end="8342" title="Soyuz TMA-1" label="Soyuz TMA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q921112" start="8343" end="8348" title="Soyuz TM-34" label="TM-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q382184" start="8351" end="8366" title="Vitali Zholobov" label="Vitali Zholobov"/>
<link wikidata="Q426781" start="8370" end="8378" title="Soyuz 21" label="Soyuz 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q440178" start="8381" end="8397" title="Vyacheslav Zudov" label="Vyacheslav Zudov"/>
<link wikidata="Q509384" start="8400" end="8408" title="Soyuz 23" label="Soyuz 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q579421" start="8543" end="8548" title="Soyuz (spacecraft)" label="Soyuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="8601" end="8612" title="Interkosmos" label="Interkosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q77349" start="8717" end="8735" title="Abdul Ahad Mohmand" label="Abdul Ahad Mohmand"/>
<link wikidata="Q238773" start="8738" end="8748" title="Soyuz TM-6" label="Soyuz TM-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q261401" start="8749" end="8750" title="Soyuz TM-5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q444299" start="8766" end="8798" title="Aleksandar Panayotov Aleksandrov" label="Aleksandar Panayotov Aleksandrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q261401" start="8801" end="8811" title="Soyuz TM-5" label="Soyuz TM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q904285" start="8812" end="8813" title="Soyuz TM-4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q456840" start="8817" end="8830" title="Georgi Ivanov (cosmonaut)" label="Georgi Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q903151" start="8833" end="8841" title="Soyuz 33" label="Soyuz 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q362902" start="8850" end="8871" title="Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez" label="Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q847009" start="8874" end="8882" title="Soyuz 38" label="Soyuz 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q254985" start="8901" end="8915" title="Vladimír Remek" label="Vladimír Remek"/>
<link wikidata="Q617708" start="8918" end="8926" title="Soyuz 28" label="Soyuz 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q57229" start="8943" end="8955" title="Sigmund Jähn" label="Sigmund Jähn"/>
<link wikidata="Q916974" start="8970" end="8978" title="Soyuz 31" label="Soyuz 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q915385" start="8979" end="8981" title="Soyuz 29" label="29"/>
<link wikidata="Q12865" start="8993" end="9008" title="Bertalan Farkas" label="Bertalan Farkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q683815" start="9011" end="9019" title="Soyuz 36" label="Soyuz 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q735920" start="9020" end="9022" title="Soyuz 35" label="35"/>
<link wikidata="Q81129" start="9035" end="9060" title="Jügderdemidiin Gürragchaa" label="Jügderdemidiin Gürragchaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q241736" start="9063" end="9071" title="Soyuz 39" label="Soyuz 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q361415" start="9082" end="9103" title="Mirosław Hermaszewski" label="Mirosław Hermaszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q847719" start="9117" end="9125" title="Soyuz 30" label="Soyuz 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q446692" start="9137" end="9153" title="Dumitru Prunariu" label="Dumitru Prunariu"/>
<link wikidata="Q601397" start="9156" end="9164" title="Soyuz 40" label="Soyuz 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q353687" start="9176" end="9185" title="Phạm Tuân" label="Phạm Tuân"/>
<link wikidata="Q847126" start="9188" end="9196" title="Soyuz 37" label="Soyuz 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q683815" start="9197" end="9199" title="Soyuz 36" label="36"/>
<link wikidata="Q434205" start="9374" end="9392" title="Jean-Loup Chrétien" label="Jean-Loup Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q579421" start="9486" end="9491" title="Soyuz (spacecraft)" label="Soyuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49390" start="9562" end="9575" title="space tourist" label="space tourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q81133" start="9596" end="9612" title="Space Adventures" label="Space Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="9672" end="9675" title="European Space Agency" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q179103" start="9677" end="9681" title="JAXA" label="JAXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="9687" end="9691" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="9710" end="9737" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q227030" start="10027" end="10044" title="Mark Shuttleworth" label="Mark Shuttleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81133" start="10052" end="10068" title="Space Adventures" label="Space Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q921112" start="10072" end="10083" title="Soyuz TM-34" label="Soyuz TM-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753202" start="10084" end="10086" title="Soyuz TM-33" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q317643" start="10113" end="10126" title="Marcos Pontes" label="Marcos Pontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231148" start="10129" end="10140" title="Soyuz TMA-8" label="Soyuz TMA-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q357468" start="10160" end="10173" title="Guy Laliberté" label="Guy Laliberté"/>
<link wikidata="Q81133" start="10181" end="10197" title="Space Adventures" label="Space Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q846318" start="10201" end="10213" title="Soyuz TMA-16" label="Soyuz TMA-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q840706" start="10214" end="10216" title="Soyuz TMA-14" label="14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076962" start="10220" end="10234" title="Chris Hadfield" label="Chris Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q968429" start="10237" end="10250" title="Soyuz TMA-07M" label="Soyuz TMA-07M"/>
<link wikidata="Q461795" start="10254" end="10267" title="Robert Thirsk" label="Robert Thirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q534559" start="10270" end="10282" title="Soyuz TMA-15" label="Soyuz TMA-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q318934" start="10303" end="10318" title="Joseph M. Acaba" label="Joseph M. Acaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386575" start="10321" end="10334" title="Soyuz TMA-04M" label="Soyuz TMA-04M"/>
<link wikidata="Q17519" start="10344" end="10359" title="Anousheh Ansari" label="Anousheh Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q81133" start="10368" end="10384" title="Space Adventures" label="Space Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q591584" start="10388" end="10399" title="Soyuz TMA-9" label="Soyuz TMA-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231148" start="10400" end="10401" title="Soyuz TMA-8" label="8"/>
<link wikidata="Q440251" start="10405" end="10423" title="Michael R. Barratt" label="Michael R. Barratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q840706" start="10426" end="10438" title="Soyuz TMA-14" label="Soyuz TMA-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q920936" start="10442" end="10454" title="Ken Bowersox" label="Ken Bowersox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423640" start="10457" end="10468" title="Soyuz TMA-1" label="Soyuz TMA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q382176" start="10487" end="10504" title="Daniel C. Burbank" label="Daniel C. Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137089" start="10507" end="10519" title="Soyuz TMA-22" label="Soyuz TMA-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q709935" start="10523" end="10534" title="Leroy Chiao" label="Leroy Chiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130109" start="10537" end="10548" title="Soyuz TMA-5" label="Soyuz TMA-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q461777" start="10552" end="10567" title="Timothy Creamer" label="Timothy Creamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728886" start="10570" end="10582" title="Soyuz TMA-17" label="Soyuz TMA-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q21767" start="10586" end="10606" title="Tracy Caldwell Dyson" label="Tracy Caldwell Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q857018" start="10609" end="10621" title="Soyuz TMA-18" label="Soyuz TMA-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7468" start="10625" end="10642" title="Catherine Coleman" label="Catherine Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q857030" start="10645" end="10657" title="Soyuz TMA-20" label="Soyuz TMA-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q362261" start="10661" end="10675" title="Michael Fincke" label="Michael Fincke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353793" start="10678" end="10689" title="Soyuz TMA-4" label="Soyuz TMA-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q757035" start="10691" end="10703" title="Soyuz TMA-13" label="Soyuz TMA-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q540379" start="10707" end="10720" title="Michael Foale" label="Michael Foale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424715" start="10724" end="10735" title="Soyuz TMA-3" label="Soyuz TMA-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q706849" start="10739" end="10752" title="Kevin A. Ford" label="Kevin A. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458391" start="10755" end="10768" title="Soyuz TMA-06M" label="Soyuz TMA-06M"/>
<link wikidata="Q434232" start="10772" end="10789" title="Michael E. Fossum" label="Michael E. Fossum"/>
<link wikidata="Q832305" start="10792" end="10805" title="Soyuz TMA-02M" label="Soyuz TMA-02M"/>
<link wikidata="Q441017" start="10809" end="10829" title="Ronald J. Garan, Jr." label="Ronald J. Garan, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q257079" start="10832" end="10844" title="Soyuz TMA-21" label="Soyuz TMA-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q319269" start="10854" end="10870" title="Richard Garriott" label="Richard Garriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q81133" start="10879" end="10895" title="Space Adventures" label="Space Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q757035" start="10899" end="10911" title="Soyuz TMA-13" label="Soyuz TMA-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q493983" start="10912" end="10914" title="Soyuz TMA-12" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030934" start="10918" end="10936" title="Michael S. Hopkins" label="Michael S. Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887840" start="10939" end="10952" title="Soyuz TMA-10M" label="Soyuz TMA-10M"/>
<link wikidata="Q362190" start="10956" end="10967" title="Scott Kelly (astronaut)" label="Scott Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q518760" start="10970" end="10983" title="Soyuz TMA-01M" label="Soyuz TMA-01M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298031" start="10985" end="10998" title="Soyuz TMA-16M" label="Soyuz TMA-16M"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197699" start="11002" end="11019" title="Kjell N. Lindgren" label="Kjell N. Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308431" start="11022" end="11035" title="Soyuz TMA-17M" label="Soyuz TMA-17M"/>
<link wikidata="Q375202" start="11039" end="11060" title="Michael Lopez-Alegria" label="Michael Lopez-Alegria"/>
<link wikidata="Q591584" start="11064" end="11075" title="Soyuz TMA-9" label="Soyuz TMA-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q709931" start="11079" end="11084" title="Ed Lu" label="Ed Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424721" start="11087" end="11098" title="Soyuz TMA-2" label="Soyuz TMA-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q520384" start="11102" end="11118" title="Thomas Marshburn" label="Thomas Marshburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q968429" start="11121" end="11134" title="Soyuz TMA-07M" label="Soyuz TMA-07M"/>
<link wikidata="Q536777" start="11138" end="11157" title="Richard Mastracchio" label="Richard Mastracchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254245" start="11160" end="11173" title="Soyuz TMA-11M" label="Soyuz TMA-11M"/>
<link wikidata="Q709921" start="11177" end="11196" title="William S. McArthur" label="William S. McArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q965236" start="11199" end="11210" title="Soyuz TMA-7" label="Soyuz TMA-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q240776" start="11214" end="11226" title="Karen Nyberg" label="Karen Nyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118077" start="11229" end="11242" title="Soyuz TMA-09M" label="Soyuz TMA-09M"/>
<link wikidata="Q438844" start="11252" end="11265" title="Gregory Olsen" label="Gregory Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81133" start="11273" end="11289" title="Space Adventures" label="Space Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q965236" start="11293" end="11304" title="Soyuz TMA-7" label="Soyuz TMA-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q647619" start="11305" end="11306" title="Soyuz TMA-6" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q363250" start="11310" end="11323" title="Donald Pettit" label="Donald Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423640" start="11326" end="11337" title="Soyuz TMA-1" label="Soyuz TMA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138999" start="11354" end="11367" title="Soyuz TMA-03M" label="Soyuz TMA-03M"/>
<link wikidata="Q448563" start="11371" end="11387" title="John L. Phillips" label="John L. Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q647619" start="11390" end="11401" title="Soyuz TMA-6" label="Soyuz TMA-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q361932" start="11405" end="11421" title="William Shepherd" label="William Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423493" start="11424" end="11435" title="Soyuz TM-31" label="Soyuz TM-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q49819" start="11459" end="11474" title="Charles Simonyi" label="Charles Simonyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81133" start="11483" end="11499" title="Space Adventures" label="Space Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q507375" start="11503" end="11515" title="Soyuz TMA-10" label="Soyuz TMA-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q591584" start="11516" end="11517" title="Soyuz TMA-9" label="9"/>
<link wikidata="Q840706" start="11519" end="11531" title="Soyuz TMA-14" label="Soyuz TMA-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q757035" start="11532" end="11534" title="Soyuz TMA-13" label="13"/>
<link wikidata="Q143103" start="11538" end="11552" title="Norman Thagard" label="Norman Thagard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424853" start="11555" end="11566" title="Soyuz TM-21" label="Soyuz TM-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q210184" start="11590" end="11601" title="Dennis Tito" label="Dennis Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q81133" start="11609" end="11625" title="Space Adventures" label="Space Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424029" start="11629" end="11640" title="Soyuz TM-32" label="Soyuz TM-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423493" start="11641" end="11643" title="Soyuz TM-31" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q554415" start="11647" end="11661" title="Terry W. Virts" label="Terry W. Virts"/>
<link wikidata="Q610681" start="11664" end="11677" title="Soyuz TMA-15M" label="Soyuz TMA-15M"/>
<link wikidata="Q240708" start="11681" end="11695" title="Shannon Walker" label="Shannon Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q838546" start="11698" end="11710" title="Soyuz TMA-19" label="Soyuz TMA-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q461860" start="11714" end="11733" title="Douglas H. Wheelock" label="Douglas H. Wheelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q838546" start="11736" end="11748" title="Soyuz TMA-19" label="Soyuz TMA-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q235523" start="11752" end="11765" title="Peggy Whitson" label="Peggy Whitson"/>
<link wikidata="Q562173" start="11768" end="11780" title="Soyuz TMA-11" label="Soyuz TMA-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q382202" start="11784" end="11800" title="Jeffrey Williams (astronaut)" label="Jeffrey Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231148" start="11803" end="11814" title="Soyuz TMA-8" label="Soyuz TMA-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q846318" start="11816" end="11828" title="Soyuz TMA-16" label="Soyuz TMA-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q55177" start="11832" end="11847" title="Sunita Williams" label="Sunita Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q796537" start="11850" end="11863" title="Soyuz TMA-05M" label="Soyuz TMA-05M"/>
<link wikidata="Q554409" start="11867" end="11883" title="Barry E. Wilmore" label="Barry E. Wilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633048" start="11886" end="11899" title="Soyuz TMA-14M" label="Soyuz TMA-14M"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116390" start="11903" end="11921" title="Gregory R. Wiseman" label="Gregory R. Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628242" start="11924" end="11937" title="Soyuz TMA-13M" label="Soyuz TMA-13M"/>
<link wikidata="Q325205" start="11959" end="11972" title="Rakesh Sharma" label="Rakesh Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="11974" end="11985" title="Intercosmos" label="Intercosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="11989" end="11999" title="Soyuz T-11" label="Soyuz T-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q383601" start="12000" end="12002" title="Soyuz T-10" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q285944" start="12021" end="12037" title="Toyohiro Akiyama" label="Toyohiro Akiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q577280" start="12046" end="12057" title="Soyuz TM-11" label="Soyuz TM-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q367014" start="12058" end="12060" title="Soyuz TM-10" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q375641" start="12064" end="12079" title="Akihiko Hoshide" label="Akihiko Hoshide"/>
<link wikidata="Q796537" start="12082" end="12095" title="Soyuz TMA-05M" label="Soyuz TMA-05M"/>
<link wikidata="Q357450" start="12099" end="12113" title="Soichi Noguchi" label="Soichi Noguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q728886" start="12116" end="12128" title="Soyuz TMA-17" label="Soyuz TMA-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q706916" start="12132" end="12148" title="Satoshi Furukawa" label="Satoshi Furukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q832305" start="12151" end="12164" title="Soyuz TMA-02M" label="Soyuz TMA-02M"/>
<link wikidata="Q375566" start="12168" end="12181" title="Koichi Wakata" label="Koichi Wakata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254245" start="12184" end="12197" title="Soyuz TMA-11M" label="Soyuz TMA-11M"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975489" start="12201" end="12211" title="Kimiya Yui" label="Kimiya Yui"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308431" start="12214" end="12227" title="Soyuz TMA-17M" label="Soyuz TMA-17M"/>
<link wikidata="Q313957" start="12240" end="12263" title="Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor" label="Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor"/>
<link wikidata="Q562173" start="12266" end="12278" title="Soyuz TMA-11" label="Soyuz TMA-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q507375" start="12279" end="12281" title="Soyuz TMA-10" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q210382" start="12297" end="12307" title="Yi So-yeon" label="Yi So-yeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q493983" start="12310" end="12322" title="Soyuz TMA-12" label="Soyuz TMA-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q562173" start="12323" end="12325" title="Soyuz TMA-11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q430996" start="12335" end="12349" title="Muhammed Faris" label="Muhammed Faris"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="12351" end="12362" title="Intercosmos" label="Intercosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q847619" start="12366" end="12376" title="Soyuz TM-3" label="Soyuz TM-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q738200" start="12377" end="12378" title="Soyuz TM-2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q78552" start="12404" end="12418" title="Franz Viehböck" label="Franz Viehböck"/>
<link wikidata="Q677519" start="12421" end="12432" title="Soyuz TM-13" label="Soyuz TM-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q677528" start="12433" end="12435" title="Soyuz TM-12" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q52495" start="12447" end="12461" title="Frank De Winne" label="Frank De Winne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423640" start="12469" end="12480" title="Soyuz TMA-1" label="Soyuz TMA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q921112" start="12481" end="12486" title="Soyuz TM-34" label="TM-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q534559" start="12488" end="12500" title="Soyuz TMA-15" label="Soyuz TMA-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q434205" start="12514" end="12532" title="Jean-Loup Chrétien" label="Jean-Loup Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q48756" start="12534" end="12538" title="CNES" label="CNES"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="12540" end="12551" title="Intercosmos" label="Intercosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q739906" start="12555" end="12564" title="Soyuz T-6" label="Soyuz T-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q767583" start="12566" end="12576" title="Soyuz TM-7" label="Soyuz TM-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q238773" start="12577" end="12578" title="Soyuz TM-6" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q352069" start="12582" end="12597" title="Léopold Eyharts" label="Léopold Eyharts"/>
<link wikidata="Q643774" start="12605" end="12616" title="Soyuz TM-27" label="Soyuz TM-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753031" start="12617" end="12619" title="Soyuz TM-26" label="26"/>
<link wikidata="Q235580" start="12623" end="12653" title="Claudie Haigneré" label="Claudie André-Deshays Haigneré"/>
<link wikidata="Q533568" start="12661" end="12672" title="Soyuz TM-24" label="Soyuz TM-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q748738" start="12673" end="12675" title="Soyuz TM-23" label="23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753202" start="12677" end="12688" title="Soyuz TM-33" label="Soyuz TM-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424029" start="12689" end="12691" title="Soyuz TM-32" label="32"/>
<link wikidata="Q721397" start="12695" end="12715" title="Jean-Pierre Haigneré" label="Jean-Pierre Haigneré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540613" start="12723" end="12734" title="Soyuz TM-17" label="Soyuz TM-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540599" start="12735" end="12737" title="Soyuz TM-16" label="16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051236" start="12739" end="12750" title="Soyuz TM-29" label="Soyuz TM-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339046" start="12754" end="12768" title="Michel Tognini" label="Michel Tognini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540622" start="12776" end="12787" title="Soyuz TM-15" label="Soyuz TM-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q611541" start="12788" end="12790" title="Soyuz TM-14" label="14"/>
<link wikidata="Q215140" start="12805" end="12819" title="Reinhold Ewald" label="Reinhold Ewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q516698" start="12827" end="12838" title="Soyuz TM-25" label="Soyuz TM-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q533568" start="12839" end="12841" title="Soyuz TM-24" label="24"/>
<link wikidata="Q214974" start="12845" end="12865" title="Klaus-Dietrich Flade" label="Klaus-Dietrich Flade"/>
<link wikidata="Q611541" start="12868" end="12879" title="Soyuz TM-14" label="Soyuz TM-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q677519" start="12880" end="12882" title="Soyuz TM-13" label="13"/>
<link wikidata="Q71248" start="12886" end="12901" title="Alexander Gerst" label="Alexander Gerst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628242" start="12904" end="12917" title="Soyuz TMA-13M" label="Soyuz TMA-13M"/>
<link wikidata="Q215124" start="12921" end="12932" title="Ulf Merbold" label="Ulf Merbold"/>
<link wikidata="Q700126" start="12940" end="12951" title="Soyuz TM-20" label="Soyuz TM-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q700718" start="12952" end="12954" title="Soyuz TM-19" label="19"/>
<link wikidata="Q166616" start="12958" end="12971" title="Thomas Reiter" label="Thomas Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q700729" start="12979" end="12990" title="Soyuz TM-22" label="Soyuz TM-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q379039" start="13003" end="13025" title="Samantha Cristoforetti" label="Samantha Cristoforetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q610681" start="13033" end="13046" title="Soyuz TMA-15M" label="Soyuz TMA-15M"/>
<link wikidata="Q448520" start="13050" end="13065" title="Roberto Vittori" label="Roberto Vittori"/>
<link wikidata="Q921112" start="13073" end="13084" title="Soyuz TM-34" label="Soyuz TM-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753202" start="13085" end="13087" title="Soyuz TM-33" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q647619" start="13089" end="13100" title="Soyuz TMA-6" label="Soyuz TMA-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130109" start="13101" end="13102" title="Soyuz TMA-5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q17177" start="13106" end="13119" title="Paolo Nespoli" label="Paolo Nespoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q857030" start="13127" end="13139" title="Soyuz TMA-20" label="Soyuz TMA-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394857" start="13143" end="13157" title="Luca Parmitano" label="Luca Parmitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118077" start="13165" end="13178" title="Soyuz TMA-09M" label="Soyuz TMA-09M"/>
<link wikidata="Q454649" start="13198" end="13211" title="André Kuipers" label="André Kuipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353793" start="13219" end="13230" title="Soyuz TMA-4" label="Soyuz TMA-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424715" start="13231" end="13232" title="Soyuz TMA-3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138999" start="13234" end="13247" title="Soyuz TMA-03M" label="Soyuz TMA-03M"/>
<link wikidata="Q448167" start="13260" end="13270" title="Ivan Bella" label="Ivan Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051236" start="13273" end="13284" title="Soyuz TM-29" label="Soyuz TM-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072785" start="13285" end="13287" title="Soyuz TM-28" label="28"/>
<link wikidata="Q448547" start="13297" end="13308" title="Pedro Duque" label="Pedro Duque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424715" start="13316" end="13327" title="Soyuz TMA-3" label="Soyuz TMA-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424721" start="13328" end="13329" title="Soyuz TMA-2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q237473" start="13358" end="13371" title="Helen Sharman" label="Helen Sharman"/>
<link wikidata="Q677528" start="13380" end="13391" title="Soyuz TM-12" label="Soyuz TM-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q577280" start="13392" end="13394" title="Soyuz TM-11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q518012" start="13398" end="13411" title="Timothy Peake" label="Timothy Peake"/>
<link wikidata="Q14288150" start="13419" end="13432" title="Soyuz TMA-19M" label="Soyuz TMA-19M"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="13503" end="13506" title="Russian Federal Space Agency" label="RKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13559" end="13567" title="U.S.S.R." label="U.S.S.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q467732" start="13931" end="13943" title="Musa Manarov" label="Musa Manarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q434546" start="14013" end="14025" title="Pyotr Klimuk" label="Pyotr Klimuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q314921" start="14057" end="14076" title="Vladimir Kovalyonok" label="Vladimir Kovalyonok"/>
<link wikidata="Q963226" start="14105" end="14118" title="Oleg Novitskiy" label="Oleg Novitski"/>
<link wikidata="Q347977" start="14191" end="14208" title="Fyodor Yurchikhin" label="Fyodor Yurchikhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q468258" start="14273" end="14289" title="Toktar Aubakirov" label="Toktar Aubakirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q539358" start="14324" end="14338" title="Yuri Lonchakov" label="Yuri Lonchakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q560360" start="14372" end="14388" title="Talgat Musabayev" label="Talgat Musabayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q358525" start="14421" end="14436" title="Viktor Patsayev" label="Viktor Patsayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379760" start="14484" end="14498" title="Dmitry Petelin" label="Dmitry Petelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313399" start="14531" end="14548" title="Vladimir Shatalov" label="Vladimir Shatalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q221615" start="14599" end="14619" title="Aleksandr Viktorenko" label="Aleksandr Viktorenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q730220" start="14690" end="14707" title="Salizhan Sharipov" label="Salizhan Sharipov"/>
<link wikidata="Q85861593" start="14737" end="14752" title="Sergey Korsakov (cosmonaut)" label="Sergey Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="14762" end="14768" title="Bishkek" label="Krunze"/>
<link wikidata="Q345288" start="14818" end="14834" title="Aleksandr Kaleri" label="Aleksandr Kaleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q447311" start="14863" end="14879" title="Anatoly Solovyev" label="Anatoly Solovyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086024" start="14905" end="14918" title="Oleg Artemyev" label="Oleg Artemyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q375659" start="14984" end="14998" title="Oleg Kononenko" label="Oleg Kononenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q487984" start="15072" end="15091" title="Anatoly Artsebarsky" label="Anatoly Artsebarsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q364451" start="15122" end="15138" title="Georgi Beregovoi" label="Georgi Beregovoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q355433" start="15182" end="15202" title="Georgiy Dobrovolskiy" label="Georgiy Dobrovolskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q448491" start="15243" end="15256" title="Yuri Gidzenko" label="Yuri Gidzenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q360060" start="15287" end="15299" title="Leonid Kizim" label="Leonid Kizim"/>
<link wikidata="Q342338" start="15347" end="15357" title="Oleg Kotov" label="Oleg Kotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q488008" start="15390" end="15407" title="Anatoli Levchenko" label="Anatoli Levchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q449577" start="15453" end="15469" title="Vladimir Lyakhov" label="Vladimir Lyakhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q342953" start="15513" end="15529" title="Yuri Malenchenko" label="Yuri Malenchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q708489" start="15563" end="15579" title="Yuri Onufriyenko" label="Yuri Onufriyenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q433046" start="15608" end="15620" title="Leonid Popov" label="Leonid Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q118490" start="15655" end="15669" title="Pavel Popovich" label="Pavel Popovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q434409" start="15709" end="15722" title="Georgi Shonin" label="Georgi Shonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q728371" start="15764" end="15780" title="Vasili Tsibliyev" label="Vasili Tsibliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q708689" start="15813" end="15830" title="Vladimir Vasyutin" label="Vladimir Vasyutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q280301" start="15872" end="15881" title="Igor Volk" label="Igor Volk"/>
<link wikidata="Q446233" start="15921" end="15937" title="Aleksandr Volkov (cosmonaut)" label="Aleksandr Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q283544" start="15968" end="15996" title="Sergei Aleksandrovich Volkov" label="Sergei Aleksandrovich Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q382184" start="16026" end="16041" title="Vitali Zholobov" label="Vitali Zholobov"/>
<link wikidata="Q466513" start="16108" end="16128" title="Vladimir Dzhanibekov" label="Vladimir Dzhanibekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793462" start="16176" end="16200" title="List of Russian aviators" label="List of Russian aviators"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793481" start="16203" end="16228" title="List of Russian explorers" label="List of Russian explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596077" start="16231" end="16256" title="List of Russian inventors" label="List of Russian inventors"/>
<link wikidata="Q856308" start="16259" end="16300" title="List of Soviet human spaceflight missions" label="List of Soviet human spaceflight missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596084" start="16303" end="16345" title="List of Russian human spaceflight missions" label="List of Russian human spaceflight missions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343768" wikidata="Q6646895" url="?curid=343768" title="Lists of astronauts">
<text>List of [[astronaut]]s or space travellers, may refer to:
==By name==
* List of astronauts by name

==By nationality==
* List of space travelers by nationality
* Timeline of space travel by nationality
* American astronauts
** List of Apollo astronauts
** Astronaut birthplaces by US state
** List of Gemini astronauts
** Mercury Seven
** NASA Astronaut Corps
** NASA Astronaut Group 2
** NASA Astronaut Group 3
** NASA Astronaut Group 4
** NASA Astronaut Group 5
** NASA Astronaut Group 6
** NASA Astronaut Group 7
** NASA Astronaut Group 8
** NASA Astronaut Group 9
** NASA Astronaut Group 10
** NASA Astronaut Group 11
** NASA Astronaut Group 12
** NASA Astronaut Group 13
** NASA Astronaut Group 14
** NASA Astronaut Group 15
** NASA Astronaut Group 16
** NASA Astronaut Group 17
** NASA Astronaut Group 18
** NASA Astronaut Group 19
** NASA Astronaut Group 20
** NASA Astronaut Group 21
** NASA Astronaut Group 22
** NASA Astronaut Group 23
** List of United States Marine Corps astronauts
** List of United States Space Force astronauts
** List of astronauts educated at the United States Military Academy
** List of astronauts educated at the United States Naval Academy
* Canadian Astronaut Corps
* List of Chinese astronauts
* List of Indian astronauts
* List of Japanese astronauts
** JAXA Astronaut Corps
* List of cosmonauts
** Roscosmos Cosmonaut Corps
* List of European astronauts
** European Astronaut Corps
***2022 European Space Agency Astronaut Group
** List of Dutch astronauts
** List of French spationauts
** List of German astronauts
** List of Italian astronauts
** List of Polish astronauts

==By demographic group==
* List of African-American astronauts
* List of Arab astronauts
* List of Asian astronauts
* List of Asian American astronauts
* List of women astronauts
* List of Hispanic astronauts
* List of Ibero-American spacefarers
* List of astronauts of Indian origin
* List of Muslim astronauts
* List of billionaire spacetravellers

==By achievement==
* List of cumulative spacewalk records
* List of inductees in the International Space Hall of Fame
* List of visitors to the International Space Station
* List of crew of the International Space Station
* List of commanders of the International Space Station 
* List of Mir visitors
* List of Space Shuttle crews
* List of spacewalkers
* List of Salyut visitors
* List of human spaceflights in Tiangong Program

==Other==
* List of astronauts by year of selection
* List of space travellers by first flight
* List of orbital space travelers by company
* Lists of fictional astronauts

==Space flights==
* List of human spaceflights, 1961–1970
* List of human spaceflights, 1971–1980
* List of human spaceflights, 1981–1990
* List of human spaceflights, 1991–2000
* List of human spaceflights, 2001–2010
* List of human spaceflights, 2011–2020
*List of human spaceflights, 2021–present 
* List of Russian human spaceflight missions
* List of Soviet human spaceflight missions
* List of fully civilian crewed suborbital spaceflights
* List of fully civilian crewed orbital spaceflights

== See also ==
* Lists of astronomical objects
* Lists of telescopes
* Lists of spacecraft
* List of government space agencies
* Lists of space scientists</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6646895" start="0" end="22" title="Lists of astronauts" label="List of [[astronaut]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646895" start="26" end="42" title="Lists of astronauts" label="space travellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q931500" start="72" end="98" title="List of astronauts by name" label="List of astronauts by name"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640257" start="121" end="159" title="List of space travelers by nationality" label="List of space travelers by nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140645" start="162" end="201" title="Timeline of space travel by nationality" label="Timeline of space travel by nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889224" start="227" end="252" title="List of Apollo astronauts" label="List of Apollo astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811615" start="256" end="289" title="Astronaut birthplaces by US state" label="Astronaut birthplaces by US state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571670" start="293" end="318" title="List of Gemini astronauts" label="List of Gemini astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q597154" start="322" end="335" title="Mercury Seven" label="Mercury Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869369" start="339" end="359" title="NASA Astronaut Corps" label="NASA Astronaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409842" start="363" end="385" title="NASA Astronaut Group 2" label="NASA Astronaut Group 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408073" start="389" end="411" title="NASA Astronaut Group 3" label="NASA Astronaut Group 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q848758" start="415" end="437" title="NASA Astronaut Group 4" label="NASA Astronaut Group 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q579376" start="441" end="463" title="NASA Astronaut Group 5" label="NASA Astronaut Group 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q986518" start="467" end="489" title="NASA Astronaut Group 6" label="NASA Astronaut Group 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q986425" start="493" end="515" title="NASA Astronaut Group 7" label="NASA Astronaut Group 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q986520" start="519" end="541" title="NASA Astronaut Group 8" label="NASA Astronaut Group 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952381" start="545" end="567" title="NASA Astronaut Group 9" label="NASA Astronaut Group 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q378820" start="571" end="594" title="NASA Astronaut Group 10" label="NASA Astronaut Group 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869357" start="598" end="621" title="NASA Astronaut Group 11" label="NASA Astronaut Group 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869359" start="625" end="648" title="NASA Astronaut Group 12" label="NASA Astronaut Group 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869360" start="652" end="675" title="NASA Astronaut Group 13" label="NASA Astronaut Group 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869361" start="679" end="702" title="NASA Astronaut Group 14" label="NASA Astronaut Group 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869362" start="706" end="729" title="NASA Astronaut Group 15" label="NASA Astronaut Group 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869363" start="733" end="756" title="NASA Astronaut Group 16" label="NASA Astronaut Group 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869364" start="760" end="783" title="NASA Astronaut Group 17" label="NASA Astronaut Group 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869365" start="787" end="810" title="NASA Astronaut Group 18" label="NASA Astronaut Group 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869366" start="814" end="837" title="NASA Astronaut Group 19" label="NASA Astronaut Group 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869367" start="841" end="864" title="NASA Astronaut Group 20" label="NASA Astronaut Group 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952378" start="868" end="891" title="NASA Astronaut Group 21" label="NASA Astronaut Group 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q30158159" start="895" end="918" title="NASA Astronaut Group 22" label="NASA Astronaut Group 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q85204076" start="922" end="945" title="NASA Astronaut Group 23" label="NASA Astronaut Group 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601854" start="949" end="994" title="List of United States Marine Corps astronauts" label="List of United States Marine Corps astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q110639923" start="998" end="1042" title="List of United States Space Force astronauts" label="List of United States Space Force astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606303" start="1046" end="1111" title="List of astronauts educated at the United States Military Academy" label="List of astronauts educated at the United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606305" start="1115" end="1177" title="List of astronauts educated at the United States Naval Academy" label="List of astronauts educated at the United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029738" start="1180" end="1204" title="Canadian Astronaut Corps" label="Canadian Astronaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567052" start="1207" end="1233" title="List of Chinese astronauts" label="List of Chinese astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q124830269" start="1236" end="1261" title="List of Indian astronauts" label="List of Indian astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q47030741" start="1264" end="1291" title="List of Japanese astronauts" label="List of Japanese astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q85770367" start="1295" end="1315" title="JAXA Astronaut Corps" label="JAXA Astronaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359326" start="1318" end="1336" title="List of cosmonauts" label="List of cosmonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q108907880" start="1340" end="1365" title="Roscosmos Cosmonaut Corps" label="Roscosmos Cosmonaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570362" start="1368" end="1395" title="List of European astronauts" label="List of European astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378042" start="1399" end="1423" title="European Astronaut Corps" label="European Astronaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742600" start="1427" end="1469" title="2022 European Space Agency Astronaut Group" label="2022 European Space Agency Astronaut Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550654" start="1473" end="1497" title="List of Dutch astronauts" label="List of Dutch astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q124475010" start="1501" end="1527" title="List of French spationauts" label="List of French spationauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458217" start="1531" end="1556" title="List of German astronauts" label="List of German astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q124376939" start="1560" end="1586" title="List of Italian astronauts" label="List of Italian astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q129567296" start="1590" end="1615" title="List of Polish astronauts" label="List of Polish astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722344" start="1644" end="1679" title="List of African-American astronauts" label="List of African-American astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561859" start="1682" end="1705" title="List of Arab astronauts" label="List of Arab astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562400" start="1708" end="1732" title="List of Asian astronauts" label="List of Asian astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722352" start="1735" end="1768" title="List of Asian American astronauts" label="List of Asian American astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958552" start="1771" end="1795" title="List of women astronauts" label="List of women astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573247" start="1798" end="1825" title="List of Hispanic astronauts" label="List of Hispanic astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q109121493" start="1828" end="1862" title="List of Ibero-American spacefarers" label="List of Ibero-American spacefarers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124570991" start="1865" end="1900" title="List of astronauts of Indian origin" label="List of astronauts of Indian origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771406" start="1903" end="1928" title="List of Muslim astronauts" label="List of Muslim astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760650" start="1931" end="1966" title="List of billionaire spacetravellers" label="List of billionaire spacetravellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070965" start="1989" end="2025" title="List of cumulative spacewalk records" label="List of cumulative spacewalk records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624007" start="2028" end="2085" title="List of inductees in the International Space Hall of Fame" label="List of inductees in the International Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711132" start="2088" end="2139" title="List of visitors to the International Space Station" label="List of visitors to the International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23012338" start="2142" end="2189" title="List of crew of the International Space Station" label="List of crew of the International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q96389210" start="2192" end="2245" title="List of commanders of the International Space Station" label="List of commanders of the International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811817" start="2249" end="2269" title="List of Mir visitors" label="List of Mir visitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624809" start="2272" end="2299" title="List of Space Shuttle crews" label="List of Space Shuttle crews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640263" start="2302" end="2322" title="List of spacewalkers" label="List of spacewalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596311" start="2325" end="2348" title="List of Salyut visitors" label="List of Salyut visitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q109447078" start="2351" end="2397" title="List of human spaceflights in Tiangong Program" label="List of human spaceflights in Tiangong Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850611" start="2411" end="2450" title="List of astronauts by year of selection" label="List of astronauts by year of selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210133" start="2453" end="2493" title="List of space travellers by first flight" label="List of space travellers by first flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871852" start="2496" end="2538" title="List of orbital space travelers by company" label="List of orbital space travelers by company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619600" start="2541" end="2570" title="Lists of fictional astronauts" label="Lists of fictional astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q920576" start="2592" end="2629" title="List of human spaceflights, 1961–1970" label="List of human spaceflights, 1961–1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017152" start="2632" end="2669" title="List of human spaceflights, 1971–1980" label="List of human spaceflights, 1971–1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192673" start="2672" end="2709" title="List of human spaceflights, 1981–1990" label="List of human spaceflights, 1981–1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610517" start="2712" end="2749" title="List of human spaceflights, 1991–2000" label="List of human spaceflights, 1991–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471840" start="2752" end="2789" title="List of human spaceflights, 2001–2010" label="List of human spaceflights, 2001–2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761321" start="2792" end="2829" title="List of human spaceflights, 2011–2020" label="List of human spaceflights, 2011–2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q95917629" start="2831" end="2871" title="List of human spaceflights, 2021–present" label="List of human spaceflights, 2021–present"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596084" start="2875" end="2917" title="List of Russian human spaceflight missions" label="List of Russian human spaceflight missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q856308" start="2920" end="2961" title="List of Soviet human spaceflight missions" label="List of Soviet human spaceflight missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q108617125" start="2964" end="3017" title="List of fully civilian crewed suborbital spaceflights" label="List of fully civilian crewed suborbital spaceflights"/>
<link wikidata="Q108602246" start="3020" end="3070" title="List of fully civilian crewed orbital spaceflights" label="List of fully civilian crewed orbital spaceflights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309613" start="3089" end="3118" title="Lists of astronomical objects" label="Lists of astronomical objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120218" start="3121" end="3140" title="Lists of telescopes" label="Lists of telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892152" start="3143" end="3162" title="Lists of spacecraft" label="Lists of spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q22991" start="3165" end="3198" title="List of government space agencies" label="List of government space agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q64760009" start="3201" end="3226" title="Lists of space scientists" label="Lists of space scientists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343781" wikidata="Q6866129" url="?curid=343781" title="Minister of Finance (New Zealand)">
<text>The minister of Finance (), originally known as colonial treasurer, is a minister and the head of the New Zealand Treasury, responsible for producing an annual New Zealand budget outlining the government&#x27;s proposed expenditure. The position is often considered to be the most important cabinet post after that of the prime minister.

The current Minister of Finance is Nicola Willis. There are currently three associate minister roles held by Chris Bishop, David Seymour, and Shane Jones.

==Responsibilities and powers==

One of the Minister of Finance&#x27;s key roles involves the framing of the annual year budget. According to Parliament&#x27;s Standing Orders, the Minister of Finance may veto any parliamentary bill which would have a significant impact on the government&#x27;s budget plans. The Minister of Finance supervises the Treasury, which is the government&#x27;s primary advisor on matters of economic and financial policy. As such, the Minister of Finance has broad control of the government&#x27;s spending, making the position quite powerful.

Some analysts, such as Jonathan Boston, claim that the Minister of Finance can sometimes hold more influence than the Prime Minister, if the conditions are right. Gordon Coates, Finance Minister in the early 1930s, was sometimes such a figure. Some political scientists, such as Boston, believe that in the government of David Lange, Minister of Finance Roger Douglas held more power than was proper, and that the Treasury was using its control of government finances to take a supervisory role across the whole administration. It was probably for this reason that Lange&#x27;s successor, Geoffrey Palmer, established the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, which could offer the Prime Minister advice independent of that given by individual ministers.

==History==
The office of Minister of Finance has existed since 1841. Apart from the office of Prime Minister itself, the only other cabinet posts to have existed since the first cabinet are those of Attorney-General and Minister of Internal Affairs. Originally, the holder of the post was designated &quot;Colonial Treasurer&quot;, but this term was replaced with &quot;Minister of Finance&quot; shortly after New Zealand ceased to be a Colony and became a Dominion. This occurred in 1907, during the cabinet of Joseph Ward.

In the past, several Prime Ministers took on the post of Minister of Finance themselves, though in recent times this practice has declined. Robert Muldoon, the last Prime Minister to also serve as his own Minister of Finance, created considerable controversy by doing so. It is more common, however, for a Deputy Prime Minister to serve as Minister of Finance. Bob Tizard, Michael Cullen, Bill English and Grant Robertson served as Deputy Prime Minister when in the position as Minister of Finance.

Traditionally Ministers of Finance rank second or third in seniority lists within Westminster-style Cabinets, although initially Harry Lake was ranked at sixth and his successor Robert Muldoon was ranked at eighth; both because of their short service to date in Parliament, and because Keith Holyoake saw Muldoon as too arrogant and ambitious for his own good. In the Hipkins Cabinet, Grant Robertson was ranked fourth, although he was the most senior minister who was not the prime minister, deputy prime minister, or deputy leader of the Labour Party.

== Junior ministerial appointments in the finance portfolio ==
The convention of making a second, more junior appointment in the Finance portfolio began with Holyoake, who appointed Muldoon as an Assistant Minister to Lake shortly before the latter&#x27;s death in 1967. Some successive Prime Ministers made similar appointments of an Associate Minister of Finance (for example, Marshall and Kirk) but this was not always done (Rowling, for example, who had Mick Connelly as his associate while serving as Finance Minister did not appoint an associate Minister after succeeding to the premiership in 1974). Associate appointments became standard when Muldoon served concurrently as both Prime Minister and Finance Minister. In his second term, Muldoon appointed both a Deputy Minister of Finance (Hugh Templeton) as well as an associate Minister (Derek Quigley). Muldoon&#x27;s successors Lange and Palmer continued to have a three-strong Finance team, each appointing two associate Ministers to support their respective Ministers of Finance. At times, the appointment of associate ministers was intended to temper the reform ambitions of Roger Douglas.

In the coalition governments formed in 1996, 2017 and 2023, responsibility for Finance was shared between the parties. After the 1996 elections, the role of the Minister of Finance was formally split between two portfolios – that of Minister of Finance and that of Treasurer. The position of Treasurer was senior to that of the Minister of Finance, and was created as part of the coalition agreement between the National Party and New Zealand First. It was established especially for Winston Peters, leader of New Zealand First, who demanded it as part of the deal. When Peters ended the coalition, the position reverted to the National Party. After the change of government in 1999, both positions were held concurrently by Michael Cullen before they were combined into the old Minister of Finance portfolio in 2002. Associate Finance roles were won in coalition negotiations by New Zealand First, the Green Party and ACT New Zealand in the formation of both the Sixth Labour Government and the Sixth National Government.

== List of finance ministers ==

; Key


==List of treasurers==

; Key


== List of junior ministerial appointments in the finance portfolio ==
; Key
 
 
 

==References==
==External links==
* New Zealand Treasury</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6866129" start="4" end="23" title="Minister of Finance (New Zealand)" label="minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866129" start="48" end="66" title="Minister of Finance (New Zealand)" label="colonial treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866528" start="73" end="81" title="Ministers in the New Zealand Government" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015808" start="102" end="122" title="New Zealand Treasury" label="New Zealand Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875458" start="160" end="178" title="New Zealand budget" label="New Zealand budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932373" start="291" end="298" title="Cabinet of New Zealand" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="322" end="336" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q41424038" start="374" end="387" title="Nicola Willis" label="Nicola Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097593" start="448" end="460" title="Chris Bishop" label="Chris Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055796" start="462" end="475" title="David Seymour" label="David Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488117" start="481" end="492" title="Shane Jones" label="Shane Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875458" start="616" end="622" title="New Zealand budget" label="budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q221911" start="655" end="670" title="Parliamentary procedure" label="Standing Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015808" start="840" end="852" title="New Zealand Treasury" label="the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q731342" start="1232" end="1245" title="Gordon Coates" label="Gordon Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q367589" start="1390" end="1401" title="David Lange" label="David Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q352998" start="1423" end="1436" title="Roger Douglas" label="Roger Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385100" start="1658" end="1673" title="Geoffrey Palmer (politician)" label="Geoffrey Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260565" start="1691" end="1735" title="Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (New Zealand)" label="Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818600" start="2033" end="2049" title="Attorney-General (New Zealand)" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088927" start="2054" end="2082" title="Minister of Internal Affairs (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Internal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371024" start="2346" end="2357" title="Joseph Ward" label="Joseph Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="2500" end="2514" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261068" start="2666" end="2687" title="Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934206" start="2721" end="2731" title="Bob Tizard" label="Bob Tizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622925" start="2733" end="2747" title="Michael Cullen (politician)" label="Michael Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384608" start="2749" end="2761" title="Bill English" label="Bill English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543207" start="2766" end="2781" title="Grant Robertson" label="Grant Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670427" start="2989" end="2999" title="Harry Lake" label="Harry Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="3038" end="3052" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q637012" start="3146" end="3160" title="Keith Holyoake" label="Keith Holyoake"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314738" start="3228" end="3243" title="Sixth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Hipkins Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="3337" end="3351" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261068" start="3353" end="3374" title="Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099289" start="3379" end="3412" title="Deputy Leader of the New Zealand Labour Party" label="deputy leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q284733" start="3794" end="3802" title="Jack Marshall" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237120" start="3807" end="3811" title="Norman Kirk" label="Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q862430" start="3843" end="3850" title="Bill Rowling" label="Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838103" start="3873" end="3886" title="Mick Connelly" label="Mick Connelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945535" start="4212" end="4226" title="Hugh Templeton" label="Hugh Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262289" start="4262" end="4275" title="Derek Quigley" label="Derek Quigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q745640" start="4534" end="4550" title="Rogernomics" label="reform ambitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q352998" start="4554" end="4567" title="Roger Douglas" label="Roger Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="4982" end="4996" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="5001" end="5018" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396178" start="5054" end="5068" title="Winston Peters" label="Winston Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327761" start="5473" end="5484" title="Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q288838" start="5489" end="5504" title="ACT New Zealand" label="ACT New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314738" start="5534" end="5557" title="Sixth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Sixth Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q123232751" start="5566" end="5591" title="Sixth National Government of New Zealand" label="Sixth National Government"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343782" wikidata="Q14472169" url="?curid=343782" title="Parliamentary Labour Party">
<text>The Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP) is the parliamentary group of the Labour Party in the British House of Commons. The group comprises the Labour members of parliament as a collective body. Commentators on the British Constitution sometimes draw a distinction between the Labour Party (which was created outside Parliament and later achieved office) and the Conservative and Liberal parties (which began as parliamentary factions). The term Parliamentary Labour Party refers to the party in Parliament, whereas the term Labour Party refers to the entire Labour Party, the parliamentary element of which is the PLP.

A similar body for the Conservative Party is the 1922 Committee.

An organisation for former members, the &quot;PLP in exile&quot;, was established after the 2010 general election.

==Role==
The PLP holds regular meetings behind closed doors to question the Leader and to discuss its concerns.

Labour MPs elect three of their number to Labour&#x27;s National Executive Committee.

Originally, the Leader of the Labour Party was elected by the PLP. Now, however, the party operates on a one member, one vote system, where all members are awarded a single vote, as well as affiliated organizations (trade unions and socialist societies) and temporary registered supporters. Instant-runoff voting (the &quot;Alternative Vote&quot;) is used to conduct the election. Labour MPs retain the power to trigger an extraordinary or &quot;special&quot; Labour Party Conference to choose a new leader if they lose confidence in their existing leader.

==Chair==

The Chair of the PLP chairs meetings of the Parliamentary party. They are elected by Labour MPs at the start of each annual session of Parliament. By tradition, only elections at the start of each Parliament, following a general election, are competitive.

From 1921 to 1970, the Chair of the PLP was also the leader of the party as a whole; before 1921, leadership of the party was arguably split between the Chairman of the PLP, the General Secretary and the Party Chairman. When the leaders of the Labour Party joined coalition governments during the First and Second World Wars, an acting chair was appointed to lead the rump of the party in Opposition. When the Party was in government, a liaison committee was elected to facilitate communications between the cabinet and Labour backbenchers – the chair of this committee also chaired meetings of the PLP as a whole during these periods. In 1970, the positions of Leader of the Labour Party and Chair of the PLP were permanently split.
==Other roles and groups==
There is also a deputy chair.

Other groups have been established within the PLP, such as the Women&#x27;s PLP and the LGBT+ PLP.

Labour and Co-operative MPs form part of the PLP, though they also meet (together with Labour Co-op members of the House of Lords) as the Co-operative Parliamentary Group, which has its own chair.

==See also==
*1922 Committee
*Parliamentary group

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14472169" start="4" end="30" title="Parliamentary Labour Party" label="Parliamentary Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472169" start="32" end="35" title="Parliamentary Labour Party" label="PLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="44" end="63" title="parliamentary group" label="parliamentary group"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="71" end="83" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="99" end="115" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767862" start="212" end="232" title="United Kingdom constitutional law" label="British Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="360" end="372" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="377" end="384" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561171" start="667" end="681" title="1922 Committee" label="1922 Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="776" end="797" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="969" end="997" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="1105" end="1125" title="one member, one vote" label="one member, one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688922" start="1216" end="1228" title="affiliated trade unions" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551856" start="1233" end="1252" title="socialist societies" label="socialist societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="1291" end="1312" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="Instant-runoff voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467451" start="1460" end="1483" title="Labour Party Conference" label="Labour Party Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="1790" end="1806" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532175" start="2004" end="2021" title="Labour Party General Secretary" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="2030" end="2044" title="National Executive Committee of the Labour Party" label="Party Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2123" end="2128" title="World War I" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2133" end="2149" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="2353" end="2364" title="backbencher" label="backbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467393" start="2718" end="2741" title="Labour and Co-operative" label="Labour and Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561171" start="2930" end="2944" title="1922 Committee" label="1922 Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="2946" end="2965" title="Parliamentary group" label="Parliamentary group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343783" wikidata="Q603225" url="?curid=343783" title="Antonio Margarito">
<text>Antonio Margarito Montiel (born March 18, 1978) is a Mexican-American former professional boxer who competed between 1994 and 2017. He held multiple welterweight world championships, including the WBO title from 2002 to 2007, the IBF title in 2008, and the WBA (Super) title from 2008 to 2009. He also challenged three times for a light middleweight world title between 2004 and 2011. Nicknamed &quot;El Tornado de Tijuana&quot; (&quot;The Tijuana Tornado&quot;), Margarito was known for his aggressive pressure fighting style and exceptionally durable chin.

In 2009, just before his fight with Shane Mosley, Margarito was involved in an incident where he was caught with illegal hand wraps containing gypsum (calcium sulfate) which, when combined with moisture, forms plaster of Paris. His signature stoppage victory over Miguel Cotto in 2008 was subsequently called into question. Following consecutive losses to Manny Pacquiao (a fight in which Margarito sustained career-changing eye damage) and a rematch against Cotto, Margarito retired from boxing in 2012 but returned for three more fights between 2016 and 2017.

==Early life and amateur career==
Margarito was born in Torrance, California. From the age of two, he grew up in Tijuana, Mexico, where he and his brother spent a lot of time in a neighborhood boxing gym.

He compiled a record of 18–3 in his relatively brief amateur career, indicating that he may have turned pro quickly due to financial concerns (which he himself confirmed on his personal television segment on HBO: &quot;Ring Life: Antonio Margarito&quot;).

==Professional career==
===Welterweight===
Margarito made his debut at the age of 15, beating Jose Trujillo in Tijuana by decision. On April 25 he achieved his first knockout, defeating Victor Angulo in the second round. On October 17 he suffered his first defeat, a six-round decision to Victor Lozoya. Over the next six bouts, he went 4–2. Following that, his financial situation dramatically improved (which is what he was trying to achieve early on in his career) and from there he went 28–2–1, with notable wins over Alfred Ankamah, Juan Soberanes, future World Middleweight Champion Sergio Martínez, Buck Smith, David Kamau and Frankie Randall, a former World Light Welterweight Champion who became the first man to beat Julio César Chávez in 91 fights.

===First world title fight===
On July 21, 2001, he got his first world title try against southpaw Daniel Santos for the WBO Welterweight title at Bayamón, Puerto Rico&#x27;s Rubén Rodríguez Coliseum. The fight had to be stopped in the first round as a consequence of a clash of heads that opened deep gashes on both fighters and sent them both to a nearby hospital. Because the fight had not gone at least four rounds, a technical decision could not be awarded. The bout was declared a &quot;no contest&quot; and Santos retained the belt.

===WBO welterweight champion===
Santos then vacated the WBO title to go up in weight and pursue the WBO Light Middleweight Championship and Margarito was assigned to fight Antonio Díaz for the vacant title in front of an HBO Boxing audience. On March 16, 2002, Margarito crowned himself world champion, beating Diaz by knockout in round ten. He defended that crown with a decision in twelve over Danny Perez Ramírez and a knockout in two over former WBA title holder Andrew Lewis. Lewis was a southpaw and a hard puncher, but had been exposed as having a weak chin, while Margarito proved that he has a world class chin. He publicly asked for a unification bout with then WBC and WBA Champion Ricardo Mayorga.

At this point, Margarito considered going up in weight to try to lure Fernando Vargas, Oscar De La Hoya or Shane Mosley into a lucrative fight, or Santos into a rematch at the light middleweight division. On October 17, 2003, Margarito made his light middleweight division debut with a two-round knockout win over Maurice Brantley in Phoenix, Arizona.

On January 31, 2004, back in the welterweight division, he retained his title with a second-round knockout of Canada&#x27;s previously undefeated Hercules Kyvelos.

Margarito faced Daniel Santos in a rematch on September 11 of the same year at the José Miguel Agrelot Coliseum in San Juan for Santos&#x27; WBO Light Middleweight title. The rematch also ended because of a headbutt, but this time, as the fight had already reached the four rounds mark needed for fights like these to be decided by judges, Margarito lost by a split ten round technical decision. He was down on two scorecards when the fight was stopped.

On April 23, 2005, Margarito retained his WBO welterweight title against another Puerto Rican, undefeated world class puncher Kermit Cintron, dropping him four times on his way to a fifth-round knockout (this fight was televised by ESPN Pay-Per-View Boxing). This was regarded as one of his best wins.

After almost a ten-month layoff, Margarito returned to the boxing ring on February 18, 2006, retaining his title with a first-round knockout of Jaime Manuel Gomez, who had lasted eleven rounds with Mosley for the IBF Lightweight title eight and a half years before.

On December 2, 2006, Margarito defeated future champion Joshua Clottey by a twelve-round unanimous decision. Margarito set a Compubox all-time record of 1,675 total punches thrown in a twelve-round bout. In the aftermath of the fight, it was revealed that Margarito had injured his ankle a week before the fight, but went on to fight regardless of the injury.

===Losing and regaining the WBO welterweight title===

On July 14, 2007, Margarito lost a 12-round unanimous decision to undefeated challenger Paul Williams, losing his WBO belt. After the bout, Margarito heavily disputed the decision, claiming that he had landed the most meaningful punches. Williams, however, landed the most punches (outhitting Margarito by almost a 2–1 ratio and throwing an average of over 100 punches per round) according to compubox.

On April 12, 2008, Margarito engaged in a rematch with Cintron, who had won the IBF Welterweight title belt following his loss to Margarito in 2005. In the early rounds, Cintron struck Margarito with several flush power shots to the head, but Margarito remained unhurt and continued to execute a game plan of continuously moving forward and pressuring Cintron. In the sixth round, Margarito landed a liver shot, knocking Cintron out and taking the IBF title. As the referee counted Cintron out, HBO cameras captured Margarito from a neutral corner, gesturing upward with his arms and urging Cintron to get up so that the two men could continue fighting.

===Margarito vs. Cotto===

Following his successful rematch with Cintron, the IBF ordered him to fight a mandatory defense against the organization&#x27;s number-one contender, Joshua Clottey, whom Margarito had previously defeated in 2006. Rather than agreeing to a rematch with Clottey, Margarito vacated the IBF title and agreed to a fight with undefeated WBA Welterweight Champion Miguel Cotto of Puerto Rico. The Cotto-Margarito match took place on July 26, 2008, in Las Vegas.

Margarito won in the 11th round via technical knockout. Margarito had lost almost all the early rounds, but he came back with relentless pace, eventually winning in the 11th round, in what was lauded as one of the best fights of the year. At the time of the stoppage, Margarito was ahead by two rounds on two judges&#x27; scorecards, with one judge having it even. Prior to his fight with Shane Mosley, Margarito had a record of 37 wins, 5 losses and 1 no contest, with 27 wins by knockout.

===Margarito vs. Mosley===
Margarito fought Shane Mosley on January 24, 2009, at the Staples Center in Los Angeles to defend his WBA title and for the vacant Lineal Welterweight Championship of &quot;Lineal Champs&quot; and &quot;Cyber Boxing Zone (CBZ)&quot;. &quot;The Ring&quot; did not recognize this bout for its vacant Welterweight Championship despite the fact it pitted &quot;The Ring&quot; #1 ranked welterweight, Antonio Margarito, vs. &quot;The Ring&quot; #3 ranked welterweight, Shane Mosley. Coming in the bout, Margarito had just stopped the previous &quot;The Ring&quot; #1 ranked welterweight and current &quot;The Ring&quot; #2 ranked welterweight, Miguel Cotto. In the fight, Margarito was battered and outclassed by Mosley and lost the fight and his WBA title by 9th-round technical knockout.

After the knockout loss, Margarito said he was weight-drained during the fight, and was also suffering from dehydration and back problems.

===Margarito vs. García===

Margarito was scheduled to return to the ring on March 13, 2010, against Carson Jones, pending his relicensing, on the Pacquiao-Clottey undercard. But for reasons unspecified, promoter Top Rank announced he would not return.
Margarito expressed interest in fighting Filipino boxer Manny Pacquiao if the latter&#x27;s bout with Floyd Mayweather Jr. did not materialize.

His comeback fight was postponed until May 8 and was held at Aguascalientes, Mexico, where he faced light middleweight contender Roberto García (28–2). Margarito won a ten-round unanimous decision over García to capture the vacant WBC International Light Middleweight title. The judges&#x27; score cards were 99–89, 100–88 and 99–90, all in favor of Margarito.

Margarito knocked García down in the first round, the first time García was knocked down in his boxing career.

===Margarito vs. Pacquiao===

On July 23, 2010, Bob Arum announced that Margarito would face Manny Pacquiao for the WBC Light Middleweight championship that was vacated by then Middleweight champion Sergio Martínez. The fight took place on Saturday, November 13, 2010, in Cowboys Stadium in Arlington, Texas, as Margarito had a licence to box in Texas. In his camp for this fight, Margarito had four southpaw sparring partners: Karim Martínez, Cleotis Pendarvis, number one mandatory for the WBA Light Middleweight title, Austin Trout, and U.S. Olympic silver medalist Ricardo Williams. Five weeks before the fight, Margarito and Lightweight boxer Brandon Ríos were interviewed by Elie Seckbach and the video taken showed both of them (Margarito and Ríos) mocking Manny Pacquiao&#x27;s trainer Freddie Roach who has Parkinson&#x27;s disease. On the Thursday before the fight, Margarito publicly apologized to Roach and to everyone suffering from Parkinson&#x27;s. Margarito had a 17-pound weight advantage (weighing 165 to Pacquiao&#x27;s 148), a 5.5 inch height advantage, and a six-inch reach advantage. Despite this, he was dominated by Pacquiao and endured a savage, brutal, relentless beating for 12 rounds, and suffered serious eye damage. On the fourth episode of HBO reality show 24/7, it was observed that one week before the fight, Margarito weighed in at 154 lbs with the fight scheduled at a catchweight of 150 lbs. The fight wound up being a unanimous decision loss for Margarito, with the judges&#x27; scorecards being 120–108, 119–109, and 118–108. Margarito was taken to the hospital directly after the fight where it was discovered that his left orbital bone had been fractured. Surgery had to be postponed to two days later as his face was too swollen to operate on.

===Margarito vs. Cotto II===
On December 3, 2011, Margarito was defeated by Miguel Cotto via TKO by doctor stoppage in the 10th round. The fight was stopped at the start of the 10th round because of the condition of Margarito&#x27;s right eye, which was swollen shut. This was the same eye that was badly damaged in his previous fight with Manny Pacquiao and the one that almost kept the New York State Athletic Commission from granting him his boxing license because of the special procedure that was performed on it in 2010. Margarito retired following this fight.

===Comeback===
Margarito came out of retirement in 2016, winning two bouts that year. He faced Carson Jones on September 2, 2017, winning a slugfest by seventh-round technical decision after a cut opened up on Margarito&#x27;s eye in the early rounds.
==Tampered handwraps controversy==
Before Margarito vs. Mosley, Mosley&#x27;s trainer, Naazim Richardson, observed that Margarito had a pasty white substance in his handwraps. One doctor described this material as plaster hidden in the wrapped hands of Margarito, leading to accusations that he may have been trying to cheat. At Richardson&#x27;s insistence, California State Inspector Dean Lohuis called for Margarito&#x27;s hands to be rewrapped. According to Judd Burstein, the attorney for Mosley, Margarito had wet pads in the wrapping. Mosley&#x27;s doctor, Robert Olvera, likened the material to the type of plaster used to make casts. Burstein said he seized the pad removed from the wrapping and another pad found in Margarito&#x27;s dressing room. Both were placed in a sealed box that was given to Lohuis for further study. The California Department of Justice laboratory later confirmed the substance to be similar in nature to plaster of Paris.

In late January the California State Athletic Commission suspended Margarito and his trainer, Javier Capetillo, pending investigation. At the hearing, Margarito claimed he did not know what was in the wraps, while Capetillo admitted to making &quot;a big mistake&quot; by placing the wrong inserts into Margarito&#x27;s hand wraps. The commission voted unanimously to revoke Margarito and Capetillo&#x27;s licenses for at least one year. While it found Margarito did not know about the gloves, it took the line that as head of the team, he was responsible for Capetillo&#x27;s actions. 

Since state boxing commissions generally honor suspensions imposed in other states, this action effectively banned Margarito from boxing in the United States.

In November 2009, it emerged that red stains on the hand wraps Margarito used in the Cotto fight were similar to the stains on the inserts seized before the Mosley fight. This has raised suspicions that Margarito&#x27;s gloves were loaded for that fight and possibly others as well.

==Personal life==
Margarito resides in Los Angeles, California, with his wife Lorena, whom he married after his first marriage. He was first married to his childhood sweetheart Michelle in 1999, came to an end.

==Professional boxing record==

==See also==
*Notable boxing families
*List of welterweight boxing champions
*List of WBA champions
*List of IBF champions
*List of WBO champions
*List of Mexican boxing world champions

==References==
==External links==
*
*Antonio Margarito profile at About.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q603225" start="0" end="25" title="Antonio Margarito" label="Antonio Margarito Montiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="77" end="95" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q766904" start="149" end="161" title="welterweight" label="welterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q830940" start="197" end="200" title="World Boxing Organization" label="WBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q742944" start="230" end="233" title="International Boxing Federation" label="IBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="257" end="268" title="WBA (Super)" label="WBA (Super)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215222" start="331" end="349" title="light middleweight" label="light middleweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951976" start="503" end="520" title="pressure fighting" label="pressure fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099468" start="553" end="557" title="chin (combat sports)" label="chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q559462" start="596" end="608" title="Shane Mosley" label="Shane Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="703" end="709" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="711" end="726" title="calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="770" end="786" title="plaster" label="plaster of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="802" end="810" title="technical knockout" label="stoppage"/>
<link wikidata="Q543778" start="824" end="836" title="Miguel Cotto" label="Miguel Cotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q486359" start="916" end="930" title="Manny Pacquiao" label="Manny Pacquiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q489197" start="1179" end="1199" title="Torrance, California" label="Torrance, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739" start="1236" end="1243" title="Tijuana" label="Tijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="1537" end="1540" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739" start="1697" end="1704" title="Tijuana" label="Tijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="1752" end="1760" title="knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722236" start="2108" end="2122" title="Alfred Ankamah" label="Alfred Ankamah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051530" start="2153" end="2165" title="Middleweight" label="Middleweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q973553" start="2175" end="2190" title="Sergio Martínez (boxer)" label="Sergio Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982945" start="2192" end="2202" title="Buck Smith" label="Buck Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235835" start="2204" end="2215" title="David Kamau" label="David Kamau"/>
<link wikidata="Q346369" start="2220" end="2235" title="Frankie Randall" label="Frankie Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112498" start="2252" end="2270" title="Light Welterweight" label="Light Welterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q471461" start="2313" end="2331" title="Julio César Chávez" label="Julio César Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135001" start="2445" end="2458" title="Daniel Santos (boxer)" label="Daniel Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q830940" start="2467" end="2470" title="World Boxing Organization" label="WBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q766904" start="2471" end="2483" title="Welterweight" label="Welterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q739675" start="2493" end="2513" title="Bayamón, Puerto Rico" label="Bayamón, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918692" start="2521" end="2545" title="Rubén Rodríguez Coliseum" label="Rubén Rodríguez Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215222" start="2991" end="3009" title="Light Middleweight" label="Light Middleweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776580" start="3059" end="3071" title="Antonio Díaz (boxer)" label="Antonio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629052" start="3108" end="3118" title="HBO Boxing" label="HBO Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220736" start="3283" end="3302" title="Danny Perez Ramírez" label="Danny Perez Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846659" start="3354" end="3366" title="Andrew Lewis (boxing)" label="Andrew Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="3559" end="3562" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="3567" end="3570" title="World Boxing Association" label="WBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357538" start="3580" end="3595" title="Ricardo Mayorga" label="Ricardo Mayorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q772193" start="3668" end="3683" title="Fernando Vargas" label="Fernando Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q293534" start="3685" end="3701" title="Oscar De La Hoya" label="Oscar De La Hoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q559462" start="3705" end="3717" title="Shane Mosley" label="Shane Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="3932" end="3948" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4061" end="4067" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736477" start="4097" end="4113" title="Hercules Kyvelos" label="Hercules Kyvelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889550" start="4199" end="4227" title="José Miguel Agrelot Coliseum" label="José Miguel Agrelot Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="4231" end="4239" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692333" start="4492" end="4510" title="technical decision" label="technical decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="4652" end="4664" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720045" start="4697" end="4711" title="Kermit Cintron" label="Kermit Cintron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503515" start="4803" end="4827" title="ESPN2 Friday Night Fights" label="ESPN Pay-Per-View Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213967" start="5018" end="5036" title="Jaime Manuel Gomez" label="Jaime Manuel Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q742944" start="5087" end="5090" title="International Boxing Federation" label="IBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051922" start="5091" end="5102" title="Lightweight" label="Lightweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396183" start="5197" end="5211" title="Joshua Clottey" label="Joshua Clottey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990893" start="5266" end="5274" title="Compubox" label="Compubox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375801" start="5645" end="5658" title="Paul Williams (boxer)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990893" start="5950" end="5958" title="compubox" label="compubox"/>
<link wikidata="Q96391787" start="6721" end="6738" title="mandatory challenger" label="mandatory defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q543778" start="7001" end="7013" title="Miguel Cotto" label="Miguel Cotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="7017" end="7028" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519890" start="7034" end="7055" title="The Battle (boxing)" label="Cotto-Margarito match"/>
<link wikidata="Q559462" start="7636" end="7648" title="Shane Mosley" label="Shane Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="7677" end="7691" title="Staples Center" label="Staples Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q886814" start="7750" end="7756" title="Lineal Championship" label="Lineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="7859" end="7867" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="The Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046942" start="8646" end="8658" title="Carson Jones" label="Carson Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751038" start="8692" end="8708" title="Manny Pacquiao vs. Joshua Clottey" label="Pacquiao-Clottey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824594" start="8758" end="8766" title="Top Rank" label="Top Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q486359" start="8854" end="8868" title="Manny Pacquiao" label="Manny Pacquiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q318204" start="8900" end="8920" title="Floyd Mayweather Jr." label="Floyd Mayweather Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q79952" start="9004" end="9018" title="Aguascalientes" label="Aguascalientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938839" start="9072" end="9086" title="Roberto García (Mexican boxer)" label="Roberto García"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051530" start="9594" end="9606" title="Middleweight" label="Middleweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q838284" start="9689" end="9704" title="Cowboys Stadium" label="Cowboys Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17943" start="9708" end="9724" title="Arlington, Texas" label="Arlington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131769" start="9861" end="9878" title="Cleotis Pendarvis" label="Cleotis Pendarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q781185" start="9939" end="9951" title="Austin Trout" label="Austin Trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q346051" start="9986" end="10002" title="Ricardo Williams (boxer)" label="Ricardo Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923783" start="10065" end="10077" title="Brandon Ríos" label="Brandon Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360726" start="10098" end="10111" title="Elie Seckbach" label="Elie Seckbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q486359" start="10181" end="10195" title="Manny Pacquiao" label="Manny Pacquiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q515377" start="10211" end="10224" title="Freddie Roach (boxing)" label="Freddie Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="10233" end="10257" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="11296" end="11299" title="Technical knockout" label="TKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992437" start="11591" end="11625" title="New York State Athletic Commission" label="New York State Athletic Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046942" start="11866" end="11878" title="Carson Jones" label="Carson Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692333" start="11937" end="11955" title="technical decision" label="technical decision"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12065" end="12085" title="Antonio Margarito#Margarito vs. Mosley" label="Margarito vs. Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956684" start="12110" end="12127" title="Naazim Richardson" label="Naazim Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020429" start="12862" end="12894" title="California Department of Justice" label="California Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="12963" end="12979" title="plaster of Paris" label="plaster of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021008" start="13002" end="13038" title="California State Athletic Commission" label="California State Athletic Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13714" end="13727" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="14053" end="14064" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14272" end="14295" title="List of boxing families#Mexico" label="Notable boxing families"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562372" start="14297" end="14334" title="List of welterweight boxing champions" label="List of welterweight boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14336" end="14357" title="List of WBA world champions#Welterweight" label="List of WBA champions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14359" end="14380" title="List of IBF world champions#Welterweight" label="List of IBF champions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14382" end="14403" title="List of WBO world champions#Welterweight" label="List of WBO champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590015" start="14405" end="14443" title="List of Mexican boxing world champions" label="List of Mexican boxing world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q124250582" start="14511" end="14520" title="About.com" label="About.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343789" wikidata="Q7551856" url="?curid=343789" title="Socialist society (Labour Party)">
<text>A socialist society is a membership organisation that is affiliated with the Labour Party in the UK.
The best-known and oldest socialist society is the Fabian Society, founded in 1884, some years before the creation of the Labour Party itself (in which the Society participated). The Society&#x27;s membership is relatively small (around 7000) but it exerts much influence in Labour circles. The Co-operative Party is not strictly a &quot;socialist society&quot; in the context of the Labour Party; it is in fact a separate party with an electoral agreement with Labour. It acts as a socialist society for the most part although it has certain additional rights.

&quot;Affiliation&quot; means that the socialist societies – like a number of British trade unions – pay an affiliation fee to the Labour Party, and the affiliates&#x27; members become affiliated supporters of the Labour Party (a different status from full member), unless they specifically choose otherwise. In return the societies receive a formal role in Labour decision-making, and the affiliated supporters can take part in all-member ballots in certain circumstances. For example, they can participate in the election of Labour Party leaders and deputy leaders, have delegates and votes at Annual Conference.

Socialist societies also elect a delegate (currently James Asser) to the Labour National Executive Committee and can affiliate at a local level to Constituency Labour Parties. A second seat was allotted to BAME Labour in early 2007, when its membership rose above 2,500. The Socialist Societies also elect three representatives to the National Policy Forum; currently, these are Sina Lari, Andrew Harrop and Paul Clarkson. Since the 2011 &#x27;refounding Labour&#x27; process, seats on the NPF have also been allocated to LGBT+ Labour and the Disability Labour. Each Socialist Society can nominate, and since 2015 Socialist Society members can vote individually, in the Labour leader and deputy leader elections.

The socialist societies are also involved in the Labour Party&#x27;s policy reviews, and the work of the Socialist Societies is co-ordinated by the Socialist Societies Executive. This is a regular meeting of the chairs and key officers of all the societies to share ideas and co-ordinate work. These meetings also co-ordinate regular meetings with senior Labour Party officials and MPs.

As a collective, the societies try to co-ordinate campaigning work and hold a joint event at Labour Party conference. A small group of officers are elected to co-ordinate this work. The current committee is:

* Chair – Claire Reynolds (Labour Women&#x27;s Network) 
* Vice-Chair (Development / Campaigns) – Liam Conlon (Labour Party Irish Society)
* Vice-Chair (Policy) – Mike Buckley (Labour Campaign for International Development)
* Secretary – Katie Curtis (Fabian Society)
* Treasurer – Chris Wongsosaputro (East &amp; South East Asians for Labour)

==Current socialist societies==
As of January 2025, there are 20 affiliated socialist societies:

* Black, Asian Minority Ethnic Labour (BAME Labour) (formerly Labour Party Black Sections and Black Socialist Society)
* East &amp; South East Asians for Labour
* Christians on the Left (formerly The Christian Socialist Movement)
* Disability Labour (formerly Labour Party Disabled Members Group)
* Fabian Society
* Jewish Labour Movement, (formerly Poale Zion)
* Labour Animal Welfare Society
* Labour Business (formerly Labour Finance and Industry Group)
* Labour Campaign for International Development
* Labour Housing Group
* Labour Movement for Europe
* Labour Party Irish Society
* Labour Women&#x27;s Network
* LGBT+ Labour
* National Union of Labour and Socialist Clubs
* Scientists for Labour
* Socialist Educational Association
* Socialist Environment and Resources Association (SERA)- Labour&#x27;s Environmental Campaign
* Socialist Health Association
* Society of Labour Lawyers

There are other organisations, such as Labour Arts Alliance, Muslims for Labour and Labour Humanists, which are not formally affiliated to the Labour Party but act as campaign groups for Labour Party members in the same way as the affiliates, but have yet to apply for affiliation or have decided not to do so.

Young Labour and Labour Students are not Socialist Societies, and retain separate places within the Labour Party as national branches for young and student members.

==See also==
*Labour Party (UK) affiliated trade union
*List of organisations associated with the Labour Party (UK)
*Socialism

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7551856" start="2" end="19" title="Socialist society (Labour Party)" label="socialist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="77" end="89" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="97" end="99" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="152" end="166" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q211931" start="396" end="414" title="Co-operative Party" label="Co-operative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="750" end="762" title="trade unions" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="1360" end="1388" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163958" start="1427" end="1454" title="Constituency Labour Parties" label="Constituency Labour Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698781" start="1486" end="1497" title="BAME Labour" label="BAME Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457808" start="1802" end="1814" title="LGBT+ Labour" label="LGBT+ Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867964" start="1823" end="1840" title="Disability Labour" label="Disability Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647581" start="1883" end="1893" title="2015 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="since 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467495" start="2702" end="2728" title="Labour Party Irish Society" label="Labour Party Irish Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="2843" end="2857" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698781" start="3036" end="3085" title="BAME Labour" label="Black, Asian Minority Ethnic Labour (BAME Labour)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698778" start="3096" end="3123" title="Labour Party Black Sections" label="Labour Party Black Sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698782" start="3128" end="3151" title="Black Socialist Society" label="Black Socialist Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915433" start="3197" end="3219" title="Christians on the Left" label="Christians on the Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867964" start="3266" end="3283" title="Disability Labour" label="Disability Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="3333" end="3347" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851303" start="3350" end="3372" title="Jewish Labour Movement" label="Jewish Labour Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471943" start="3384" end="3394" title="Poale Zion" label="Poale Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640299" start="3564" end="3590" title="Labour Movement for Europe" label="Labour Movement for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467495" start="3593" end="3619" title="Labour Party Irish Society" label="Labour Party Irish Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q128693453" start="3622" end="3649" title="Labour Women&amp;#x27;s Network" label="Labour Women&amp;#x27;s Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457808" start="3652" end="3664" title="LGBT+ Labour" label="LGBT+ Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979141" start="3667" end="3711" title="National Union of Labour and Socialist Clubs" label="National Union of Labour and Socialist Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60484583" start="3714" end="3735" title="Scientists for Labour" label="Scientists for Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551554" start="3738" end="3771" title="Socialist Educational Association" label="Socialist Educational Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551556" start="3774" end="3821" title="Socialist Environment and Resources Association" label="Socialist Environment and Resources Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995477" start="3869" end="3897" title="Socialist Health Association" label="Socialist Health Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023052" start="4239" end="4251" title="Young Labour (United Kingdom)" label="Young Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467528" start="4256" end="4271" title="Labour Students" label="Labour Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688922" start="4419" end="4459" title="Labour Party (UK) affiliated trade union" label="Labour Party (UK) affiliated trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631781" start="4461" end="4520" title="List of organisations associated with the Labour Party (UK)" label="List of organisations associated with the Labour Party (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="4522" end="4531" title="Socialism" label="Socialism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343794" wikidata="Q3324390" url="?curid=343794" title="Morrade Hakkar">
<text>Morrade Hakkar (born 19 January 1972 in Besançon, France) is a French former professional boxer who competed from 1992 to 2012. He held the French national middleweight title twice (March 1997 to January 1998 and again from March 1999 to October 2000), the WBC International middleweight title (1997) and the European middleweight title 2002.

After knocking out previously undefeated Cristian Sanavia to capture the European middleweight belt on 11 May 2002, he became the mandatory challenger for undisputed world champion Bernard Hopkins. On 29 March 2003 they faced one another in Philadelphia, with Hopkins winning by technical knockout in the eighth round.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3324390" start="0" end="14" title="Morrade Hakkar" label="Morrade Hakkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="40" end="56" title="Besançon, France" label="Besançon, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="77" end="95" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="257" end="260" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="309" end="315" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002859" start="385" end="401" title="Cristian Sanavia" label="Cristian Sanavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96391787" start="474" end="494" title="mandatory challenger" label="mandatory challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q531804" start="525" end="540" title="Bernard Hopkins" label="Bernard Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="585" end="597" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="623" end="641" title="technical knockout" label="technical knockout"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343795" wikidata="Q4688922" url="?curid=343795" title="Labour Party (UK) affiliated trade union">
<text>In British politics, an affiliated trade union is one that is linked to the Labour Party. The party was created by the trade unions and socialist societies in 1900 as the Labour Representation Committee and the unions have retained close institutional links with it.

Affiliated unions pay an annual fee to the Labour Party; in return, they elect thirteen of the thirty-nine members of Labour&#x27;s National Executive Committee and fifty per cent of the delegates to Labour Party Conference. Local union branches also affiliate to Constituency Labour Parties and their members who are also individual members of the Party may represent the union as delegates on Labour Party structures.

Individual members may &quot;opt out&quot; of paying into a union&#x27;s political fund which is used to finance the affiliation.

Since 1994, affiliated trade unions have organised themselves into TULO - The Trade Union &amp; Labour Party Liaison Organisation, with a small number of staff to manage the relationship between the unions and the Party. A national TULO committee, with the unions&#x27; general secretaries, the Party Leader and Deputy Leader, General Secretary and NEC Chair and MPs&#x27; representatives, meets regularly to co-ordinate work and policy.

Until 1995, each union exercised a block vote at party conferences; since then, multiple delegates of a single union get an equal share of its voting allocation.

==Affiliated unions==
As of October 2021, the trade unions affiliated to the Labour Party are:

*Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen (ASLEF)
*Community (formerly KFAT &amp; ISTC)
*Communication Workers Union (CWU)
*Fire Brigades Union (FBU)
*GMB
*Musicians Union (MU)
*National Union of Mineworkers (NUM)
*Transport Salaried Staffs&#x27; Association (TSSA)
*UNISON (The Public Services Union)
*Unite (general workers in public and private sectors)
*Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers (USDAW)

The General Federation of Trade Unions (GFTU) represents its members, seven of the smaller unions, on many of the committees if they cannot send a delegate. In 2015, Unity merged into the GMB. In January 2017, the Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union (BECTU) merged with Prospect, a trade union that represents certain grades in the civil service and other professionals. Because Prospect represents civil servants, they are politically neutral and so BECTU disaffiliated from the Labour Party as a condition of the merger. In January 2017, the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians (UCATT) merged into Unite.

==Former affiliates==
During Tony Blair&#x27;s leadership of the Labour Party, the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers and Fire Brigades Union severed their links. However, the Fire Brigades Union re-affiliated to the Labour Party in November 2015. In September 2021 the Bakers, Food and Allied Workers&#x27; Union, one of the founding unions of the party, announced its disaffiliation from the party, citing dissatisfaction with Keir Starmer&#x27;s leadership.

Formerly, there were many more small trade unions in the UK, and many of them affiliated to the Labour Party. In 1946, the affiliates were:

* Amalgamated Engineering Union
* Amalgamated Society of Journeymen Felt Hatters
* Amalgamated Society of Shuttlemakers
* Amalgamated Society of Textile Workers and Kindred Trades
* Amalgamated Union of Building Trade Workers of Great Britain and Ireland
* Amalgamated Union of Operative Bakers, Confectioners and Allied Workers
* Amalgamated Union of Upholsterers
* Associated Blacksmiths&#x27;, Forge and Smithy Workers&#x27; Society
* Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen
* Association of Cine-Technicians
* Association of Correctors of the Press
* Association of Engineering and Shipbuilding Draughtsmen
* Boilermakers&#x27; and Iron and Steel Shipbuilders&#x27; Society
* Cardiff, Penarth and Barry Coal Trimmers&#x27; Union
* Confederation of Health Service Employees
* Constructional Engineering Union
* Clerical and Administrative Workers&#x27; Union
* Electrical Trades Union
* Enginemen and Firemen&#x27;s Union
* Fire Brigades&#x27; Union
* General Iron Fitters&#x27; Association
* Iron and Steel Trades Confederation
* Ironfounding Workers&#x27; Association
* London Society of Compositors
* National Amalgamated Furnishing Trades&#x27; Association
* National Amalgamated Union of Life Assurance Workers
* National Amalgamated Union of Shop Assistants, Warehousemen and Clerks
* National Association of Operative Plasterers
* National Cutlery Union
* National League of the Blind
* National Society of Coppersmiths, Braziers and Metal Workers
* National Society of Metal Mechanics
* National Society of Operative Printers and Assistants
* National Society of Painters
* National Society of Pottery Workers
* National Union of Agricultural Workers
* National Union of Blastfurnacemen, Ore Miners, Coke Workers and Kindred Trades
* National Union of Boot and Shoe Operatives
* National Union of Cigarette Makers and Tobacco Workers
* National Union of Distributive and Allied Workers
* National Union of Dyers, Bleachers and Textile Workers
* National Union of Electrotypers and Stereotypers
* National Union of Foundry Workers
* National Union of General and Municipal Workers
* National Union of Gold, Silver and Allied Trades
* National Union of Mineworkers
* National Union of Public Employees
* National Union of Railwaymen
* National Union of Seamen
* National Union of Shale Miners and Oil Workers
* National Union of Stove, Grate, and General Metal Workers
* National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers
* National Union of Vehicle Builders
* National Woolsorters&#x27; Society
* Power Loom Carpet Weavers&#x27; and Textile Workers&#x27; Association
* Prudential Staff Union
* Railway Clerks&#x27; Association
* Scottish Painters&#x27; Society
* Scottish Union of Bakers and Confectioners
* Ship Constructors&#x27; and Shipwrights&#x27; Association
* Society of Lithographic Artists, Designers, Engravers and Process Workers
* Transport and General Workers&#x27; Union
* Typographical Association
* United French Polishers&#x27; Society
* United Patternmakers&#x27; Association
* United Textile Factory Workers&#x27; Association
* Waterproof Garment Workers&#x27; Trade Union
* Yorkshire Warptwisters&#x27; Society

==See also==
*Trades Union Congress
*Political funding in the United Kingdom
*Trade Union and Labour Party Liaison Organisation
*Socialist society (Labour Party)

==References==
==External links==
*TULO - Unions Together</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q678363" start="3" end="19" title="British politics" label="British politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="35" end="46" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="76" end="88" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551856" start="136" end="155" title="socialist societies" label="socialist societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="400" end="428" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467451" start="468" end="491" title="Labour Party Conference" label="Labour Party Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163958" start="532" end="559" title="Constituency Labour Parties" label="Constituency Labour Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832003" start="887" end="949" title="TULO - The Trade Union &amp;amp; Labour Party Liaison Organisation" label="TULO - The Trade Union &amp;amp; Labour Party Liaison Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532175" start="1147" end="1164" title="General Secretary of the Labour Party" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809240" start="1519" end="1573" title="Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen" label="Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154612" start="1583" end="1592" title="Community (trade union)" label="Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154122" start="1621" end="1648" title="Communication Workers Union (UK)" label="Communication Workers Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451333" start="1656" end="1675" title="Fire Brigades Union" label="Fire Brigades Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485928" start="1683" end="1686" title="GMB (trade union)" label="GMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942600" start="1688" end="1703" title="Musicians&amp;#x27; Union (UK)" label="Musicians Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753814" start="1710" end="1739" title="National Union of Mineworkers (Great Britain)" label="National Union of Mineworkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062795" start="1747" end="1790" title="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association" label="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547264" start="1799" end="1805" title="UNISON" label="UNISON"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254509" start="1835" end="1840" title="Unite the Union" label="Unite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886722" start="1890" end="1936" title="Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers" label="Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q967612" start="1950" end="1984" title="General Federation of Trade Unions (UK)" label="General Federation of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893749" start="2112" end="2117" title="Unity (trade union)" label="Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972123" start="2160" end="2220" title="Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union" label="Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967824" start="2241" end="2249" title="Prospect (trade union)" label="Prospect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="2303" end="2316" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886558" start="2515" end="2567" title="Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians" label="Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="2625" end="2635" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="2643" end="2673" title="New Labour" label="leadership of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979153" start="2679" end="2733" title="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers" label="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451333" start="2738" end="2757" title="Fire Brigades Union" label="Fire Brigades Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849254" start="2886" end="2929" title="Bakers, Food and Allied Workers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Bakers, Food and Allied Workers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="3045" end="3057" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195110" start="3221" end="3250" title="Amalgamated Engineering Union" label="Amalgamated Engineering Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969996" start="3253" end="3299" title="Amalgamated Society of Journeymen Felt Hatters" label="Amalgamated Society of Journeymen Felt Hatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046197" start="3302" end="3338" title="Amalgamated Society of Shuttlemakers" label="Amalgamated Society of Shuttlemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24948615" start="3341" end="3398" title="Amalgamated Society of Textile Workers and Kindred Trades" label="Amalgamated Society of Textile Workers and Kindred Trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739375" start="3401" end="3473" title="Amalgamated Union of Building Trade Workers of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Amalgamated Union of Building Trade Workers of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849254" start="3476" end="3547" title="Amalgamated Union of Operative Bakers, Confectioners and Allied Workers" label="Amalgamated Union of Operative Bakers, Confectioners and Allied Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888476" start="3550" end="3583" title="Amalgamated Union of Upholsterers" label="Amalgamated Union of Upholsterers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27813999" start="3586" end="3654" title="Associated Blacksmiths&amp;#x27;, Forge and Smithy Workers&amp;#x27; Society" label="Associated Blacksmiths&amp;#x27;, Forge and Smithy Workers&amp;#x27; Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809240" start="3657" end="3711" title="Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen" label="Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809722" start="3714" end="3745" title="Association of Cine-Technicians" label="Association of Cine-Technicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079995" start="3748" end="3786" title="Association of Correctors of the Press" label="Association of Correctors of the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692239" start="3789" end="3844" title="Association of Engineering and Shipbuilding Draughtsmen" label="Association of Engineering and Shipbuilding Draughtsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739360" start="3847" end="3911" title="Boilermakers&amp;#x27; and Iron and Steel Shipbuilders&amp;#x27; Society" label="Boilermakers&amp;#x27; and Iron and Steel Shipbuilders&amp;#x27; Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850320" start="3914" end="3966" title="Cardiff, Penarth and Barry Coal Trimmers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Cardiff, Penarth and Barry Coal Trimmers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159816" start="3969" end="4010" title="Confederation of Health Service Employees" label="Confederation of Health Service Employees"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035154" start="4013" end="4045" title="Constructional Engineering Union" label="Constructional Engineering Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809987" start="4048" end="4095" title="Clerical and Administrative Workers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Clerical and Administrative Workers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184105" start="4098" end="4121" title="Electrical Trades Union (UK)" label="Electrical Trades Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970332" start="4124" end="4158" title="Enginemen and Firemen&amp;#x27;s Union" label="Enginemen and Firemen&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451333" start="4161" end="4186" title="Fire Brigades&amp;#x27; Union" label="Fire Brigades&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647829" start="4189" end="4227" title="General Iron Fitters&amp;#x27; Association" label="General Iron Fitters&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072909" start="4230" end="4265" title="Iron and Steel Trades Confederation" label="Iron and Steel Trades Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716026" start="4268" end="4306" title="Ironfounding Workers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Ironfounding Workers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670877" start="4309" end="4338" title="London Society of Compositors" label="London Society of Compositors"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073951" start="4341" end="4397" title="National Amalgamated Furnishing Trades&amp;#x27; Association" label="National Amalgamated Furnishing Trades&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q30634613" start="4400" end="4452" title="National Amalgamated Union of Life Assurance Workers" label="National Amalgamated Union of Life Assurance Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023209" start="4455" end="4525" title="National Amalgamated Union of Shop Assistants, Warehousemen and Clerks" label="National Amalgamated Union of Shop Assistants, Warehousemen and Clerks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970715" start="4528" end="4572" title="National Association of Operative Plasterers" label="National Association of Operative Plasterers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076569" start="4575" end="4597" title="National Cutlery Union" label="National Cutlery Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974075" start="4600" end="4628" title="National League of the Blind" label="National League of the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715421" start="4631" end="4691" title="National Society of Coppersmiths, Braziers and Metal Workers" label="National Society of Coppersmiths, Braziers and Metal Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932359" start="4694" end="4729" title="National Society of Metal Mechanics" label="National Society of Metal Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978590" start="4732" end="4785" title="National Society of Operative Printers and Assistants" label="National Society of Operative Printers and Assistants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238637" start="4788" end="4816" title="National Society of Painters" label="National Society of Painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893749" start="4819" end="4854" title="National Society of Pottery Workers" label="National Society of Pottery Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979106" start="4857" end="4895" title="National Union of Agricultural Workers" label="National Union of Agricultural Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979110" start="4898" end="4976" title="National Union of Blastfurnacemen, Ore Miners, Coke Workers and Kindred Trades" label="National Union of Blastfurnacemen, Ore Miners, Coke Workers and Kindred Trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979112" start="4979" end="5021" title="National Union of Boot and Shoe Operatives" label="National Union of Boot and Shoe Operatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793939" start="5024" end="5078" title="National Union of Cigarette Makers and Tobacco Workers" label="National Union of Cigarette Makers and Tobacco Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998530" start="5081" end="5130" title="National Union of Distributive and Allied Workers" label="National Union of Distributive and Allied Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979122" start="5133" end="5187" title="National Union of Dyers, Bleachers and Textile Workers" label="National Union of Dyers, Bleachers and Textile Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079972" start="5190" end="5238" title="National Union of Electrotypers and Stereotypers" label="National Union of Electrotypers and Stereotypers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023213" start="5241" end="5274" title="National Union of Foundry Workers" label="National Union of Foundry Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485928" start="5277" end="5324" title="National Union of General and Municipal Workers" label="National Union of General and Municipal Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979130" start="5327" end="5375" title="National Union of Gold, Silver and Allied Trades" label="National Union of Gold, Silver and Allied Trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753814" start="5378" end="5407" title="National Union of Mineworkers (UK)" label="National Union of Mineworkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979149" start="5410" end="5444" title="National Union of Public Employees" label="National Union of Public Employees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979152" start="5447" end="5475" title="National Union of Railwaymen" label="National Union of Railwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979160" start="5478" end="5502" title="National Union of Seamen" label="National Union of Seamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979156" start="5505" end="5551" title="National Union of Shale Miners and Oil Workers" label="National Union of Shale Miners and Oil Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952880" start="5554" end="5611" title="National Union of Stove, Grate, and General Metal Workers" label="National Union of Stove, Grate, and General Metal Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979182" start="5614" end="5659" title="National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers" label="National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979187" start="5662" end="5696" title="National Union of Vehicle Builders" label="National Union of Vehicle Builders"/>
<link wikidata="Q86009754" start="5699" end="5733" title="National Woolsorters&amp;#x27; Society" label="National Woolsorters&amp;#x27; Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838192" start="5736" end="5805" title="Power Loom Carpet Weavers&amp;#x27; and Textile Workers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Power Loom Carpet Weavers&amp;#x27; and Textile Workers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641509" start="5808" end="5830" title="Prudential Staff Union" label="Prudential Staff Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062795" start="5833" end="5865" title="Railway Clerks&amp;#x27; Association" label="Railway Clerks&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641711" start="5868" end="5899" title="Scottish Painters&amp;#x27; Society" label="Scottish Painters&amp;#x27; Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402813" start="5902" end="5944" title="Scottish Union of Bakers and Confectioners" label="Scottish Union of Bakers and Confectioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497992" start="5947" end="6004" title="Ship Constructors&amp;#x27; and Shipwrights&amp;#x27; Association" label="Ship Constructors&amp;#x27; and Shipwrights&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932048" start="6007" end="6080" title="Society of Lithographic Artists, Designers, Engravers and Process Workers" label="Society of Lithographic Artists, Designers, Engravers and Process Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091316" start="6083" end="6124" title="Transport and General Workers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Transport and General Workers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861402" start="6127" end="6152" title="Typographical Association" label="Typographical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q86751986" start="6155" end="6192" title="United French Polishers&amp;#x27; Society" label="United French Polishers&amp;#x27; Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889028" start="6195" end="6233" title="United Patternmakers&amp;#x27; Association" label="United Patternmakers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027923" start="6236" end="6284" title="United Textile Factory Workers&amp;#x27; Association" label="United Textile Factory Workers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794283" start="6287" end="6331" title="Waterproof Garment Workers&amp;#x27; Trade Union" label="Waterproof Garment Workers&amp;#x27; Trade Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6334" end="6370" title="Yorkshire Warptwisters&amp;#x27; Society" label="Yorkshire Warptwisters&amp;#x27; Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="6386" end="6407" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210311" start="6409" end="6448" title="Political funding in the United Kingdom" label="Political funding in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832003" start="6450" end="6499" title="Trade Union and Labour Party Liaison Organisation" label="Trade Union and Labour Party Liaison Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551856" start="6501" end="6533" title="Socialist society (Labour Party)" label="Socialist society (Labour Party)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343806" wikidata="Q6467451" url="?curid=343806" title="Labour Party Conference">
<text>The Labour Party Conference is the annual conference of the British Labour Party. It is formally the supreme decision-making body of the party and is traditionally held in the final week of September, during the party conference season when the House of Commons is in recess, after each year&#x27;s second Liberal Democrat Conference and before the Conservative Party Conference. The Labour Party Conference opens on a Sunday and finishes the following Wednesday, with an address by the Deputy Leader of the Labour Party; the Leader&#x27;s address is usually on the Tuesday. In contrast to the Liberal Democrat Conference, where every party member attending its Conference, either in-person or online, has the right to vote on party policy, under a one member, one vote system, or the Conservative Party Conference, which does not hold votes on party policy, at the Labour Party Conference, 50% of votes are allocated to affiliated organisations (such as trade unions), and the other 50% to Constituency Labour Parties, but all voting in both categories is restricted to nominated representatives (known as delegates). Conference decisions are not binding on the party leadership, even if carried unanimously.

==Conference==

===Delegates===
Delegates to the conference are elected by Constituency Labour Parties, affiliated trade unions and socialist societies. Currently, affiliated trade unions hold 50% of the votes at the conference, down from 80% in the era before Tony Blair. Some 40% of the votes are wielded by the three largest trade unions (Unite, GMB, Unison).

===Resolutions===
Resolutions for debate are put forward by CLPs and unions before the conference begins. Each CLP, Trade Union and Socialist Society may make one submission to Annual Conference, either a constitutional amendment (rule change) or a motion.

CLPs, Trade Unions and Socialist Societies may submit emergency motions for consideration for debate by the Conference Arrangements Committee on urgent matters that have arisen since the deadline for motions.

===Role of the NEC===

The National Executive Committee leads the conference (although the details of the conference, including what is debated, are managed by the Conference Arrangements Committee) and if it does not agree with a resolution, the committee may put pressure on the backers to withdraw or &quot;remit&quot; it. &quot;Remittance&quot; means that the resolution&#x27;s backers agree to &quot;send back&quot; the resolution to the National Executive so that it can consider the matter in more detail; this is viewed by some as a mere delaying tactic. The resolutions voted upon are normally &quot;composites&quot;, meaning that they have been compiled by combining several resolutions put forward by different bodies into a single wording agreed beforehand.

===Conference Fringe===
Alongside the official business of Conference, there is an extensive fringe programme. The programme consists of a range of events including seminars, debates, workshops and receptions across the conference site and the host city. These events are run by different organisations with many differing themes and topics of discussion.

==List of conferences==

===Of the Labour Representation Committee===

===Of the Labour Party===
==Conferences==

=== Hugh Gaitskell leadership ===

==== 1957 Brighton ====
Aneurin Bevan made a speech disavowing unilateral nuclear disarmament, claiming that it would send the government &quot;naked into the conference chamber&quot;.

=== Harold Wilson leadership ===

==== 1966 Brighton ====
Nicolas Walter shouted &quot;hypocrite&quot; at Wilson in protest against support given by the government to US behaviour in the Vietnam War. Walter was bundled out of the venue, arrested, charged with &quot;indecency in church&quot; under the 1860 Ecclesiastical Courts Jurisdiction Act because Wilson was speaking in a church, and imprisoned for two months.

=== James Callaghan leadership ===

==== 1976 Blackpool ====
Chancellor of the Exchequer Denis Healey announced his plans for a $3.9 billion loan from the IMF to tackle inflation, as well as continuing existing pay policies and public spending restraints.

=== Michael Foot leadership ===

==== September 1981 Brighton ====
There was a minute&#x27;s silence at the Conference in memory of Bill Shankly, former Liverpool FC manager and lifelong Labour supporter. The deputy leadership election took place, with incumbent deputy Denis Healey narrowly defeating challenger Tony Benn.

=== Neil Kinnock leadership ===

==== 1983 Brighton ====
Neil Kinnock was elected party leader with 71% of the vote, following Labour&#x27;s defeat in the June general election, succeeding Foot. Roy Hattersley joined him as deputy leader. In his speech, Kinnock stated that &quot;we can enjoy fraternity between socialists and we must enjoy fidelity to socialism.&quot; The editorial board of Militant were expelled.

==== 1985 Bournemouth ====
In his speech, Kinnock attacked Militant and their record in the leadership of Liverpool City Council, leading to a walkout led by Eric Heffer.

==== 1989 Brighton ====
The rules for the election of the Parliamentary Committee were changed, expanding it to 18 seats, at least three of which were to be filled by women.

=== John Smith leadership ===

==== 1993 Brighton ====
For 1993, the rules for the Parliamentary Committee were amended again so four of its seats were to be filled by women. Smith abolished the trade union block vote at Conference and replaced it with the one member, one vote method. He was praised by John Prescott for &quot;putting his head on a block&quot; in pushing the reforms through.

=== Tony Blair leadership ===

==== 1994 Blackpool ====
The &quot;New Labour&quot; rebranding was officially unveiled.

==== October 1995 Brighton ====
Featured Blair&#x27;s &quot;Young Country&quot; speech.

==== 1996 Blackpool ====
Featured Blair&#x27;s &quot;Education, Education and Education&quot; speech.

====2000 Brighton====
The 2000 conference was held in Brighton from 24 to 28 September.

On 25 September, John Prescott, Deputy Prime Minister, made a speech stating that Labour would &quot;take the Tories to the cleaners&quot; in the next election, and called William Hague a &quot;drunk in charge of a bandwagon.&quot; On 27 September, delegates voted by a majority of nearly three-to-two in favour of a motion calling for the basic state pension to be linked to average earnings. Blair said that the government would not change its pension policies despite the vote. The international guest speaker was Nelson Mandela, the former President of South Africa. Closing the conference on 28 September, he made a speech condemning poverty and inequality and made an appeal concerning AIDS in South Africa.

====2001 Brighton====
The 2001 conference took place in Brighton and began on 30 September. On 25 September, Blair had stated he would recall Parliament from the recess for a day in order to keep MPs updated following the September 11 attacks, meaning the conference was rescheduled to end a day earlier than initially planned, on 3 October. The event was protected by a large security operation, including a five-mile air exclusion zone. The international guest speaker was Gerhard Schröder, the Chancellor of Germany.

The conference began with a two-minute silence, an address from the Chief Fire Officers Association praising firefighters in New York, and a speech from culture secretary Tessa Jowell. Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott also gave a speech, with &quot;The Guardian&quot; noting that he &quot;dropped his usual party conference knock-about routine.&quot;

Blair&#x27;s speech on 2 October focused mostly upon the fallout of September 11 and plans for the war in Afghanistan, while also paying some focus to a potential referendum on the introduction of the Euro. It was praised by most U.S. newspapers, while European papers were less supportive; &quot;The&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot; stated that Blair was &quot;America&#x27;s most passionate and steadfast ally in the fight against terrorism,&quot; while Italian paper &quot;La Stampa&quot; said that &quot;in some phases Blair has seemed to be tugging at Bush&#x27;s jacket, so as to appear not so much the trusted friend but more the petulant friend, or even the irritating friend.&quot; Blair also spoke of an international &quot;Partnership for Africa&quot;, giving the private sector a larger role in public services, and a potential review of student funding and tuition fees.

====2002 Blackpool====
The 2002 event took place in the Winter Gardens complex in Blackpool, and ran from 30 September to 3 October. Attendees included: pressure groups such as the Countryside Alliance, League Against Cruel Sports, and Anti-Nazi League; big business such as BNFL, BP, and BAE Systems; think tanks including the Fabian Society, 50 people from the Institute for Public Policy Research, and the Adam Smith Institute; the Confederation of British Industry; various media organisations; and observers from other political parties including the Iraqi National Congress, though the Socialist Workers Party claimed they were not let in.

In Blair&#x27;s speech on 1 October, he pledged to &quot;quicken the march of progress&quot; in reforming the UK&#x27;s public services, and said that Labour was &quot;best at its boldest - and so far we&#x27;ve made a good start, but we&#x27;ve not been bold enough.&quot; He told the trade unions to &quot;work with us,&quot; and said that the welfare state had led to a &quot;monolithic provision of services,&quot; arguing for the use of private finance. He argued for the possibility of war with Iraq, and reiterated that there would be a referendum on joining the euro if economic tests were met. It ended with a four minute standing ovation.

The international guest speaker was Bill Clinton, former President of the United States of America, who spoke in a 50 minute address on 2 October. He used the speech to tell both President George W. Bush and Labour to continue working with the United Nations to solve the Iraq disarmament crisis. The speech was followed by a 2.5 minute standing ovation.

====2003 Bournemouth====
2003 was Blair&#x27;s tenth conference as leader, held in Bournemouth from 28 September to 2 October. It was chaired by Ian McCartney.

On 28 September, Blair stated that he would continue pushing for foundation hospitals and university top-up fees, though a potential deal between the government and Unison concerning foundation hospitals, which was due to be announced in Blair&#x27;s keynote speech, collapsed that night. Delegates initially voted to leave the Iraq War off the conference agenda entirely, instead staging emergency debates on the NHS, employment rights and pensions. On 29 September at a fringe event, former House of Commons leader Robin Cook made a speech criticising Blair&#x27;s rejection of plans for a partly elected House of Lords. On 30 September, Gordon Brown was seen to put pressure on Blair in a speech, promising extra spending on public services, without directly attacking him. Culture secretary Tessa Jowell, announced plans to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Normandy D-Day landings, and deputy prime minister John Prescott announced that 1,600 houses were to be built in the South East.

Blair also made his speech on the 30th, which received a record 7.5 minute standing ovation. During the speech, he listed Labour&#x27;s achievements, dismissed a new top rate of income tax, stated that it &quot;wouldn&#x27;t be fair&quot; if education funding came from the taxpayer, attacked those opposed to foundation hospitals, advocated pluralism in the public sector, and defended his decision to go to war in Iraq.

On 1 October, the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers (RMT) attempted to force an emergency vote on the Iraq War onto the agenda which called &quot;for the withdrawal of coalition troops&quot;, but this failed. The party leadership allowed a vote to go ahead concerning a section in a party policy document that recorded the Iraq War&#x27;s chronology instead, with RMT stating that &quot;the proposed vote will be meaningless&quot;. Blair&#x27;s side won the Iraq vote, but lost two votes on foundation hospitals and the NHS among delegates. Over 86% of delegates also voted in favour of allowing people in Northern Ireland to become party members. The international guest speaker to address conference on the 1st was Hamid Karzai, the first President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

To end the conference on 2 October, Prescott told the party in a speech to stop &quot;tearing ourselves apart,&quot; after unions forced ministers to accept a motion on compulsory employer pension contributions. &quot;The Red Flag&quot; was sung for the first time at the conference since 1999, alongside &quot;Jerusalem&quot;.

====2004 Brighton====
The 2004 party conference was held in Brighton and ran from 26 to 30 September, again chaired by Ian McCartney. The conference rejected a call for withdrawal from Iraq, but accepted a resolution calling for renationalisation of the railways; the leadership declared that it would ignore this.

During his speech on 29 September, Blair was interrupted shortly after he started speaking by anti-war protester Hector Christie, who shouted &quot;you&#x27;ve got blood on your hands,&quot; speaking of the Iraq War. Blair stated that the protester was lucky to be free to voice the protest. Around 15 to 20 minutes later, about six pro-hunting demonstrators shouted and set off rape alarms on the balcony above. All protesters were escorted away by police.

The conference was addressed on 30 September by the Irish rock star Bono who called for more action to combat the spread of AIDS and the debt problems African countries.

====2005 Brighton====
The 2005 conference was held in Brighton from 26 until 29 September and followed Labour&#x27;s success in the 2005 general election. Over the course of the conference, over 600 people were held under Section 44 of the Terrorism Act 2000, which allows for stop and search to be carried out by the police. This included Walter Wolfgang, an 82-year-old peace activist and refugee from Nazi Germany who was removed from the conference for shouting the word &quot;nonsense&quot; at a speech on Iraq by Jack Straw, and later detained under the Act when he tried to get back in. None of those held were arrested nor charged. Labour issued an apology to Wolfgang, and he was cheered when he returned the next day.

====2006 Manchester====
In 2006 the conference was held in Manchester at the G-Mex and Manchester International Conference Centre from 24 to 28 September. It was the first time since 1974 that the main Labour conference was not held at a seaside town and the first time since 1917 the Labour conference had been held in Manchester. This followed Labour&#x27;s Spring 2004 conference which was held at the G-Mex for the first time. The conference was Blair&#x27;s last as leader after he stated this would be the case just before the conference and at the conference itself. The start of the conference was marked with protests against the Iraq War.

St Johns C.E. Primary School&#x27;s steel band performed before Blair came on stage for his last speech to conference as party leader and prime minister. In the speech, he praised the work of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, though did not explicitly support him as a potential successor.

The conference was addressed in a joint session by Labour&#x27;s Mayor of London, Ken Livingstone and the Mayor of Los Angeles Antonio Villaraigosa on the subject of climate change. Bob Geldof and Monica Naggaga from Oxfam (Uganda) spoke together about Africa. The main international guest speaker was the former US President Bill Clinton on 27 September. Another international visitor – but not a speaker to the conference – was Shimon Peres, the former Prime Minister of Israel.

=== Gordon Brown leadership ===

====2007 Bournemouth====
The 2007 conference was held in the Bournemouth International Centre from 23 to 27 September. The conference was the first with Gordon Brown as leader of the Labour Party and Prime Minister, and he laid out his plans for his premiership. It was a first conference for Harriet Harman as Deputy Leader.
====2008 Manchester====
The 2008 conference was held between 20 and 24 September in Manchester at Manchester Central (formerly G-Mex). The opening day of conference was moved from Sunday to Saturday to allow people who work during the week to attend. The Labour leader and Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, delivered his keynote address on 23 September.

====2009 Brighton====
The 2009 conference was held in Brighton from 27 September to 1 October 2009. It saw an address from Peter Mandelson, given on 28 September, in which he claimed that Labour was in &quot;the fight of our lives&quot; as the next general election approached. Gordon Brown gave his keynote address to the conference on the afternoon of 29 September, saying that Labour was &quot;not done yet&quot;. Shortly afterwards, &quot;The Sun&quot; announced it would withdraw its support for Labour, and gave its backing to the Conservatives. Union leader and Labour supporter Tony Woodley responded by tearing up a copy of that edition of &quot;The Sun&quot;, telling the audience that &quot;in Liverpool, we learnt a long time ago what to do. I suggest the rest of the country should do exactly the same thing&quot;, in reference to the hostility felt in Liverpool towards &quot;The Sun&quot; following its controversial allegations about the behaviour of Liverpool FC supporters in the Hillsborough disaster 20 years earlier.

=== Ed Miliband leadership ===

====2010 Manchester====

Shortly after losing the 2010 general election to the Conservatives, following a Liberal Democrat coalition, the 2010 Conference took place at Manchester Central conference centre between 26 and 30 September. The conference started with the announcement of the results of the 2010 leadership election and was Ed Miliband&#x27;s first conference as leader. In his first major speech as leader on 28 September, Miliband told delegates that his &quot;new generation&quot; would return the party to power. The following day David Miliband announced he would not be serving in his brother&#x27;s shadow cabinet, although he would continue as an MP. Other highlights of the conference included activists condemning the coalition government&#x27;s proposed public spending cuts as &quot;obscene&quot; on 27 September, and a close of conference address from Harriet Harman in which she told delegates that Ed Miliband would &quot;fortify&quot; the party.

====2011 Liverpool====
The 2011 Conference took place in Liverpool from 25 to 29 September. It was the first time since 1925 that Labour had held its conference there. On 26 September delegates voted to scrap the tradition of Shadow Cabinet elections. Miliband&#x27;s keynote speech on 27 September suffered a five-minute blackout after all media communications were lost.

==== 2012 Manchester ====
The 2012 Conference was held at Manchester Central conference centre, from 30 September to 4 October.

On 30 September, Miliband was interviewed on The Andrew Marr Show, with Marr particularly questioning his image, leadership appeal and popularity. Harvard professor Michael Sandel delivered a lecture to conference on predistribution as an economic goal, which Miliband had mentioned in his 2011 conference speech. He attended at least 30 fringe events on 1 October, including a Friends of Europe event with Eddie Izzard.

On 2 October, Miliband made his keynote speech themed around the new One Nation Labour branding. It was the first speech in around twenty years to be delivered by a Labour leader without the use of an autocue, enabling him to walk up and down the stage while maintaining audience eye contact, replicating the style of David Cameron&#x27;s Conservative leadership bid in 2005. Miliband also made use of humour in approximately 20% of the speech, more than in his previous speeches. It received an overwhelmingly positive reaction from the press.

On 3 October, Miliband led a question and answer session for about 3,000 delegates and members.

====2013 Brighton====
The 2013 Conference took place in Brighton from 22 to 25 September at the Brighton Centre.

====2014 London (Special Conference)====
A special conference was held at ExCeL London on 1 March to approve rule changes arising from former general-secretary Ray Collins review of party reform. The changes included replacing the electoral college system for selecting new leaders with a &quot;one member, one vote&quot; system. Mass membership would be encouraged by allowing &quot;registered supporters&quot; to join at a low cost, as well as full membership. Members from the trade unions would also have to explicitly &quot;opt in&quot; rather than &quot;opt out&quot; of paying a political levy to Labour.

====2014 Manchester====
The 2014 Conference was held in Manchester from 21 to 24 September at Manchester Central conference centre. Ed Miliband was criticised by his colleagues for not mentioning the deficit and immigration in his Conference address, despite having promised to do so in his pre-speech press release.

=== Jeremy Corbyn leadership ===

==== 2015 London (Special Conference) ====
The results of the leadership and deputy leadership elections were announced prior to the annual conference on 12 September at a short Special Conference in Westminster, London, in which Jeremy Corbyn was elected leader of the party.

====2015 Brighton====
The 2015 conference took place in Brighton between 27 September and 30 September. Corbyn reinstated the use of the Autocue, three years after it had been abandoned by Miliband. It was the first time that Corbyn had used one to deliver a speech.

====2016 Liverpool====

The 2016 Conference took place at ACC Liverpool; it started on 25 September and ran until Wednesday 28 September. The result of the 2016 leadership election was announced the previous day, with Jeremy Corbyn being re-elected. The conference heard impassioned pleas from Deputy Leader Tom Watson and Mayor of London Sadiq Khan for unity and a need for the party to gain power. Because of the second leadership election in two years and the divisive ideological discussions, there was concern about a fraught atmosphere at the conference. However, delegates and elected representatives came together in harmony on many issues, including opposition to plans for grammar school expansions, a &#x27;hard Brexit&#x27; and on accepting more unaccompanied child refugees into Britain. Part of Corbyn&#x27;s platform for the second leadership election was accepting the result of the EU referendum that year, though there were motions and debates on Europe and the prospect of a second referendum. The first year of The World Transformed, a festival hosted by the left-wing grassroots campaigning group Momentum, took place in the city at the same time as the conference.

====2017 Brighton====

The 2017 Conference took place at the Brighton Centre in Brighton and had 13,000 attendees from Sunday 24 September to Wednesday 27 September 2017. The conference atmosphere was regarded as positive, following the relative successes of the party at the 2017 general election.

Labour deputy leader Tom Watson announced a number of policy plans concerning gambling, including forcing gambling companies to pay a levy to fund research, NHS treatment to help problem gamblers deal with their addiction, and banning football clubs from signing shirt sponsorship deals with betting companies. The conference cut the number of politicians from the program in order to let more regular party members to have slots. One example that received media attention was a speech by Lauren Stocks, a 16-year-old student from Greater Manchester. Commentators quickly drew parallels with William Hague&#x27;s 1977 Conservative conference, which he delivered when he was also 16. Stocks spoke about the effects of recent changes to exams, and argued that:There&#x27;s a statistic we were shown when I was about 13 or 14 that told me 3 in 10 people in every classroom suffer with a mental illness. Now I&#x27;m going to be a bit frank here conference. That is bollocks! It&#x27;s a good half ... I could&#x27;ve walked into any food tech, history, art, maths classroom and just watched seas of spaced-out, stressed-out, depressed kids, in a battlefield where they can&#x27;t afford pens and paper! ... It is a disgusting sight and we cannot sit on our hands any longer!

Corbyn&#x27;s keynote speech lasted 75 minutes and included a number of jokes at the expense both of the Conservatives and the Daily Mail. In terms of policy, Corbyn pledged that a Labour government would give cities the power to bring in rent controls and introduce restrictions on gentrification projects, citing the then recent Grenfell Tower fire.

Fringe events at the conference included the second year of The World Transformed, at which former party leader Ed Miliband hosted a political pub quiz, focusing on Labour history and current affairs. Centre for Cities, a think tank focused on cities in the UK, hosted a &quot;the future of urban leadership&quot; event, chaired by Andrew Carter with a panel consisting of Andy Burnham, Steve Rotheram, Michelle Dix (Managing Director of Crossrail 2), Francesca Gains (Head of Politics at University of Manchester) and David Orr (Chief Executive of the National Housing Federation).

====2018 Liverpool====
The 2018 Conference took place at the Arena and Convention Centre Liverpool (ACC Liverpool) from 23 to 26 September, with 13,000 delegates at the event.

On 23 September, Angela Rayner announced a range of education reforms: that Labour would scrap the Free School program, democratise Academy schools, give local authorities the power to take control of badly performing Academies and remove the ability to shape their own admission policies. On 24 September, it was announced that private property tenants would be given more protections, as landlords couldn&#x27;t evict them without reason. John McDonnell announced that workers in companies with more than 250 employees would become joint share holders in a structure that the law would oblige to adopt, with each employee receiving a payout at the end of each year.

The prospect of a second referendum on the UK&#x27;s relationship with the European Union was a heavily discussed topic at the conference. Both Leader Jeremy Corbyn and Deputy Leader Tom Watson had said should the conference vote for a second referendum they would support it. The motion was discussed by delegates on the Sunday, including MPs and representatives from People&#x27;s Vote and other delegates, and after five hours they had written a two-paged motion stating that &quot;If we cannot get a general election Labour must support all options remaining on the table, including campaigning for a public vote&quot;. The vote on motion took place on the Tuesday.

Party delegates voted on the Member of Parliament reselection process. They lowered the threshold required of local branches and local union branches to express dissatisfaction in an MP&#x27;s performance from 50% to 33%.

Fringe Events also took place at the conference included The World Transformed, at which 2017 French presidential candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon was a key-note speaker, as well as Corbyn, Katja Kipping (leader of Die Linke), Ralf Stegner (SPD), Zitto Kabwe (leader of Alliance for Change and Transparency) and Ash Sarkar. Councils against Austerity also took place, organised by a group of 24 Labour council leaders and 12 local Labour group leaders who had signed an open letter sent to Prime Minister Theresa May, criticising austerity&#x27;s effect on local government. Real Britain, an event hosted by &quot;The Mirror&quot;, was chaired by Kevin Maguire and had speakers such as John McDonnell, Len McCluskey and former footballer Neville Southall. At this event McCluskey stated Unite&#x27;s interest in supporting Labour Party candidates in Northern Ireland, instead of the SDLP.

====2019 Brighton====
The 2019 Conference took place at the Brighton Centre from 21 to 25 September, and was chaired by Wendy Nichols. Earlier in the year, there was talk of hosting a special conference on a resolution to the deadlock on whether Labour should back a second referendum on Britain&#x27;s relationship with the European Union. However, in July 2019 Labour&#x27;s affiliated trade unions agreed a joint position on Brexit, in which any finalised Brexit deal would be subject to a referendum, with the party to back a Remain vote if a Conservative government had negotiated the deal, and the party’s position to be decided if it was a Labour government&#x27;s deal. Conference delegates voted on whether Labour should fully support remain in a second referendum, or support the leadership&#x27;s position of hosting a special conference after securing a majority government of how to campaign in the referendum. A majority of delegates supported the leadership&#x27;s position.

Conference delegates voted on and supported several policy motions, including: supporting a Green New Deal - which included large investments in windfarms and making the country carbon neutral by 2030, reducing working hours to 32-hour week within a decade, abolish private schools, free prescriptions in England, the creation of a National Care Service (a care-focused counterpart to the National Health Service) and extension of voting rights to all residents of the UK regardless of their citizenship.

Jeremy Corbyn brought his speech forward by a day due to the Supreme Court ruling that the prorogation of Parliament by Prime Minister Boris Johnson was unlawful.

=== Keir Starmer leadership ===

====2020 London (cancelled Special Conference)====
On 4 April, a special conference was due to take place in London in order to announce the results of the leadership election, the deputy leadership election and by-elections for two membership election NEC positions, as well as a BAME (Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic) place on the National Executive Committee. The conference was cancelled due to the Coronavirus pandemic, and results were subsequently announced via the Labour Party social media feeds. Keir Starmer was announced as the 19th leader of the Labour Party.

====2020 Connected (Online Conference)====
The 2020 Labour Party Conference would have taken place in Liverpool from Saturday 19 September to Wednesday 23 September, however it was moved to an online format due to the COVID-19 outbreak. It was Keir Starmer&#x27;s first conference as leader. Taking place from 19 to 22 September, the virtual conference was renamed Labour Connected and described by the party as focused on &quot;people coming together, to create a fairer and better society&quot;. Speakers included deputy leader Angela Rayner and Shadow Chancellor Anneliese Dodds.

Starmer&#x27;s speech took place on 22 September, during which he criticised the government&#x27;s handling of COVID-19, commenting that &quot;just when the country needs leadership, we get serial incompetence&quot;. Starmer also focused on how Labour had changed since his election as party leader earlier that year, emphasising that the party was &quot;under new leadership&quot;.

==== 2021 Brighton ====
The 2021 Labour Party conference took place between Saturday 25 September to Wednesday 29 September. It saw members attend in-person for the first time since the 2019 Conference.

Prior to the conference, motions were blocked by the Conference Arrangement Committee and party staff which were seen as too &quot;broad&quot;. This included both the Labour for a &#x27;Green Jobs Revolution&#x27; motion and the &#x27;Build Back Fairer&#x27; motion, both backed by the party&#x27;s left. Instead, less radical but similar motions were allowed to remain. The decision was quickly reversed after an appeal.

Controversy emerged due to Starmer wishing to change the voting system for leadership elections. He proposed reverting from a one member, one vote system, in which each Labour party member and supporter has an equal vote back to the electoral college where MPs, the membership and trade unions have a third of the vote each. The plan was accused of being anti-democratic, inappropriately timed and lacking consultation. Media speculated that this change in voting system was an attempt to continue an internal struggle with the left-wing of the party, and to stop another left-wing candidate like Jeremy Corbyn from winning the election. Prior to the conference, the media reported opposition from Unite the Union, TSSA, CWU, and Momentum, and uncertainty from Unison, GMB and Usdaw.

Starmer gave up on the electoral college after it failed to gain the support of trade unions. However, the party&#x27;s executive committee agreed to send a series of more modest reforms to conference, including increasing the percentage of Labour MPs a candidate would need the support of to get on the leadership election ballot, banning the party&#x27;s newest members from voting, and making it harder for members to deselect MPs. These changes were later passed by a small margin.

At the conference party members voted in favour of a £15 an hour minimum wage. The motion calling for a £15 an hour minimum wage was put forward by the Unite union. Starmer and his leadership team did not indicate a preference either in favour or against the motion.

==== 2022 Liverpool ====
The 2022 conference took place in Liverpool from Sunday 25 to Wednesday 28 September 2022 at ACC Liverpool, King&#x27;s Dock, and was chaired by Anneliese Dodds.

To open the conference, Labour held a minute&#x27;s silence following the death of Queen Elizabeth II, and sang God Save the King for the first time at a Labour conference. Former leader Jeremy Corbyn criticised the decision, stating that it was &quot;very, very odd,&quot; and &quot;excessively nationalist,&quot; arguing that there was no precedent for doing so.

Keir Starmer was introduced by Satvir Kaur. Delegates voted in favour of a motion on proportional representation, which is supported by major trade unions associated with the Labour Party, including Unite, Unison and the Communication Workers Union (CWU). However, Starmer said that electoral reform is not a priority and ruled out putting electoral reform in the Labour Party&#x27;s next election manifesto.

==== 2023 Liverpool ====
Unusually, the 2023 conference took place in the same city as it did the previous year, Liverpool, from Sunday 8 October to Wednesday 11 October. It was also unusually held after the Conservative Party conference. The conference saw an increase in stalls from large companies, including for Google, Ineos, Specsavers, with fringe events sponsored by Deliveroo and Goldman Sachs. There was an increase in the number of &quot;observers&quot; sent by the Conservative Party to at least eight, up from the two usually sent between conferences at both parties.

Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves made her speech on 9 October, and spoke of a stance of &quot;securonomics,&quot; which &quot;The Guardian&quot; stated was similar to U.S. President Joe Biden&#x27;s language on economic nationalism. She announced the creation of a &quot;Covid corruption commissioner&quot;, enforcement of the ministerial code on the use of private jets, and a fiscal lock on ministerial spending. Also on 9 October, Labour MP Apsana Begum left the conference due to safety concerns after she tweeted a photograph of herself supporting the Palestine Solidarity Campaign during the 2023 Israel–Hamas war.

Starmer gave his speech on 10 October, but was interrupted before he began when Yaz Ashmawi, a protester from the new campaign group People Demand Democracy, poured glitter over him, calling for a &quot;people&#x27;s house&quot; and for proportional representation, which Starmer had rejected since the previous conference. During his speech, Starmer repeated the phrase &quot;getting Britain building again,&quot; and repeated a pledge to build 1.5 million new houses. Starmer did not walk off the stage and through the crowd following his speech, as was usually the norm for party leader speeches at the conference. Labour sold limited edition &quot;sparkle with Starmer&quot; t-shirts for £20 following the incident, and the party launched a security review.

====2024 Liverpool====

The 2024 Conference took place in Liverpool, on 22 September to 25 September for the third time in a row.

==See also==
* Conservative Party Conference
* Liberal Democrat Conference
* Party conference season

==References==
==External links==

* Labour Party official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6467451" start="4" end="27" title="Labour Party Conference" label="Labour Party Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="68" end="80" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140982" start="212" end="235" title="party conference season" label="party conference season"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="245" end="261" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738900" start="306" end="333" title="Liberal Democrat Conference" label="Liberal Democrat Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195226" start="349" end="378" title="Conservative Party Conference" label="Conservative Party Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261043" start="487" end="520" title="Deputy Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Deputy Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="526" end="539" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="629" end="672" title="Liberal Democrat Conference#All-member Conference voting system" label="every party member attending its Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688922" start="955" end="967" title="Labour Party (UK) affiliated trade union" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163958" start="991" end="1018" title="Constituency Labour Parties" label="Constituency Labour Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688922" start="1315" end="1337" title="affiliated trade union" label="affiliated trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551856" start="1343" end="1362" title="socialist societies" label="socialist societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="1472" end="1482" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254509" start="1553" end="1558" title="Unite the Union" label="Unite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485928" start="1560" end="1563" title="GMB (trade union)" label="GMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547264" start="1565" end="1571" title="Unison (trade union)" label="Unison"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="2070" end="2098" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="3344" end="3357" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="3394" end="3413" title="nuclear disarmament" label="nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029863" start="3564" end="3578" title="Nicolas Walter" label="Nicolas Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3693" end="3704" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332239" start="3808" end="3851" title="Ecclesiastical Courts Jurisdiction Act 1860" label="1860 Ecclesiastical Courts Jurisdiction Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="3986" end="4013" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="4014" end="4026" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q207457" start="4314" end="4326" title="Bill Shankly" label="Bill Shankly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="4335" end="4347" title="Liverpool FC" label="Liverpool FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467468" start="4391" end="4417" title="1981 Labour Party deputy leadership election" label="deputy leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="4452" end="4464" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="4495" end="4504" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="4564" end="4576" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="4662" end="4683" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="June general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q333692" start="4702" end="4716" title="Roy Hattersley" label="Roy Hattersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314191" start="4900" end="4908" title="Militant tendency" label="Militant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658351" start="5031" end="5053" title="Liverpool City Council" label="Liverpool City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q334387" start="5083" end="5094" title="Eric Heffer" label="Eric Heffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640988" start="5479" end="5489" title="Voting bloc" label="block vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="5529" end="5549" title="one member, one vote" label="one member, one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q332393" start="5576" end="5589" title="John Prescott" label="John Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="5733" end="5743" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q332393" start="6085" end="6098" title="John Prescott" label="John Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507619" start="6100" end="6121" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="6240" end="6253" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="6420" end="6427" title="pension" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="6585" end="6599" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q273884" start="6612" end="6637" title="President of South Africa" label="President of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="6707" end="6714" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="6760" end="6764" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="7005" end="7025" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q822530" start="7202" end="7220" title="air exclusion zone" label="air exclusion zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="7258" end="7274" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="7280" end="7301" title="Chancellor of Germany (Federal Republic)" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096745" start="7372" end="7403" title="Chief Fire Officers Association" label="Chief Fire Officers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q272642" start="7475" end="7487" title="Tessa Jowell" label="Tessa Jowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q332393" start="7511" end="7524" title="John Prescott" label="John Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="7556" end="7568" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="7758" end="7776" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="war in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="7860" end="7864" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7950" end="7992" title="The New York Times" label="&amp;quot;The&amp;quot; &amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q923353" start="8135" end="8144" title="La Stampa" label="La Stampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q538104" start="8529" end="8541" title="tuition fees" label="tuition fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026231" start="8600" end="8614" title="Winter Gardens, Blackpool" label="Winter Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137257" start="8725" end="8745" title="Countryside Alliance" label="Countryside Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q914694" start="8747" end="8774" title="League Against Cruel Sports" label="League Against Cruel Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098407" start="8780" end="8796" title="Anti-Nazi League" label="Anti-Nazi League"/>
<link wikidata="Q261875" start="8819" end="8823" title="BNFL" label="BNFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="8825" end="8827" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="8833" end="8844" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="8872" end="8886" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994949" start="8907" end="8943" title="Institute for Public Policy Research" label="Institute for Public Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q350927" start="8953" end="8973" title="Adam Smith Institute" label="Adam Smith Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992409" start="8979" end="9012" title="Confederation of British Industry" label="Confederation of British Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q940293" start="9100" end="9123" title="Iraqi National Congress" label="Iraqi National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q405492" start="9136" end="9159" title="Socialist Workers Party (UK)" label="Socialist Workers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="9537" end="9550" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="9683" end="9696" title="Iraq War" label="war with Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="9877" end="9889" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="9898" end="9939" title="President of the United States of America" label="President of the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="10030" end="10044" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="10085" end="10099" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433190" start="10113" end="10136" title="Iraq disarmament crisis" label="Iraq disarmament crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610932" start="10178" end="10194" title="standing ovation" label="standing ovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333318" start="10342" end="10355" title="Ian McCartney" label="Ian McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954187" start="10423" end="10443" title="foundation hospitals" label="foundation hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851778" start="10448" end="10470" title="Top-up fees" label="university top-up fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547264" start="10523" end="10529" title="Unison (trade union)" label="Unison"/>
<link wikidata="Q311214" start="10875" end="10885" title="Robin Cook" label="Robin Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="10998" end="11010" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q272642" start="11153" end="11165" title="Tessa Jowell" label="Tessa Jowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="11235" end="11249" title="D-Day landings" label="D-Day landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q332393" start="11277" end="11290" title="John Prescott" label="John Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="11343" end="11353" title="South East England" label="South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="11534" end="11544" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850164" start="11698" end="11707" title="Pluralism (political theory)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979153" start="11797" end="11851" title="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers" label="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="12406" end="12422" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="12517" end="12529" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140706" start="12541" end="12589" title="President of Afghanistan" label="President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10695766" start="12810" end="12822" title="The Red Flag" label="The Red Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q77425249" start="12903" end="12912" title="And did those feet in ancient time" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="12981" end="12989" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="13331" end="13339" title="anti-war" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131087" start="13616" end="13626" title="rape alarm" label="rape alarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="13764" end="13768" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="13820" end="13824" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="13999" end="14020" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518865" start="14107" end="14125" title="Terrorism Act 2000" label="Terrorism Act 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q106810407" start="14144" end="14159" title="stop and search" label="stop and search"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966443" start="14207" end="14222" title="Walter Wolfgang" label="Walter Wolfgang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="14271" end="14283" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="14386" end="14396" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="14655" end="14665" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747302" start="14673" end="14678" title="G-Mex" label="G-Mex"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="14834" end="14841" title="coast" label="seaside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140595" start="15214" end="15243" title="protests against the Iraq War" label="protests against the Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="15442" end="15469" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="15471" end="15483" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="15615" end="15630" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="15632" end="15647" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465319" start="15656" end="15676" title="Mayor of Los Angeles" label="Mayor of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q218511" start="15677" end="15697" title="Antonio Villaraigosa" label="Antonio Villaraigosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="15716" end="15730" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q216608" start="15732" end="15742" title="Bob Geldof" label="Bob Geldof"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="15767" end="15772" title="Oxfam" label="Oxfam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="15774" end="15780" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="15863" end="15875" title="US President" label="US President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="15876" end="15888" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="15980" end="15992" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="16005" end="16029" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Prime Minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950291" start="16126" end="16158" title="Bournemouth International Centre" label="Bournemouth International Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="16218" end="16230" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="16265" end="16279" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q234182" start="16358" end="16372" title="Harriet Harman" label="Harriet Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="16475" end="16485" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747302" start="16489" end="16507" title="Manchester Central Convention Complex" label="Manchester Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q310046" start="16865" end="16880" title="Peter Mandelson" label="Peter Mandelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="16986" end="17007" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="next general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="17185" end="17192" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="17279" end="17292" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823695" start="17328" end="17340" title="Tony Woodley" label="Tony Woodley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="17709" end="17721" title="Liverpool FC" label="Liverpool FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="17740" end="17761" title="Hillsborough disaster" label="Hillsborough disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="17863" end="17884" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="17892" end="17905" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="17919" end="17935" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747302" start="17981" end="18017" title="Manchester Central Convention Complex" label="Manchester Central conference centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467491" start="18114" end="18138" title="2010 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="2010 leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="18147" end="18158" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q272670" start="18358" end="18372" title="David Miliband" label="David Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="18551" end="18571" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q234182" start="18688" end="18702" title="Harriet Harman" label="Harriet Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="18843" end="18852" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579210" start="19012" end="19026" title="Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet (United Kingdom)" label="Shadow Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713706" start="19334" end="19354" title="The Andrew Marr Show" label="The Andrew Marr Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="19436" end="19443" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q381044" start="19454" end="19468" title="Michael Sandel" label="Michael Sandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239689" start="19506" end="19521" title="predistribution" label="predistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q254022" start="19696" end="19708" title="Eddie Izzard" label="Eddie Izzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16190951" start="19780" end="19797" title="One Nation Labour" label="One Nation Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062004" start="19912" end="19919" title="autocue" label="autocue"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="20029" end="20042" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q35874" start="20113" end="20119" title="humour" label="humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="20410" end="20418" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967617" start="20450" end="20465" title="Brighton Centre" label="Brighton Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q826480" start="20542" end="20554" title="ExCeL London" label="ExCeL London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293246" start="20628" end="20639" title="Ray Collins, Baron Collins of Highbury" label="Ray Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="21137" end="21147" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="21213" end="21224" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647581" start="21495" end="21505" title="2015 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647580" start="21510" end="21527" title="2015 Labour Party deputy leadership election" label="deputy leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="21663" end="21676" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062004" start="21848" end="21855" title="Autocue" label="Autocue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650553" start="22037" end="22050" title="ACC Liverpool" label="ACC Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184760" start="22135" end="22159" title="2016 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="2016 leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q263802" start="22287" end="22297" title="Tom Watson, Baron Watson of Wyre Forest" label="Tom Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q334155" start="22318" end="22328" title="Sadiq Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42609890" start="23010" end="23031" title="The World Transformed" label="The World Transformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079985" start="23097" end="23105" title="Momentum (organisation)" label="Momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967617" start="23228" end="23243" title="Brighton Centre" label="Brighton Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="23247" end="23255" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="23443" end="23464" title="2017 United Kingdom General Election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519716" start="23545" end="23553" title="Gambling in the United Kingdom" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q748309" start="23646" end="23661" title="problem gambler" label="problem gambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381731" start="23730" end="23747" title="shirt sponsorship" label="shirt sponsorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="23998" end="24016" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="24059" end="24072" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195226" start="24085" end="24108" title="Conservative Party (UK) Conference" label="Conservative conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="24867" end="24877" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078081" start="24979" end="24992" title="rent controls" label="rent controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="25023" end="25046" title="Gentrification" label="gentrification projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q30274958" start="25071" end="25090" title="Grenfell Tower fire" label="Grenfell Tower fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42609890" start="25153" end="25174" title="The World Transformed" label="The World Transformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="25205" end="25216" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062375" start="25294" end="25311" title="Centre for Cities" label="Centre for Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q269909" start="25466" end="25478" title="Andy Burnham" label="Andy Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q480068" start="25480" end="25494" title="Steve Rotheram" label="Steve Rotheram"/>
<link wikidata="Q802096" start="25531" end="25542" title="Crossrail 2" label="Crossrail 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="25582" end="25606" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973426" start="25646" end="25673" title="National Housing Federation" label="National Housing Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650553" start="25738" end="25775" title="Arena and Convention Centre Liverpool" label="Arena and Convention Centre Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164278" start="25871" end="25884" title="Angela Rayner" label="Angela Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500295" start="25953" end="25964" title="Free school (England)" label="Free School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671329" start="25986" end="26001" title="Academy schools" label="Academy schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q694695" start="26295" end="26309" title="John McDonnell" label="John McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412792" start="26541" end="26612" title="Proposed referendum on the Brexit withdrawal agreement" label="second referendum on the UK&amp;#x27;s relationship with the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="26674" end="26687" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074877" start="26892" end="26910" title="People&amp;#x27;s Vote" label="People&amp;#x27;s Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020999" start="27506" end="27540" title="2017 French presidential election" label="2017 French presidential candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5829" start="27541" end="27559" title="Jean-Luc Mélenchon" label="Jean-Luc Mélenchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76342" start="27603" end="27616" title="Katja Kipping" label="Katja Kipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="27628" end="27637" title="Die Linke" label="Die Linke"/>
<link wikidata="Q89578" start="27640" end="27652" title="Ralf Stegner" label="Ralf Stegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="27654" end="27657" title="SPD" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153384" start="27660" end="27671" title="Zitto Kabwe" label="Zitto Kabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161932" start="27683" end="27719" title="Alliance for Change and Transparency" label="Alliance for Change and Transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q55584558" start="27725" end="27735" title="Ash Sarkar" label="Ash Sarkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="28027" end="28037" title="Daily Mirror" label="The Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396833" start="28060" end="28073" title="Kevin Maguire (journalist)" label="Kevin Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q694695" start="28099" end="28113" title="John McDonnell" label="John McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521883" start="28115" end="28128" title="Len McCluskey" label="Len McCluskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q436650" start="28151" end="28167" title="Neville Southall" label="Neville Southall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254509" start="28200" end="28205" title="Unite the Union" label="Unite"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642359" start="28236" end="28279" title="Labour Party in Northern Ireland" label="Labour Party candidates in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q175443" start="28296" end="28300" title="SDLP" label="SDLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412792" start="28570" end="28587" title="Proposed second United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="second referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068307" start="29386" end="29400" title="Green New Deal" label="Green New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="29472" end="29486" title="carbon neutral" label="carbon neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="29560" end="29575" title="private schools" label="private schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="29683" end="29706" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="29800" end="29813" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="29861" end="29874" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q68629673" start="29875" end="29881" title="R (Miller) v The Prime Minister and Cherry v Advocate General for Scotland" label="ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q68544129" start="29891" end="29916" title="2019 British prorogation controversy" label="prorogation of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="29935" end="29948" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q78326482" start="30153" end="30172" title="2020 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q85736054" start="30178" end="30204" title="2020 Labour Party deputy leadership election" label="deputy leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128403" start="30278" end="30282" title="BAME" label="BAME"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="30331" end="30359" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="30401" end="30421" title="Coronavirus pandemic" label="Coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="30504" end="30516" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="30543" end="30569" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="30674" end="30683" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="30790" end="30798" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164278" start="31102" end="31115" title="Angela Rayner" label="Angela Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529268" start="31138" end="31153" title="Anneliese Dodds" label="Anneliese Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="31267" end="31275" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="32293" end="32313" title="one member, one vote" label="one member, one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141323" start="32400" end="32417" title="electoral college" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254509" start="32865" end="32880" title="Unite the Union" label="Unite the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062795" start="32882" end="32886" title="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association" label="TSSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154122" start="32888" end="32891" title="Communication Workers Union (United Kingdom)" label="CWU"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079985" start="32897" end="32905" title="Momentum (organisation)" label="Momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547264" start="32928" end="32934" title="Unison (trade union)" label="Unison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485928" start="32936" end="32939" title="GMB (trade union)" label="GMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886722" start="32944" end="32949" title="Usdaw" label="Usdaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254509" start="33587" end="33602" title="Unite the Union" label="the Unite union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650553" start="33825" end="33838" title="ACC Liverpool" label="ACC Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529268" start="33877" end="33892" title="Anneliese Dodds" label="Anneliese Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068056" start="33933" end="33954" title="minute&amp;#x27;s silence" label="minute&amp;#x27;s silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846055" start="33969" end="33996" title="death of Queen Elizabeth II" label="death of Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="34007" end="34024" title="God Save the King" label="God Save the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="34261" end="34273" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120053130" start="34292" end="34303" title="Satvir Kaur" label="Satvir Kaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="34346" end="34373" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154122" start="34482" end="34509" title="Communication Workers Union (United Kingdom)" label="Communication Workers Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="34987" end="34993" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q673231" start="34995" end="35000" title="Ineos" label="Ineos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000610" start="35002" end="35012" title="Specsavers" label="Specsavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000919" start="35046" end="35055" title="Deliveroo" label="Deliveroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="35060" end="35073" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="35148" end="35166" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q574896" start="35271" end="35284" title="Rachel Reeves" label="Rachel Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="35378" end="35390" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="35434" end="35443" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q555887" start="35463" end="35483" title="economic nationalism" label="economic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933985" start="35579" end="35595" title="ministerial code" label="ministerial code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="35610" end="35621" title="private jet" label="private jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q76363973" start="35696" end="35708" title="Apsana Begum" label="Apsana Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127320" start="35809" end="35838" title="Palestine Solidarity Campaign" label="Palestine Solidarity Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="35850" end="35871" title="2023 Israel–Hamas war" label="2023 Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q123179788" start="36007" end="36030" title="People Demand Democracy" label="People Demand Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195226" start="36783" end="36812" title="Conservative Party Conference" label="Conservative Party Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738900" start="36815" end="36842" title="Liberal Democrat Conference" label="Liberal Democrat Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140982" start="36845" end="36868" title="Party conference season" label="Party conference season"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343808" wikidata="Q319234" url="?curid=343808" title="Bernard Lovell">
<text>Sir Alfred Charles Bernard Lovell ( ; 31 August 19136 August 2012) was an English physicist and radio astronomer. He was the first director of Jodrell Bank Observatory, from 1945 to 1980.

==Early life and education==
Lovell was born at Oldland Common, Bristol, in 1913, the son of local tradesman and Methodist preacher Gilbert Lovell (1881–1956) and Emily Laura, née Adams. Gilbert Lovell was an &quot;authority on the Bible&quot; and, having &quot;studied English literature and grammar&quot;, was still &quot;bombarding his son with complaints on points of grammar, punctuation and method of speaking&quot; when Lovell was in his forties. Lovell&#x27;s childhood hobbies and interests included cricket and music, mainly the piano. He had a Methodist upbringing and attended Kingswood Grammar School.

== Career and research ==
Lovell studied physics at the University of Bristol obtaining a Bachelor of Science degree in 1934, and a PhD in 1936 for his work on the electrical conductivity of thin films. At this time, he also received lessons in music from Raymond Jones, a teacher at Bath Technical School and later an organist at Bath Abbey. The church organ was one of the main loves of his life, apart from science.

Lovell worked in the cosmic ray research team at the University of Manchester&lt;ref name=&quot;doi10.1098/rspa.1939.0122&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; until the outbreak of the Second World War. At the beginning of the war, Lovell published his first book, &quot;Science and Civilization&quot;. During the war he worked for the Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE) developing radar systems to be installed in aircraft, among them H2S.

In June 1942, following the crash in England of a Halifax bomber on a flight to demonstrate the H2S, Lovell aided in the recovery of the H2S&#x27;s highly secret (and nearly indestructible) cavity magnetron from the plane&#x27;s wreckage. All 11 on board were killed, including a number of his colleagues, notably EMI engineer Alan Blumlein. Despite the tragedy, Lovell resumed his work as the government considered the H2S radar critical to the war effort.

At the end of the Second World War, Lovell attempted to continue his studies of cosmic rays with an ex-military radar detector unit, but suffered much background interference from the electric trams on Manchester&#x27;s Oxford Road. He moved his equipment to a more remote location, one which was free from such electrical interference, and where he established the Jodrell Bank Observatory, near Goostrey in Cheshire. It was an outpost of the university&#x27;s botany department and had been a searchlight station during the war. In the course of his experiments, he was able to show that radar echoes could be obtained from daytime meteor showers as they entered the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere and ionised the surrounding air. He was later able to determine the orbits of meteors in annual meteor showers to show they were in solar orbit and not of interstellar origin. With university funding, he constructed the then-largest steerable radio telescope in the world, which now bears his name: the Lovell Telescope. Over 50 years later, it remains a productive radio telescope, now operated mostly as part of the MERLIN and European VLBI Network interferometric arrays of radio telescopes.

In 2009, Lovell claimed he had been the subject of a Cold War assassination attempt during a 1963 visit to the Soviet Deep-Space Communication Centre (Eupatoria). He alleged that his hosts tried to kill him with a lethal radiation dose because he was head of the Jodrell Bank space telescope when it was also being used as part of an early warning system for Soviet nuclear attacks. He wrote a full account of the incident which, at his determination, was only published after his death.

===Lectures===
In 1958, Lovell was invited by the BBC to deliver the annual Reith Lectures, a series of six radio broadcasts called &quot;The Individual and the Universe&quot;, in which he examined the history of enquiry into the solar system and the origin of the universe.

In 1959, he was invited to deliver the MacMillan Memorial Lecture to the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland. He chose the subject &quot;Radio Astronomy and the Structure of the Universe&quot;.

In 1965 he was invited to co-deliver the Royal Institution Christmas Lecture on &quot;Exploration of the Universe&quot;.

In 1975 he gave the presidential address (&quot;In the Centre of Immensities&quot;) to the British Association meeting in Guildford.

== Awards and honours==
Lovell won numerous awards including:

* 1946 – Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE), for his work on H2S
*1955 – Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society
* 1955 – Elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences
* 1960 – Royal Medal
* 1961 – Knight Bachelor for his important contributions to the development of radio astronomy
* 1967 – Honorary Degree (Doctor of Science), University of Bath
* 1969 – Lorimer Medal of the Astronomical Society of Edinburgh
* 1969–71 – President of the Royal Astronomical Society
* 1974 – Elected to the American Philosophical Society
* 1980 – Benjamin Franklin Medal
* 1981 – Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society
Lovell was a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

Beyond professional recognition, Lovell has a secondary school named after him in Oldland Common, Bristol, which he officially opened. A building on the QinetiQ site in Malvern is also named after him, as was the fictional scientist Bernard Quatermass, the hero of several BBC Television science-fiction serials of the 1950s, whose first name was chosen in honour of Lovell.

==Personal life==
In 1937, Lovell married Mary Joyce Chesterman (d. 1993) and they had two sons and three daughters.

In later life Lovell was physically very frail; he lived in quiet retirement in the countryside, surrounded by music, his books and a vast garden filled with trees he planted many decades before. Lovell died at home in Swettenham, Cheshire on 6 August 2012.

== Read also ==
* 

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319234" start="0" end="33" title="Bernard Lovell" label="Sir Alfred Charles Bernard Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="82" end="91" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569783" start="143" end="167" title="Jodrell Bank Observatory" label="Jodrell Bank Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085687" start="237" end="251" title="Oldland Common" label="Oldland Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="253" end="260" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="698" end="705" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="744" end="753" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411036" start="778" end="802" title="King&amp;#x27;s Oak Academy" label="Kingswood Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="846" end="853" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="861" end="882" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123580" start="1089" end="1110" title="Bath Technical School" label="Bath Technical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q334399" start="1136" end="1146" title="Bath Abbey" label="Bath Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="1246" end="1256" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="1278" end="1302" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1395" end="1411" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q376223" start="1546" end="1587" title="Telecommunications Research Establishment" label="Telecommunications Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="1605" end="1610" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q521916" start="1659" end="1662" title="H2S radar" label="H2S"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977783" start="1689" end="1698" title="1942 Herefordshire TRE Halifax crash" label="the crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="1715" end="1722" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="1855" end="1871" title="cavity magnetron" label="cavity magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="1979" end="1982" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q724082" start="1992" end="2005" title="Alan Blumlein" label="Alan Blumlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="2204" end="2214" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="2275" end="2298" title="Electromagnetic interference" label="background interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022857" start="2344" end="2355" title="Wilmslow Road" label="Oxford Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569783" start="2490" end="2514" title="Jodrell Bank Observatory" label="Jodrell Bank Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968731" start="2521" end="2529" title="Goostrey" label="Goostrey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2586" end="2603" title="Faculty of Life Sciences (University of Manchester)#Department of Botany" label="botany department"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="2758" end="2764" title="meteor" label="meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="2806" end="2816" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="2821" end="2828" title="ionised" label="ionised"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="3060" end="3075" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q555130" start="3120" end="3136" title="Lovell Telescope" label="Lovell Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245062" start="3235" end="3241" title="MERLIN" label="MERLIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053281" start="3246" end="3267" title="European VLBI Network" label="European VLBI Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3366" end="3374" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053951" start="3464" end="3473" title="Pluton (complex)" label="Eupatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474926" start="3647" end="3694" title="Four-minute warning" label="early warning system for Soviet nuclear attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482202" start="3878" end="3892" title="Reith Lectures" label="Reith Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995187" start="4151" end="4204" title="Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland" label="Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q600467" start="4332" end="4367" title="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures" label="Royal Institution Christmas Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q918782" start="4504" end="4523" title="British Science Association" label="British Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="4619" end="4661" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000705" start="4690" end="4734" title="List of Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1955" label="1955 – Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="4759" end="4796" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q746756" start="4806" end="4817" title="Royal Medal" label="Royal Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="4827" end="4842" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="4897" end="4912" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422458" start="4959" end="4977" title="University of Bath" label="University of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q107596477" start="5008" end="5041" title="Astronomical Society of Edinburgh" label="Astronomical Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24357183" start="5054" end="5097" title="President of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="President of the Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="5122" end="5152" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q817363" start="5162" end="5185" title="Benjamin Franklin Medal (Royal Society of Arts)" label="Benjamin Franklin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q753072" start="5195" end="5239" title="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="5267" end="5300" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085687" start="5385" end="5399" title="Oldland Common" label="Oldland Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759946" start="5456" end="5463" title="QinetiQ" label="QinetiQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q623323" start="5472" end="5479" title="Malvern, Worcestershire" label="Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898482" start="5536" end="5554" title="Bernard Quatermass" label="Bernard Quatermass"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="5576" end="5590" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102666" start="6016" end="6026" title="Swettenham" label="Swettenham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343809" wikidata="Q293604" url="?curid=343809" title="Al-Maqrizi">
<text>Al-Maqrīzī (, full name Taqī al-Dīn Abū al-&#x27;Abbās Aḥmad ibn &#x27;Alī ibn &#x27;Abd al-Qādir ibn Muḥammad al-Maqrīzī, ; 1364–1442) was a medieval Egyptian historian and biographer during the Mamluk era, known for his interest in the Fatimid era, and the earlier periods of Egyptian history. He is recognized as the most influential historian of premodern Egypt.

==Life==
A direct student of Ibn Khaldun, al-Maqrīzī was born in Cairo to a family of Syrian origin that had recently relocated from Damascus. When he presents himself in his books he usually stops at the 10th forefather although he confessed to some of his close friends that he can trace his ancestry to al-Mu‘izz li-Dīn Allāh – first Fatimid caliph in Egypt and the founder of al-Qahirah – and even to Ali ibn Abi Talib. He was trained in the Hanafite school of law. Later, he switched to the Shafi&#x27;ite school and finally to the Zahirite school. Maqrizi studied theology under one of the primary masterminds behind the Zahiri Revolt, and his vocal support and sympathy with that revolt against the Mamluks likely cost him higher administrative and clerical positions with the Mamluk regime. The name Maqrizi was an attribution to a quarter of the city of Baalbek, from where his paternal grandparents hailed. Maqrizi confessed to his contemporaries that he believed that he was related to the Fatimids through the son of al-Muizz. Ibn Hajar preserves the most memorable account: his father, as they entered the al-Hakim Mosque one day, told him &quot;My son, you are entering the mosque of your ancestor.&quot; However, his father also instructed al-Maqrizi not to reveal this information to anyone he could not trust; Walker concludes:
:Ultimately it would be hard to conclude that al-Maqrizi conceived any more than an antiquarian interest in the Fatimids. His main concern seems more likely to be the meaning they and their city might have for the present, that is, for Mamluk Egypt and its role in Islam. (p. 167)

In 1385, he went on the Islamic pilgrimage, the Hajj. For some time he was secretary in a government office, and in 1399 became inspector of markets for Cairo and northern Egypt. This post he soon gave up to become a preacher at the Mosque of &#x27;Amr ibn al &#x27;As, president of the al-Hakim Mosque, and a lecturer on tradition. In 1408, he went to Damascus to become inspector of the Qalanisryya and lecturer. Later, he retired into private life at Cairo.

In 1430, he again went on Hajj with his family and travelled for some five years. His learning was great, his observation accurate and his judgement good, but his books are largely compilations, and he does not always acknowledge the sources upon which he relied.

==Works==
Most of al-Maqrizi&#x27;s works, exceeding 200, are concerned with Egypt.
*&quot;al-Mawāʻiẓ wa-al-Iʻtibār bi-Dhikr al-Khiṭaṭ wa-al-āthār&quot; (Arabic, 2 vols., Bulaq, 1853); French translation by Urbain Bouriant as &quot;Description topographique et historique de l&#x27;Égypte&quot; (Paris, 1895–1900; compare A. R. Guest, &quot;A List of Writers, Books and other Authorities mentioned by El Maqrizi in his Khitat,&quot; in &quot;Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society&quot;, 1902, pp. 103–125). 
*&quot;Itti‘āz al-Ḥunafā’ bi-Akhbār al-A’immah al-Fāṭimīyīn al-Khulafā’&quot;
*&quot;Kitāb al-Khiṭaṭ al-Maqrīzīyah&quot;
*&quot;Kitāb al-Sulūk li-Ma‘rifat Duwal al-Mulūk&quot;
*&quot;History of the Fatimites&quot;; extract published by J.G.L. Kosegarten in &quot;Chrestomathia&quot; (Leipzig, 1828), pp. 115–123;

*&quot;History of the Ayyubit and Mameluke Rulers&quot;; French translation by Etienne Marc Quatremère (2 vols., Paris, 1837–1845).
*&quot;Muqaffa&quot;, first sixteen-volumes of an Egyptian biographic encyclopedia arranged in alphabetic order. The Egyptian historian, al-Sakhawi, estimated that the complete work would require eighty volumes. Three autograph volumes exist in manuscript in Leiden and one in Paris.
===Smaller works===
*&quot;Mahomeddan Coinage&quot; (ed. O. G. Tychsen, Rostock, 1797; French translation by Silvestre de Sacy, Paris, 1797)
*&quot;Arab Weights and Measures&quot; (ed. Tychsen, Rostock, 1800)
*&quot;Arabian Tribes that migrated to Egypt&quot; (ed. F. Wüstenfeld, Göttingen, 1847)
*&quot;Account of Hadhramaut&quot; (ed. P. B. Noskowyj, Bonn, 1866)
*&quot;Strife between the Bani Umayya and the Bani Hashim&quot; (ed. G. Vos, Leiden, 1888)
*&quot;Historia Regum Islamiticorum in Abyssinia&quot; (ed. and Latin trans. F. T. Rink, Leiden, 1790).

===Books===
* al-Mawa&#x27;iz wa al-&#x27;i&#x27;tibar bi dhikr al-khitat wa al-&#x27;athar (about the planning of Cairo and its monuments)
**A. R. Guest, p. 103ff: A list of Writers, Books and other Authorities mentioned by El Maqrisi in his Khitat
* al-Selouk Leme&#x27;refatt Dewall al-Melouk (about Mamluk history in Egypt)
* Ette&#x27;aaz al-honafa be Akhbaar al-A&#x27;emma al-Fatemeyyeen al-Kholafaa (about the Fatimid state)
* al-Bayaan wal E&#x27;raab Amma Be Ard Misr min al A&#x27;raab (about the Arab Tribes in Egypt)
* Eghathatt al-Omma be Kashf al-Ghomma (about the famines that took place in Egypt)
* al-Muqaffa (biographies of princes and prominent personality of his time)
* (pp. 115 −123: Al-Maqrizi, an extract of &quot;History of the Fatimites.&quot;)
*
*
*A. R. Guest, 1902, in Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, pp. 103–125: &quot;A List of Writers, Books and other Authorities mentioned by El Maqrizi in his Khitat&quot; (Notes on the 1853-edition)
*
*
**alternative: 

==See also==
*List of Muslim historians
*List of Arab scientists and scholars
*Ibn Inabah

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

*&quot;Mawa&#x27;iz&quot;, online text (in Arabic)
*Account of the Crusade of St. Louis (in English)
*On al-Maqrizi</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q293604" start="0" end="10" title="Al-Maqrizi" label="Al-Maqrīzī"/>
<link wikidata="Q293604" start="24" end="121" title="Al-Maqrizi" label="Taqī al-Dīn Abū al-&amp;#x27;Abbās Aḥmad ibn &amp;#x27;Alī ibn &amp;#x27;Abd al-Qādir ibn Muḥammad al-Maqrīzī"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="196" end="206" title="Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)" label="Mamluk era"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="238" end="249" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid era"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="397" end="408" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="501" end="509" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335443" start="674" end="696" title="al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz li-Din Allah" label="al-Mu‘izz li-Dīn Allāh"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="773" end="790" title="Ali" label="Ali ibn Abi Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="814" end="820" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="864" end="876" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q140592" start="905" end="913" title="Ẓāhirī" label="Zahirite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208124" start="995" end="1008" title="Zahiri Revolt" label="Zahiri Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="1231" end="1238" title="Baalbek" label="Baalbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q335443" start="1397" end="1405" title="Ma&amp;#x27;ad al-Muizz Li-Deenillah" label="al-Muizz"/>
<link wikidata="Q471116" start="1407" end="1416" title="Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani" label="Ibn Hajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q775838" start="1487" end="1502" title="al-Hakim Mosque" label="al-Hakim Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="2043" end="2047" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q683511" start="2228" end="2263" title="Mosque of &amp;#x27;Amr ibn al &amp;#x27;As" label="Mosque of &amp;#x27;Amr ibn al &amp;#x27;As"/>
<link wikidata="Q775838" start="2282" end="2297" title="al-Hakim Mosque" label="al-Hakim Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="2348" end="2356" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q508907" start="2929" end="2944" title="Urbain Bouriant" label="Urbain Bouriant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3044" end="3055" title="A. R. Guest" label="A. R. Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q289886" start="3622" end="3645" title="Etienne Marc Quatremère" label="Etienne Marc Quatremère"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120128" start="3812" end="3822" title="al-Sakhawi" label="al-Sakhawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="3934" end="3940" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q90930" start="4016" end="4029" title="O. G. Tychsen" label="O. G. Tychsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q507774" start="4068" end="4085" title="Silvestre de Sacy" label="Silvestre de Sacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q68140" start="4224" end="4237" title="F. Wüstenfeld" label="F. Wüstenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4296" end="4310" title="Paul Berlin Noskowyj" label="P. B. Noskowyj"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391988" start="4393" end="4399" title="Geerhardus Vos" label="G. Vos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4492" end="4502" title="F. T. Rink" label="F. T. Rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296185" start="5319" end="5355" title="Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society" label="Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617025" start="5530" end="5555" title="List of Muslim historians" label="List of Muslim historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736514" start="5557" end="5593" title="List of Arab scientists and scholars" label="List of Arab scientists and scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40378873" start="5595" end="5605" title="Ibn Inabah" label="Ibn Inabah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343815" wikidata="Q1333815" url="?curid=343815" title="Vasco">
<text>Vasco may refer to:

==People==
===Given name===
====Middle Ages====
* Vasco da Gama (c. 1460s–1524), Portuguese explorer
* Vasco Núñez de Balboa (1475–1519), Spanish conquistador
* Vasco Fernandes Coutinho, captain of Espírito Santo (1490–1561), Portuguese nobleman and first donatary of the Captaincy of Espírito Santo
* Vasco Fernandes (artist) (1475–1540), Portuguese painter
* Vasco de Quiroga (1470/78–1565), Spanish bishop and judge, first bishop of Michoacán, Mexico
* Vasco Martins de Sousa (1320s–1387), Lord of Mortágua and Chancellor mor under King Peter I of Portugal

====Modern world====
* Vasco Cordeiro (born 1973), Portuguese politician
* Vasco da Gama Fernandes (1908–1991), Portuguese politician, Chairman of the Portuguese Parliament
* Vasco Fernandes (footballer) (born 1986), Portuguese footballer
* Vasco Gonçalves, Portuguese army officer and Prime Minister of Portugal from 1974 to 1975
* Vasco Lopes (born 1999), Portuguese footballer
* Vasco Oliveira (footballer, born 1922), Portuguese deceased footballer
* Vasco Oliveira (footballer, born 2000), Portuguese footballer
* Vasco Rossi (born 1952), Italian singer-songwriter
* Vasco Santana (1898–1958), Portuguese actor
* Vasco Sousa (footballer) (born 2003), Portuguese footballer
* Vasco Joaquim Rocha Vieira (1939–2025), last Portuguese governor (1991–1999) of Macau

===Surname===
* André Vasco (born 1984), Brazilian actor and television presenter
* Giambattista Vasco (1733–1796), Italian economist and abbot
* María Vasco (born 1975), Spanish race walker
* Maurizio Vasco (born 1955), American television presenter

===Nickname or stage name===
* Vassil Evtimov (born 1977), French-Bulgarian former professional basketball player and head coach nicknamed &quot;Vasco&quot;
* Bill Stax, South Korean rapper Shin Dong-yeol (born 1980), former stage name Vasco

==Sports clubs==
* CR Vasco da Gama, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, a sports club also known simply as Vasco
* Vasco Esporte Clube, Sergipe, Brazil, a football club
* Vasco SC, Goa, India, a sports club

==Other uses==
* Basque language, called &quot;vasco&quot; in Spanish
* Vasco da Gama, Goa, a city in India, often called simply Vasco
* Vasco Road, California, United States
* &quot;Vasco&quot; (album), a two-part EP by Ricardo Villalobos
* Jane Vasco, the lead character in the &quot;Painkiller Jane&quot; TV series
* × &quot;Vascostylis&quot; or Vasco, an orchid genus
* Vasco Data Security International, a corporate security firm now known as OneSpan
* Vietnam Air Services Company, a regional airline in southern Vietnam, a subsidiary of Vietnam Airlines

==See also==
* Vasco da Gama (disambiguation)
*Vasko (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1333815" start="0" end="5" title="Vasco" label="Vasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="71" end="84" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q19080" start="124" end="145" title="Vasco Núñez de Balboa" label="Vasco Núñez de Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554892" start="182" end="233" title="Vasco Fernandes Coutinho, captain of Espírito Santo" label="Vasco Fernandes Coutinho, captain of Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357253" start="323" end="347" title="Vasco Fernandes (artist)" label="Vasco Fernandes (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990920" start="382" end="398" title="Vasco de Quiroga" label="Vasco de Quiroga"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974225" start="477" end="499" title="Vasco Martins de Sousa" label="Vasco Martins de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q968223" start="605" end="619" title="Vasco Cordeiro" label="Vasco Cordeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916430" start="657" end="680" title="Vasco da Gama Fernandes" label="Vasco da Gama Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107044" start="757" end="785" title="Vasco Fernandes (footballer)" label="Vasco Fernandes (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q712532" start="823" end="838" title="Vasco Gonçalves" label="Vasco Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291775" start="915" end="926" title="Vasco Lopes" label="Vasco Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916420" start="964" end="1002" title="Vasco Oliveira (footballer, born 1922)" label="Vasco Oliveira (footballer, born 1922)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43378381" start="1037" end="1075" title="Vasco Oliveira (footballer, born 2000)" label="Vasco Oliveira (footballer, born 2000)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17171" start="1101" end="1112" title="Vasco Rossi" label="Vasco Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511027" start="1154" end="1167" title="Vasco Santana" label="Vasco Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q108033782" start="1200" end="1224" title="Vasco Sousa (footballer)" label="Vasco Sousa (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q843303" start="1262" end="1288" title="Vasco Joaquim Rocha Vieira" label="Vasco Joaquim Rocha Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760082" start="1365" end="1376" title="André Vasco" label="André Vasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559953" start="1433" end="1451" title="Giambattista Vasco" label="Giambattista Vasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q236390" start="1495" end="1506" title="María Vasco" label="María Vasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856664" start="1632" end="1646" title="Vassil Evtimov" label="Vassil Evtimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q16081222" start="1760" end="1769" title="Bill Stax" label="Bill Stax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014111" start="1863" end="1879" title="CR Vasco da Gama" label="CR Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916412" start="1948" end="1967" title="Vasco Esporte Clube" label="Vasco Esporte Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q944337" start="2004" end="2012" title="Vasco SC" label="Vasco SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="2058" end="2073" title="Basque language" label="Basque language"/>
<link wikidata="Q978780" start="2113" end="2131" title="Vasco da Gama, Goa" label="Vasco da Gama, Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916424" start="2178" end="2188" title="Vasco Road" label="Vasco Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916405" start="2218" end="2243" title="Vasco (album)" label="&amp;quot;Vasco&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005464" start="2321" end="2348" title="Painkiller Jane (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Painkiller Jane&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q107581247" start="2361" end="2386" title="× Vascostylis" label="× &amp;quot;Vascostylis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552887" start="2489" end="2496" title="OneSpan" label="OneSpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370655" start="2499" end="2527" title="Vietnam Air Services Company" label="Vietnam Air Services Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578710" start="2618" end="2648" title="Vasco da Gama (disambiguation)" label="Vasco da Gama (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042764" start="2650" end="2672" title="Vasko (disambiguation)" label="Vasko (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343816" wikidata="Q250358" url="?curid=343816" title="Adoption in ancient Rome">
<text>Adoption in ancient Rome was primarily a legal procedure for transferring paternal power &quot;(potestas)&quot; to ensure succession in the male line within Roman patriarchal society. The Latin word &quot;adoptio&quot; refers broadly to &quot;adoption&quot;, which was of two kinds: the transferral of &quot;potestas&quot; over a free person from one head of household to another; and &quot;adrogatio&quot;, when the adoptee had been acting &quot;sui iuris&quot; as a legal adult but assumed the status of unemancipated son for purposes of inheritance. &quot;Adoptio&quot; was a longstanding part of Roman family law pertaining to paternal responsibilities such as perpetuating the value of the family estate and ancestral rites &quot;(sacra)&quot;, which were concerns of the Roman property-owning classes and cultural elite. During the Principate, adoption became a way to ensure imperial succession.

In contrast to modern adoption, Roman &quot;adoptio&quot; was neither designed nor intended to build emotionally satisfying families and support childrearing. Among all social classes, childless couples or those who wanted to expand the size of their families instead might foster children. Evidence is meager for the &quot;adoptio&quot; of young children for purposes other than securing a male heir, and probably would have been employed mostly by former slaves legitimating the status of their own children born into slavery or outside a legally valid marriage.

Roman women could own, inherit, and control property as citizens, and therefore could exercise prerogatives of the &quot;paterfamilias&quot; pertaining to ownership and inheritance. They played an increasingly significant role in succession and the inheritance of property from the 2nd century BC through the 2nd century AD, but as an instrument for transferring paternal &quot;potestas&quot;, adoption was mainly a male-gendered practice.

==Social and legal context==

Formal adoption was practiced primarily for financial, social, and political purposes among the property-owning classes. Free working people for whom these interests were minimal had little need of the cumbersome legal procedure and instead fostered if they wished to rear children. For the Romans, kinship was &quot;biologically based but not biologically determined&quot;, and procedures such as adoption and divorce gave them greater latitude to restructure their families than was allowed in Christian Europe. Cicero said that adoption was an accepted way to ensure the &quot;hereditas&quot; (transmission) of three aspects of Roman family continuity: the family name &quot;(nomen)&quot;, wealth &quot;(pecunia)&quot;, and religious rites &quot;(sacra)&quot;. Adoption was appropriate for a man who had no legitimate children, but if there were already legitimate heirs, adoption risked diluting their inheritance and the social status that came with it. Romans tended to prefer small families of two or three children for this reason, though premodern rates of neonatal and childhood mortality, along with other factors, could be an unsought brake on family size that jeopardized the family line. In adopting an adult heir, the father &quot;could see what he was getting&quot;.

Adoption was carried out by the male who was head of his family, the &quot;paterfamilias&quot;, and his adopting did not make his wife a mother. Nor was marriage required; an adult bachelor could adopt in order to pass along his family name and &quot;potestas&quot;, as could a citizen eunuch (Latin &quot;spado&quot;).

===The adoptee===
A close relative was preferred as the adoptee, and a &quot;paterfamilias&quot; might adopt a grandson, especially if the grandson&#x27;s father was not in the line of succession. The grandson might be his daughter&#x27;s son, or the &quot;pater&quot; might have removed the boy&#x27;s father from succession by emancipating him. One common pattern in Roman adoption was for a woman&#x27;s childless brother to adopt one of her sons. A brother or cousin on the father&#x27;s side might relinquish &quot;potestas&quot; over a son to provide a childless man with an adoptive heir. A &quot;pater&quot; who had no sons might adopt his daughter&#x27;s husband to strengthen family lineage, but to avoid technical incest, he would first need to emancipate his daughter so that she was no longer legally a part of the family – the adoption would otherwise create a brother-sister relationship that Roman law regarded as &quot;consanguines&quot;, the same as blood ties. Adoption of a stepson from the wife&#x27;s previous marriage was another strategy, if the stepson had no children; after adoption, his offspring would enter the line as grandchildren of the adopting &quot;paterfamilias&quot;.

The adoptee did not have to be a relative. Romans placed a high value on the social bonds of friendship (&quot;amicitia&quot;), and a childless man might adopt a friend or friend&#x27;s son. Fostering was preferred to adopting children of &quot;low&quot; birth or unknown parentage, and in Roman Egypt it was unlawful to adopt a male foundling. The &quot;paterfamilias&quot; generally transmitted his estate to an adoptee of his own rank, or the adoptee acquired the social rank of the adoptive family, with some exceptions.

====The freedman adoptee====
Most often adoption would have been a lateral move or a modest boost to the adoptee&#x27;s standing and wealth, but a freedman could also be adopted. A slave might even be simultaneously manumitted and adopted by his former master, who became both his patron &quot;(patronus)&quot; and his &quot;father&quot;. The adoption of a freedman placed his property under the control of his new &quot;paterfamilias&quot;; it no longer belonged to him, but it would return to him along with the rest of his inheritance. The choice of a freedman for adoption may have been motivated most often by gaining access to his resources rather than securing lineage.

In the early Republic, a freedman through adoption gained the same status as the freeborn citizen who freed him. By the time of Tiberius, the adopted freedman was regarded as an unemancipated son in matters of family law but held only the rights of freedpersons otherwise. Legislation that more closely regulated the varied statuses of &quot;liberti&quot; left the adoptee as a freedman who could not, for example, marry into the senatorial order even if he was adopted by a senator.

===Political adoptions and legal dodges===
In the late Republican era, Publius Clodius Pulcher famously subverted the usual course of &quot;adopting up&quot;, surrendering his patrician status and becoming a nominal plebeian in order to qualify for the office of tribune. Plebeians had adopted patricians before, but the reasons are not always clear and were not always political. Cicero criticized the &quot;adrogatio&quot; of Clodius as solely politically motivated, and Clodius was emancipated immediately after he had achieved his aim. Around the same time, a nominal adoption allowed Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther, son of the consul of 57 BC, to take a place in the College of Augurs by getting around the rule against having two members from the same &quot;gens&quot;. The adoption seems to have been entirely fictional, since there is no evidence he ever made any use of the nomenclature of the Manlius Toquatus who adopted him. Cicero&#x27;s own patrician son-in-law, Publius Cornelius Dolabella, followed the path of Clodius in becoming a tribune by having himself adopted by a plebeian Cornelius.

Augustan legislation that granted privileges to fathers with multiple children and disadvantaged the childless also prompted adoptions of convenience. Adoption for this purpose became enough of an issue that by the time of Nero a senatorial decree had tried to block legal dodges. The historian Tacitus indicates that fictitious or &quot;fake adoption&quot; &quot;(simulata adoptio)&quot; could be detected by rapid emancipation once the benefit was realized – benefits including priority in the selection of provincial governors or candidates for office for men who had met the fatherhood quota. The restrictions under the decree are not preserved in full, but a request for &quot;adrogatio&quot; could be denied if the would-be adoptive father already had children or was under the age of sixty and assumed able to procreate.

==Forms of adoption==
&quot;Adoptio&quot; had some commonalities with &quot;emancipatio&quot;, the procedure by which an adult son was released from paternal &quot;potestas&quot; – regardless of age, Roman men and women remained in effect legal minors as long as their father was alive unless emancipated. The father&#x27;s relinquishing of &quot;potestas&quot; over the son in both cases took the form of a fictive sale, based on an archaic provision of the Twelve Tables (mid-5th century BC) that a son sold three times was thereafter released from his father&#x27;s legal control.

===&quot;Adrogatio&quot;===
&quot;Adrogatio&quot; differed from &quot;adoptio&quot; in that the person adopted was already &quot;sui iuris&quot;; another father did not have to surrender his &quot;potestas&quot;, and rather than extirpating the adoptee&#x27;s previous family line, the two family lines were merged. An adrogated adoptee was likely to have inherited from the natural father whose death had left him &quot;sui iuris&quot;, consolidating two patrimonies. Ownership of anything belonging to the adoptee was legally transferred to the &quot;paterfamilias&quot;, though it was set aside as &quot;peculium&quot;, a fund or property for use by an unemancipated son or slave. When Tiberius was adopted in adulthood by Augustus, he thereafter observed this longstanding legal requirement by crediting any property he received through inheritance to the &quot;peculium&quot; rather than his private ownership.

The development of &quot;adrogatio&quot; as a form of adoption is bound up with an early procedure for making a will that required the approval of the &quot;comitia calata&quot;, an assembly of the Roman people. Upon the testator&#x27;s death, the named heir was in effect adopted by the deceased. The legislative act of adrogation was carried out by thirty magisterial lictors summoned by the Pontifex Maximus. Because adoption law developed to support the particular institutions of Roman society, &quot;adrogatio&quot; could take place only in the city of Rome until the reign of Diocletian in the late third century.

Adrogation of female adoptees became possible through imperial rescript in the Antonine era (AD 138–192), and under exceptional circumstances a woman could adopt in the same way. In one documented case from the 3rd century, a woman whose sons had died was permitted to adopt her stepson. Since a woman did not transfer paternal &quot;potestas&quot;, however, adoption accomplished little that could not be achieved through exercising her rights under inheritance law.

===Testamentary adoption===
Testamentary adoption became more common during the late Republic. Octavian, the future Augustus, was adopted in this way by his maternal great-uncle Julius Caesar. Although &quot;adoptio&quot; was a practice aimed at furthering the succession of male privileges, both men and women could in effect &quot;adopt&quot; by passing along their property in a will with the condition that the heir carry on the family name &quot;(condicio nominis ferendi)&quot;. The role of women in passing property along the family line became &quot;increasingly important&quot;. Technically, this was not adoption but the &quot;institution of an heir.&quot; The advantage of this arrangement was that the testator did not have to assume patriarchal responsibilities for the adoptee while he was alive but had assured the continuity of the family name, rites, and estate after his death; the testamentary adoptee did not surrender his own status as a &quot;pater&quot; as he would in adrogation but received the benefits of inheritance.

Adoption was also the means by which married women could become part of their husband&#x27;s family. From the late Republic through the Principate, most Roman women married &quot;sine manu&quot;, meaning that they remained part of their birth family and did not submit to their husband&#x27;s &quot;potestas&quot;. Livia, the wife of Augustus, outlived him, and only upon his death did testamentary adoption make her a part of the Julian family.

===Legitimation===
Illegitimacy does not appear to have carried much stigma in Roman society before the time of Constantine I, as many forms of Roman marriage existed, some rather loosely defined, along with quasi-marital unions such as &quot;contubernium&quot; among slaves and monogamous concubinage &quot;(concubinatus)&quot;. Birth outside marriage was primarily at issue in matters of inheritance but was not a clearly defined status with debilities in law, as a principle of customary international law &quot;(ius gentium)&quot; was that a child took its status from the mother. A freedwoman whose male partner remained enslaved might find it advantageous to assert that her child was fatherless and not conceived during her own servitude, so as to ensure the child&#x27;s freeborn status. It was unusual for freeborn persons to legitimate a child born outside a legally valid marriage, and typically a man would not adopt his illegitimate child unless he had no other heirs. The adoptee could be &quot;ingenuus&quot; (freeborn) or a freedman, and might be a child resulting from &quot;concubinatus&quot;, though children were not especially desired from these unions.

Provisions for retroactive legitimation became more capacious in late antiquity as family law was adapted during the Christianization of the Roman Empire, in particular under Constantine and Justinian.

In the Classical period, legitimation might have been more common among former slaves. Since slaves lacked personhood under Roman law, they could neither contract a valid marriage nor institute an heir by means of a will. However, the quasi-marital union of &quot;contubernium&quot; was available to heterosexual slave couples with the owner&#x27;s approval, and expressed an intent to marry if both parties gained rights of marriage and succession upon manumission. Because a male slave did not possess the standing to assert patriarchal &quot;potestas&quot;, the child of an enslaved father was &quot;spurius&quot;, one whose father could not be legally identified as such—that is, illegitimate. Since the child&#x27;s status was determined by the mother&#x27;s, if a woman was manumitted before her partner and conceived a child with him after that, the child was &quot;spurius&quot; but freeborn; unlike freeborn children from a legal marriage, however, the child was born &quot;sui iuris&quot;, emancipated from the &quot;potestas&quot; of an adult male. If the father was later manumitted through a procedure that granted him full citizenship, he could legitimate his child through &quot;adrogatio&quot;.

==Imperial succession==
Many Roman emperors came to power through adoption, either because their predecessors had no natural sons, or simply to ensure a smooth transition for the most capable candidate.

===The Julio-Claudian dynasty===

Augustus, as he was known after he became the first Roman emperor, was adopted into the &quot;gens Julia&quot; in the will of his great uncle, Julius Caesar. He inherited Caesar&#x27;s money, name, and &quot;auctoritas&quot;.

As Augustus&#x27;s central role in the Principate solidified, it became increasingly important for him to designate an heir. He first adopted his daughter Julia&#x27;s three sons by Marcus Agrippa, renaming them Gaius Caesar, Lucius Caesar, and Agrippa Caesar. After the former two died young and the latter was exiled, Augustus adopted his stepson, Tiberius Claudius Nero, on the condition that he adopt his own nephew, Germanicus (who was also Augustus&#x27;s great nephew by blood). Tiberius succeeded Augustus, and after Tiberius&#x27;s death, Germanicus&#x27;s son Caligula became emperor.

Claudius adopted his stepson Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, who changed his name to Nero Claudius Caesar and succeeded Claudius as the emperor, Nero.

===The adoptive emperors===
The Nerva-Antonine dynasty was also united by a series of adoptions. Nerva adopted the popular military leader Trajan. Trajan in turn took Publius Aelius Hadrianus as his protégé and, although the legitimacy of the process is debatable, Hadrian claimed to have been adopted and took the name &quot;Caesar Traianus Hadrianus&quot; when he became emperor.

Hadrian adopted Lucius Ceionius Commodus, who changed his name to Lucius Aelius Caesar but predeceased Hadrian. Hadrian then adopted Titus Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Arrius Antoninus, on condition that Antoninus in turn adopt both the natural son of the late Lucius Aelius and a promising young nephew of his wife. They ruled as Antoninus Pius, Lucius Verus and Marcus Aurelius respectively.

Niccolò Machiavelli described them as &quot;The Five Good Emperors&quot; and attributed their success to having been chosen for the role:

This run of adoptive emperors came to an end when Marcus Aurelius named his biological son, Commodus, as his heir.

Adoption never became the official method of designating a successor, in part because Roman identity was based on citizenship with a visceral rejection of hereditary kingship. During the Principate, so called from Augustus&#x27;s styling of himself as &quot;princeps&quot; (first among equals, in the manner of the &quot;princeps senatus&quot;), emperors consolidated their power by making use of the institutions of Republican Rome rather than overthrowing them outright. Augustus&#x27;s early intentions seem to have been to apprentice and promote a successor on the basis of merit, but his longevity instead created an apparatus of centralized power from which his status as a private citizen could no longer be extricated. His fashioning of himself as &quot;father of his country&quot; enabled the transferral of his power over the Roman people in the same way that a &quot;paterfamilias&quot; of a family estate was bound to transfer his &quot;potestas&quot; whether or not the available successor was fully meritorious. A major transition in the means of imperial succession marks the periodization of Roman Imperial history into the Dominate, when Diocletian replaced adoption with the &quot;consortium imperii&quot;, designation of an heir by appointing him partner in &quot;imperium&quot;.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q250358" start="0" end="24" title="Adoption in ancient Rome" label="Adoption in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="41" end="56" title="Roman law" label="legal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q601444" start="96" end="104" title="patria potestas" label="potestas"/>
<link wikidata="Q117101305" start="122" end="132" title="Inheritance law in ancient Rome" label="succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q601444" start="163" end="182" title="paterfamilias" label="patriarchal society"/>
<link wikidata="Q685333" start="447" end="456" title="sui iuris" label="sui iuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q117101305" start="540" end="551" title="Inheritance law in ancient Rome" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="736" end="741" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#sacra gentilicia" label="sacra"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="838" end="848" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125740" start="882" end="901" title="List of Roman emperors" label="imperial succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="926" end="934" title="adoption" label="adoption"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1178" end="1193" title="Slavery in ancient Rome#Alumni" label="foster children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593880" start="1354" end="1367" title="Slavery in ancient Rome" label="former slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="1526" end="1534" title="Roman citizenship" label="citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593880" start="2182" end="2190" title="Alumni (ancient Rome)" label="fostered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438918" start="2352" end="2359" title="Divorce in ancient Rome" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2455" end="2461" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760158" start="2620" end="2625" title="Nomen gentilicium" label="nomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373229" start="2691" end="2696" title="sacra gentilicia" label="sacra"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="3007" end="3015" title="infant mortality" label="neonatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q61559" start="3020" end="3039" title="childhood mortality" label="childhood mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q601444" start="3300" end="3313" title="paterfamilias" label="paterfamilias"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="3511" end="3517" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q470825" start="4864" end="4872" title="amicitia" label="amicitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="5043" end="5054" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612453" start="5426" end="5434" title="Freedmen in ancient Rome" label="freedman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5495" end="5505" title="Slavery in ancient Rome#Manumission" label="manumitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881933" start="5574" end="5582" title="Patronage in ancient Rome" label="patronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="5964" end="5978" title="Roman Republic" label="early Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="6085" end="6093" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q313664" start="6513" end="6536" title="Publius Clodius Pulcher" label="Publius Clodius Pulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="6618" end="6627" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="6658" end="6666" title="Plebeians" label="plebeian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="6705" end="6712" title="Tribune of the plebs" label="tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q51380" start="7031" end="7066" title="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther" label="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther"/>
<link wikidata="Q51380" start="7079" end="7094" title="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther" label="consul of 57 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q215909" start="7119" end="7136" title="College of Augurs" label="College of Augurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q899409" start="7211" end="7215" title="gens" label="gens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7350" end="7366" title="Manlia gens#Manlii Torquati" label="Manlius Toquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q451597" start="7424" end="7451" title="Publius Cornelius Dolabella (consul 44 BC)" label="Publius Cornelius Dolabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="7779" end="7783" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="7851" end="7858" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190123" start="8065" end="8085" title="Roman governor" label="provincial governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="8630" end="8636" title="Minor (law)" label="minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q931483" start="8793" end="8805" title="legal fiction" label="fictive sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q203686" start="8844" end="8857" title="Twelve Tables" label="Twelve Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q685333" start="9099" end="9108" title="sui iuris" label="sui iuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593880" start="9577" end="9585" title="peculium" label="peculium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="9659" end="9667" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="9696" end="9704" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373229" start="10044" end="10058" title="comitia calata" label="comitia calata"/>
<link wikidata="Q59671" start="10257" end="10263" title="lictor" label="lictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q212943" start="10281" end="10297" title="Pontifex Maximus" label="Pontifex Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="10470" end="10480" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418386" start="10572" end="10580" title="rescript" label="rescript"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="10588" end="10600" title="Antonine era" label="Antonine era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="11156" end="11169" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12189" end="12218" title="Manus marriage#Sine manu" label="married &amp;quot;sine manu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q469701" start="12339" end="12344" title="Livia" label="Livia"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="12490" end="12502" title="Legitimacy (family law)" label="Illegitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="12583" end="12596" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299269" start="12615" end="12629" title="Roman marriage" label="Roman marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691424" start="12714" end="12726" title="contubernium" label="contubernium"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857315" start="12780" end="12792" title="concubinatus" label="concubinatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160085" start="12987" end="12998" title="ius gentium" label="ius gentium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13058" end="13105" title="Contubernium#Between a free woman and a male slave" label="freedwoman whose male partner remained enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q114072" start="13480" end="13488" title="ingenuus" label="ingenuus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13590" end="13607" title="Concubinatus#Children" label="children were not"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="13712" end="13726" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249513" start="13764" end="13800" title="Christianization of the Roman Empire" label="Christianization of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="13838" end="13847" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="13957" end="13967" title="legal personhood" label="personhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q685333" start="14833" end="14842" title="sui iuris" label="sui iuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="15091" end="15104" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="15300" end="15308" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="15352" end="15365" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q510193" start="15394" end="15404" title="gens Julia" label="gens Julia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15414" end="15441" title="Augustus#Heir to Caesar" label="the will of his great uncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="15443" end="15456" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q758675" start="15508" end="15518" title="auctoritas" label="auctoritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="15566" end="15576" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="15709" end="15723" title="Marcus Agrippa" label="Marcus Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q298162" start="15739" end="15751" title="Gaius Caesar" label="Gaius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q313735" start="15753" end="15766" title="Lucius Caesar" label="Lucius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q325906" start="15772" end="15786" title="Agrippa Postumus" label="Agrippa Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="15877" end="15899" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius Claudius Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="15948" end="15958" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="16097" end="16105" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="16123" end="16131" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="16265" end="16269" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="16304" end="16326" title="Nerva-Antonine dynasty" label="Nerva-Antonine dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="16369" end="16374" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="16411" end="16417" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="16439" end="16463" title="Hadrian" label="Publius Aelius Hadrianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q455034" start="16721" end="16741" title="Lucius Aelius" label="Lucius Aelius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q234734" start="16958" end="16966" title="Faustina the Elder" label="his wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="16982" end="16996" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433" start="16998" end="17010" title="Lucius Verus" label="Lucius Verus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="17015" end="17030" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="17046" end="17065" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="17277" end="17285" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="17488" end="17498" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13664859" start="17622" end="17638" title="princeps senatus" label="princeps senatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q238399" start="18441" end="18449" title="Dominate" label="Dominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="18456" end="18466" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163379" start="18500" end="18518" title="consortium imperii" label="consortium imperii"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="18584" end="18592" title="imperium" label="imperium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343817" wikidata="Q17091265" url="?curid=343817" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)">
<text>The National Executive Committee (NEC) is the governing body of the UK Labour Party, setting the overall strategic direction of the party and policy development. Its composition has changed over the years, and includes representatives of affiliated trade unions, the Parliamentary Labour Party, constituency Labour parties (CLP), and socialist societies, as well as &quot;ex officio&quot; members such as the party Leader and Deputy Leader and several of their appointees.

== History ==
During the 1980s, the NEC had a major role in policy-making and was often at the heart of disputes over party policy.

In 1997, under Tony Blair&#x27;s new party leadership, the General Secretary Tom Sawyer enacted the Partnership in Power reforms. This rebalanced the NEC&#x27;s membership, including by reducing trade union membership to a minority for the first time in its history. The reforms also introduced new seats: two for local government, three for the Parliamentary Party, three for the (Shadow) Cabinet, and one for the European Parliamentary Labour Party (EPLP). Until these reforms, Member of Parliament could stand for CLP section seats on the NEC, but thereafter MPs and MEPs could not stand in this section. Moreover, under Blair, the committee&#x27;s role declined. Its former policy development function is now largely carried out by the National Policy Forum. One of its committees has disciplinary powers including the ability to expel members of the party who have brought it into disrepute or to readmit previously expelled members. However, the NEC remains the administrative authority of the party.

In 2007, a new seat on the NEC was made for the Black Socialist Society, now known as BAME Labour.

In 2016, two new seats, one each for Scottish Labour and Welsh Labour, were added.

The 2017 Conference saw the creation of four additional NEC seats: one in the trade union section and three in the CLP section. Although the additional union seat was elected at Conference, the extra CLP seats were not elected until January 2018.

In November 2020, following the Brexit withdrawal agreement ending UK representation within the European Parliament and ending the European Parliamentary Labour Party, the single seat on the NEC for the EPLP leader was replaced by a new disability representative.

The Labour History Archive and Study Centre at the People&#x27;s History Museum in Manchester has the full run of the minutes of the National Executive Committee in their collection.

== Organisation ==

===NEC Officers===

, the Officers of the NEC are:

* Leader of the Labour Party: Keir Starmer MP
* Deputy Leader of the Labour Party: Angela Rayner MP
* Chair: Jessica Morden MP
* Vice-Chair: Ellie Reeves MP
* Treasurer: Mike Payne
* Chair of Organisation Committee: Wendy Nichols
* Chair of the Equalities Committee: Angela Eagle MP
* Chair of the Disputes Panel: Gurinder Josan MP
* Chair of the National Policy Forum (when a member of the NEC): Anneliese Dodds MP
* Former Chair of the National Policy Forum (when a member of the NEC): Ann Black
* NEC Co-Convenor of the Joint Policy Committee: Gavin Sibthorpe

===Joint Policy Committee===
The Joint Policy Committee (JPC) has strategic oversight of policy development in the party through overseeing the rolling programme of Partnership in Power. The JPC acts as the steering group for the National Policy Forum. It is therefore a joint committee made up of NEC, Government and National Policy Forum representatives.

NEC Co-Convenor: Gavin Sibthorpe

=== NEC sub-committees ===

The following are sub-committees of the NEC:

====Equalities Committee====
The Equalities Committee responsibilities and roles include: 
*Women&#x27;s recruitment, retention and participation in the party in elected office and the development of women&#x27;s forums at local level
*Black, Asian and ethnic minority recruitment, retention and participation in the party
*Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender representation and participation within the party
*Disability access and increased representation and participation of members with disabilities
*Considering effective party responses to Employment Framework Directive based on Article 13 (Treaty on European Union) and the European Union Action Programme to Combat Discrimination
*Responsibility for driving the Party&#x27;s equality agenda and the development of an inclusive organisation at all levels
*Link with Organisation Committee and Young Labour Co-ordinating Committee on issues of age discrimination
*Biannual women&#x27;s forum
*Biannual ethnic minorities forum

====Business Board====
The Business Board is responsible for overseeing the business functions of the organisation including the management of the finances.

====Audit, Risk Management and Compliance Committee====
The Audit, Risk Management and Compliance Committee has responsibility for audit and compliance oversight, and is accountable for internal audit procedures providing a systematic approach to risk management in all of the party&#x27;s activities. The committee ensures that the Labour Party&#x27;s financial activities are within the law, and that an effective system of internal control is maintained.

====Organisation Sub-Committee====
The Organisation Sub Committee is a sub-committee of the NEC (generally known as Org Sub) and is responsible for party rules and constitution; ensuring parties are operating effectively throughout the country to the highest standards and has overall responsibility for membership, investigations, selections, Conferences, electoral law, boundaries strategy and internal elections.

=====Complaints &amp; Disciplinary Sub-committee=====
The NEC Complaints &amp; Disciplinary Sub-committee is a sub-committee of the NEC Organisation Sub-committee which hears membership appeals; re-admission applications; party disputes and conciliation; minor investigations and local government appeals where referred to the NEC. It operates in a quasi-judicial fashion, conducting hearings and interviews around the country where necessary.

==Membership==
Excluding &quot;ex officio&quot; members, NEC members are elected by their respective constituencies, and each serve a two-year term. , the NEC has 39 members, as follows:

* 3: &quot;Ex officio&quot; positions: Leader and Deputy Leader of the Labour Party, and Party Treasurer
* 13: Trade Unions representatives
* 6: MPs
** 3 Frontbench MPs (nominated by the Cabinet)
** 3 Backbench MPs (elected by the members of the Parliamentary Labour Party)
* 2: Local Government representatives
* 9: from CLPs 
* 1: from the Socialist and Co-operative Societies 
* 2: Scottish and Welsh Labour
* 3: 1 BAME Labour, 1 Young Labour, 1 Disabled members

The General Secretary of the Labour Party acts as the non-voting secretary to the NEC, the Chief Whip and the PLP Chair also attend as non-voting members.

== Current members ==

; Leader of the Labour Party:
* Keir Starmer MP

; Deputy Leader of the Labour Party:
* Angela Rayner MP

; Treasurer:
* Mike Payne

; House of Commons Front Bench:
*Shabana Mahmood MP
*Ellie Reeves MP
*Jonathan Reynolds MP

; Young Labour Representative:
* Elsie Greenwood

; Disabled Members Representative:
* Ellen Morrison

; BAME Representative:
* Carol Sewell

; Division I – Trade Unions:
* Kathy Abu-Bakir (GMB)
* David Agbley (Unite)
* Maggi Ferncombe (UNISON)
* Isabelle Gutierrez (Musicians&#x27; Union)
* Jane Jones (Usdaw)
* Nicola Jukes (TSSA)
* Ian Murray (FBU)
* Wendy Nichols (UNISON)
* Karen Rose (CWU)
* Gavin Sibthorpe (GMB)
* Joanne Thomas (Usdaw)
* Mick Whelan (ASLEF)
* Mary Williams (Unite)

; Division II – Socialist Societies:
* Anu Prashar (Socialist Societies)

; Division III – Constituency Labour Parties:
* Cat Arnold
* Jessica Barnard
* Ann Black
* Gemma Bolton
* Yasmine Dar
* Angie Davies
* Abdi Duale
* Peter Mason
* Jane Thomas

; Division IV – Labour Councillors:
* Cllr Claire Holland
* Cllr Peter Wheeler

; Division V – Parliamentary Labour Party:
* Luke Akehurst MP
* Gurinder Singh Josan MP
* Melanie Onn MP

; Scottish Labour and Welsh Labour
* Jackie Baillie MSP (Deputy Leader of the Scottish Labour Party)
* Ann Jones (Welsh Labour Representative)

In addition, the General Secretary (Hollie Ridley), the PLP Chief Whip (Alan Campbell MP), and PLP Chair (Jessica Morden MP) attend ex officio without a vote

==Chair of the National Executive Committee==
The chair of the party is elected by the NEC from among its own members, and holds office for a calendar year, chairing both NEC meetings and national party conferences.

The name of this post has become confused since 2001 when Labour Party leader Tony Blair appointed Charles Clarke to the courtesy position of Chair of the Labour Party without the NEC or the national conference authorising such a position. The office&#x27;s name remains &quot;chair of the party&quot; in the Labour Party Constitution, but elsewhere the party presents the position as &quot;Chair of the NEC&quot;. Prior to 2001 the position was called &quot;Chair of the Labour Party&quot;, and before that &quot;Chairman of the Labour Party&quot;.

===List of chairs of the Labour Party National Executive Committee===

Chairmen of the Annual Conference of the Labour Representation Committee

:1900: William Charles Steadman MP
:1901: John Hodge
:1902: William John Davis
:1903: Joseph Nicholas Bell
:1904: John Hodge
:1905: Arthur Henderson MP

Chairmen of the National Executive Committee of the Labour Representation Committee

:1900: William Charles Steadman MP
:1901: Allan Gee
:1902: Richard Bell MP
:1903: John Hodge
:1904: David J. Shackleton
:1905: Arthur Henderson MP

Chairmen of the Annual Conference of the Labour Party

==See also==
*Conservative Party Board
*Liberal Democrats Federal Board

==Notes==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* 

* 


==External links==
* &quot;Members of the NEC&quot; &quot;Labour&quot; (2024)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="4" end="32" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="34" end="37" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="68" end="83" title="UK Labour Party" label="UK Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688922" start="238" end="261" title="affiliated trade unions" label="affiliated trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472169" start="267" end="293" title="Parliamentary Labour Party" label="Parliamentary Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163958" start="295" end="322" title="constituency Labour parties" label="constituency Labour parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551856" start="334" end="353" title="socialist societies" label="socialist societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="372" end="382" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="622" end="639" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809254" start="684" end="694" title="Tom Sawyer, Baron Sawyer" label="Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412964" start="1022" end="1057" title="European Parliamentary Labour Party" label="European Parliamentary Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="1087" end="1107" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="1177" end="1181" title="MEPs" label="MEPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091331" start="1347" end="1368" title="National Policy Forum" label="National Policy Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698782" start="1663" end="1686" title="Black Socialist Society" label="Black Socialist Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698781" start="1701" end="1712" title="BAME Labour" label="BAME Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="1752" end="1767" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="1772" end="1784" title="Welsh Labour" label="Welsh Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476704" start="2079" end="2106" title="Brexit withdrawal agreement" label="Brexit withdrawal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="2143" end="2162" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374980" start="2363" end="2391" title="People&amp;#x27;s History Museum" label="People&amp;#x27;s History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="2395" end="2405" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="2570" end="2596" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="2598" end="2610" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261043" start="2616" end="2649" title="Deputy Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Deputy Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164278" start="2651" end="2664" title="Angela Rayner" label="Angela Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q580431" start="2677" end="2691" title="Jessica Morden" label="Jessica Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q30234240" start="2709" end="2721" title="Ellie Reeves" label="Ellie Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836767" start="2727" end="2736" title="Treasurer of the Labour Party" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q302763" start="2835" end="2847" title="Angela Eagle" label="Angela Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60218953" start="2882" end="2896" title="Gurinder Josan" label="Gurinder Josan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529268" start="2965" end="2980" title="Anneliese Dodds" label="Anneliese Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269323" start="3165" end="3187" title="Joint Policy Committee" label="Joint Policy Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091331" start="3362" end="3383" title="National Policy Forum" label="National Policy Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q788804" start="4149" end="4179" title="Directive 2000/78/EC" label="Employment Framework Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="4201" end="4225" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023052" start="4454" end="4466" title="Young Labour (UK)" label="Young Labour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5352" end="5363" title="Labour Party Rule Book" label="party rules"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5368" end="5380" title="Labour Party Rule Book" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269458" start="5970" end="5984" title="quasi-judicial" label="quasi-judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="6097" end="6107" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="6293" end="6299" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261043" start="6304" end="6317" title="Deputy Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Deputy Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836767" start="6343" end="6358" title="Treasurer of the Labour Party" label="Party Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981489" start="6408" end="6418" title="Frontbench" label="Frontbench"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="6455" end="6464" title="Backbench" label="Backbench"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472169" start="6500" end="6526" title="Parliamentary Labour Party" label="Parliamentary Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q853171" start="6533" end="6549" title="Local government in the United Kingdom" label="Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163958" start="6576" end="6580" title="Constituency Labour Party" label="CLPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551856" start="6596" end="6632" title="Socialist society (Labour Party)" label="Socialist and Co-operative Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="6639" end="6647" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="6652" end="6664" title="Welsh Labour" label="Welsh Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698781" start="6672" end="6683" title="BAME Labour" label="BAME Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023052" start="6687" end="6699" title="Young Labour (UK)" label="Young Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532175" start="6725" end="6762" title="General Secretary of the Labour Party" label="General Secretary of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467390" start="6812" end="6822" title="Chief Whip of the Labour Party" label="Chief Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472169" start="6831" end="6840" title="Chair of the Parliamentary Labour Party" label="PLP Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="6932" end="6944" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164278" start="6988" end="7001" title="Angela Rayner" label="Angela Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q695007" start="7066" end="7081" title="Shabana Mahmood" label="Shabana Mahmood"/>
<link wikidata="Q30234240" start="7086" end="7098" title="Ellie Reeves" label="Ellie Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q501926" start="7103" end="7120" title="Jonathan Reynolds" label="Jonathan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485928" start="7315" end="7318" title="GMB (trade union)" label="GMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254509" start="7336" end="7341" title="Unite the Union" label="Unite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547264" start="7362" end="7368" title="UNISON" label="UNISON"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942600" start="7392" end="7413" title="Musicians&amp;#x27; Union (United Kingdom)" label="Musicians&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886722" start="7429" end="7434" title="Usdaw" label="Usdaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062795" start="7452" end="7456" title="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association" label="TSSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451333" start="7472" end="7475" title="Fire Brigades Union" label="FBU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547264" start="7494" end="7500" title="UNISON" label="UNISON"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154122" start="7516" end="7519" title="Communication Workers Union (United Kingdom)" label="CWU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485928" start="7540" end="7543" title="GMB (trade union)" label="GMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886722" start="7562" end="7567" title="Usdaw" label="Usdaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838478" start="7571" end="7582" title="Mick Whelan" label="Mick Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809240" start="7584" end="7589" title="ASLEF" label="ASLEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254509" start="7608" end="7613" title="Unite the Union" label="Unite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551856" start="7668" end="7687" title="Socialist Societies" label="Socialist Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766273" start="7769" end="7778" title="Ann Black" label="Ann Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947505" start="7838" end="7849" title="Peter Mason (politician)" label="Peter Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q98792749" start="7990" end="8003" title="Luke Akehurst" label="Luke Akehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q60218953" start="8009" end="8029" title="Gurinder Singh Josan" label="Gurinder Singh Josan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20054075" start="8035" end="8046" title="Melanie Onn" label="Melanie Onn"/>
<link wikidata="Q544729" start="8088" end="8102" title="Jackie Baillie" label="Jackie Baillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766480" start="8154" end="8163" title="Ann Jones (politician)" label="Ann Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="8165" end="8192" title="Welsh Labour" label="Welsh Labour Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q268196" start="8267" end="8280" title="Alan Campbell (politician)" label="Alan Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q580431" start="8301" end="8315" title="Jessica Morden" label="Jessica Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="8327" end="8337" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="8649" end="8659" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q333758" start="8670" end="8684" title="Charles Clarke" label="Charles Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467494" start="8713" end="8738" title="Chair of the Labour Party" label="Chair of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8880" end="8905" title="Labour Party Rule Book" label="Labour Party Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006736" start="9274" end="9298" title="William Charles Steadman" label="William Charles Steadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5808467" start="9309" end="9319" title="John Hodge (politician)" label="John Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013611" start="9327" end="9345" title="William John Davis" label="William John Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285806" start="9353" end="9373" title="Joseph Nicholas Bell" label="Joseph Nicholas Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5808467" start="9381" end="9391" title="John Hodge (politician)" label="John Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q208665" start="9399" end="9415" title="Arthur Henderson" label="Arthur Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006736" start="9512" end="9536" title="William Charles Steadman" label="William Charles Steadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730620" start="9547" end="9556" title="Allan Gee" label="Allan Gee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536928" start="9564" end="9576" title="Richard Bell (British politician)" label="Richard Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5808467" start="9587" end="9597" title="John Hodge (politician)" label="John Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239659" start="9605" end="9624" title="David J. Shackleton" label="David J. Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q208665" start="9632" end="9648" title="Arthur Henderson" label="Arthur Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="9694" end="9706" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232502" start="9722" end="9746" title="Conservative Party Board" label="Conservative Party Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440210" start="9748" end="9779" title="Federal Board (Liberal Democrats)" label="Liberal Democrats Federal Board"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343821" wikidata="Q708843" url="?curid=343821" title="Reinhart Dozy">
<text>Reinhart Pieter Anne Dozy (Leiden, Netherlands, 21 February 1820 – Leiden, 29 April 1883) was a Dutch scholar of French (Huguenot) origin, who was born in Leiden. He was an Orientalist scholar of Arabic language, history and literature.

==Biography==
The Dozys, like other contemporary French families, emigrated to the Low Countries after the revocation of the edict of Nantes, but some of the former appear to have settled in the Netherlands as early as 1647. Dozy studied at the University of Leiden, obtained the degree of doctor in 1844, was appointed an extraordinary professor of history in 1850, and professor in 1857. Dozy was a correspondent of the Royal Institute between 1848 and 1851. He became a member of the successor institute, the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, in 1855.

==Works==
In 1847 Reinhart Dozy&#x27;s extensive studies in Oriental literature, Arabic language and history, resulted in his first publication, &quot;The History of the Almohads, preceded by a Sketch of the History of Spain from the time of the conquest till the reign of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and of the history of the Almoravids&quot;. This translation of an original thirteenth century Arabic history, titled &quot;Kitab al-mujib fi talkhis akhbar ahl al-Maghrib&quot; (Book of Response: A Short History of the Maghreb) by the Almohad historian Abdelwahid al-Marrakushi, was reprinted in 1881 and 1968. Al-Marrakushi (b.1185) had lived nine years in Al-Andalus (present-day southern Spain) from 1206-1215. He had visited Egypt and Mecca in 1221, and returned to Morocco to complete his book in 1224.

Other works include:
* &quot;Scriptorum Arabum loci de Abbaditis&quot; (1846–1863, 3 vols.),
* His edition of 13th century Marrakech historian Ibn Idhari&#x27;s &quot;History of Africa and Spain&quot; (1848–1852, 3 vols.), translation of a Leiden library manuscript purchased at Morocco in the 17th century titled Al-Bayan al-Mughrib.
*Of Ibn-Badrun&#x27;s &quot;Historical Commentary on the Poem of Abd al-Majid ibn Abdun&quot; (1848), and
*His &quot;Dictionnaire détaillé des noms des vêtements chez les Arabes&quot; (1845), a work crowned by the Dutch Institute.
*&quot;Spanish Islam, A History of the Moslems in Spain&quot; (1913). Publ. Chatto &amp; Windus
* &quot;Histoire des Musulmans d&#x27;Espagne, jusqu&#x27;à la conquête de l&#x27;Andalousie par les Almoravides, 711-1110&quot; (4 vols. 1861; 2nd ed. 1881) read, a graphically written account of Moorish dominion in Spain, which shed new light on many obscure points.
* &quot;Recherches sur l&#x27;histoire politique et littéraire de l&#x27;Espagne pendant le moyen âge&quot; (2 vols. 1849; 2nd ed. completely recast in 1860 as &quot;Recherches sur l&#x27;histoire et la littérature de l&#x27;Espagne pendant le moyen âge&quot;; 3rd ed. 1881) form a supplement to his &quot;Histoire des Musulmans&quot;, in which he exposes the many tricks and falsehoods of the monks in their chronicles, and effectively demolishes a good part of the Cid legends.
*&quot;Supplément aux dictionnaires arabes&quot; (1877–1881, 2 volumes) and
* &quot;Glossaire des mots espagnols et portugais, dérivés de l&#x27;arabe&quot;, edited with W. H. Engelmann of Leipzig (1861; 2nd ed., 1869), and a similar list of Dutch words derived from the Arabic.

Works Edited by Dozy:
* Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari&#x27;s &quot;Analectes sur l&#x27;histoire et la littérature des Arabes d&#x27;Espagne&quot; (1855–1861, 2 vols.), and, in conjunction with his friend and successor, Michael Jan de Goeje, at Leiden:
*al-Idrisi&#x27;s &quot;Description de l&#x27;Afrique et de l&#x27;Espagne&quot; (1866).
* &quot;Calendrier de Cordoue de l&#x27;année 961; texte arabe et ancienne traduction latine&quot; (Leiden 1873).
*&quot;Het Islamisme&quot; (&quot;Islamism&quot;; 1863, 2nd ed., 1880; French translation) is a popular exposition of Islam, of a more controversial character; and
*&quot;De Israelieten te Mekka&quot; (&quot;The Israelites at Mecca&quot;, 1864) became the subject of a rather heated discussion in Jewish circles.

== Assessment ==

According to Edward Said, despite the &quot;enormous labors&quot; represented by Dozy&#x27;s work, it was characterized by an &quot;impressive antipathy [...] to the Orient, Islam, and the Arabs&quot;.

==References==
*Hugh N. Kennedy, &quot;Muslim Spain and Portugal : A Political History of al-Andalus&quot;, Longman, 1996 ()
*Roger Collins, &quot;The Arab Conquest of Spain, 710–797&quot;, Blackwell, 1989 ()
*Kenneth Baxter Wolf: &quot;Conquerors and Chroniclers of Early Medieval Spain&quot;. Liverpool University Press, Liverpool 1999, revised edition from the 1990 edition. See: kenneth_baxter_wolf - canilup
*Ahmed Siraj: &quot;L&#x27;Image de la Tingitane. L&#x27;historiographie arabe medievale et l&#x27;Antiquite nord-africaine&quot;. École Française de Rome, (1995). . Short biographical note on Ibn Idhari al-Marrakushi .
*N. Levtzion &amp; J.F.P. Hopkins, &quot;Corpus of early Arabic sources for West African history&quot;, Cambridge University Press, (1981), (reprint: Markus Wiener, Princeton, 2000, ). Short biographical note and English translation of extracts from Al-Bayan al-Mughrib

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q708843" start="0" end="25" title="Reinhart Dozy" label="Reinhart Pieter Anne Dozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="27" end="33" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="35" end="46" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="67" end="73" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="121" end="129" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="155" end="161" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="173" end="184" title="Oriental studies" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="196" end="202" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="363" end="378" title="edict of Nantes" label="edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="433" end="444" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="483" end="503" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q253439" start="750" end="796" title="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q194380" start="868" end="887" title="Arabic literature" label="Oriental literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="889" end="904" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="978" end="986" title="Almohads" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1027" end="1032" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q369981" start="1081" end="1098" title="Yusuf ibn Tashfin" label="Yusuf ibn Tashfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="1126" end="1136" title="Almoravids" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="1336" end="1343" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664888" start="1354" end="1378" title="Abdelwahid al-Marrakushi" label="Abdelwahid al-Marrakushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="1459" end="1469" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1492" end="1497" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1530" end="1535" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="1540" end="1545" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="1733" end="1742" title="Marrakech" label="Marrakech"/>
<link wikidata="Q508501" start="1753" end="1763" title="Ibn Idhari" label="Ibn Idhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1889" end="1896" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303932" start="1924" end="1943" title="Al-Bayan al-Mughrib" label="Al-Bayan al-Mughrib"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1949" end="1959" title="Ibn-Badrun" label="Ibn-Badrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925839" start="2010" end="2032" title="Abd al-Majid ibn Abdun" label="Abd al-Majid ibn Abdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="2469" end="2476" title="Moors" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43958" start="3008" end="3011" title="El Cid" label="Cid"/>
<link wikidata="Q293551" start="3325" end="3350" title="Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari" label="Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari"/>
<link wikidata="Q201763" start="3517" end="3537" title="Michael Jan de Goeje" label="Michael Jan de Goeje"/>
<link wikidata="Q173441" start="3551" end="3560" title="al-Idrisi" label="al-Idrisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22689328" start="3647" end="3668" title="Calendar of Córdoba" label="Calendrier de Cordoue"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3871" end="3876" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="4050" end="4053" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q201538" start="4098" end="4109" title="Edward Said" label="Edward Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q973739" start="4304" end="4319" title="Hugh N. Kennedy" label="Hugh N. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489169" start="4414" end="4427" title="Roger Collins" label="Roger Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q30105750" start="4498" end="4517" title="Kenneth Baxter Wolf" label="Kenneth Baxter Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q27052161" start="4922" end="4933" title="Nehemiah Levtzion" label="N. Levtzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303932" start="5171" end="5190" title="Al-Bayan al-Mughrib" label="Al-Bayan al-Mughrib"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343822" wikidata="Q608650" url="?curid=343822" title="Sarangi">
<text>The sārangī is a bowed, short-necked three-stringed instrument played in traditional music from South Asia – Punjabi folk music, Rajasthani folk music, Sindhi folk music, Haryanvi folk music, Braj folk music, and Boro folk music (there known as the &quot;serja&quot;) – in Pakistan, South India and Bangladesh. It is said to most resemble the sound of the human voice through its ability to imitate vocal ornaments such as &quot;Gamaks or Gamakam&quot; (shakes) and &quot;meends&quot; (sliding movements). The Nepali sarangi is similar but is a folk instrument, unornate and four-stringed.

== Playing ==

The repertoire of &quot;sarangi&quot; players is traditionally very closely related to vocal music. Nevertheless, a concert with a solo sarangi as the main item will sometimes include a full-scale &quot;raag&quot; presentation with an extensive &quot;alap&quot; (the unmeasured improvisatory development of the raga) in increasing intensity (&quot;alap&quot; to &quot;jor&quot; to &quot;jhala&quot;) and several compositions in increasing tempo called &quot;bandish&quot;. As such, it could be seen as being on a par with other instrumental styles such as sitar, sarod, and bansuri.

It is rare to find a sarangi player who does not know the words of many classical compositions. The words are usually mentally present during the performance, and a performance almost always adheres to the conventions of vocal performances including the organisational structure, the types of elaboration, the tempo, the relationship between sound and silence, and the presentation of &quot;khyal&quot; and &quot;thumri&quot; compositions. The vocal quality of sarangi is in a separate category from, for instance, the so-called &quot;gayaki-ang&quot; of sitar which attempts to imitate the nuances of &quot;khyal&quot; while overall conforming to the structures and usually keeping to the &quot;gat&quot; compositions of instrumental music. (A &quot;gat&quot; is a composition set to a cyclic rhythm.)

The Nepali sarangi is a traditional stringed musical instrument of Nepal, commonly played by the Gaine or Gandarbha ethnic group; the form and repertoire of the instrument in Nepal is more folk oriented than in India, and it is particularly associated with Gandarbha people.

== Structure ==

Carved from a single block of &quot;tun&quot; (red cedar) wood, the sarangi has a box-like shape with three hollow chambers: &quot;pet&quot; (&#x27;stomach&#x27;), &quot;chaati&quot; (&#x27;chest&#x27;) and &quot;magaj&quot; (&#x27;brain&#x27;). It is usually around long and around wide, though it can vary as there are smaller as well as larger variant sarangis as well. The smaller ones are more stable in hand. The lower resonance chamber or &quot;pet&quot; is covered with parchment made out of goat skin on which a strip of thick leather is placed around the waist (and nailed on the back of the chamber) which supports the elephant-shaped bridge that is usually made of camel or buffalo bone. (Originally, it was made of ivory or Barasingha bone but now that is rare due to the ban in India). The bridge in turn supports the huge pressure of approximately 35–37 sympathetic steel or brass strings and three main gut strings that pass through it. The three main playing strings – the comparatively thicker gut strings – are bowed with a heavy horsehair bow and stopped not with the fingertips but with the nails, cuticles, and surrounding flesh. Talcum powder is applied to the fingers as a lubricant. The neck has ivory or bone platforms on which the fingers slide. The remaining strings are sympathetic, or &quot;tarabs&quot;, numbering up to around 35–37, divided into four choirs having two sets of pegs, one on the right and one on the top. On the inside is a chromatically tuned row of 15 &quot;tarabs&quot; and on the right a diatonic row of nine &quot;tarabs&quot; each encompassing a full octave, plus one to three extra surrounding notes above or below the octave. Both these sets of &quot;tarabs&quot; pass from the main bridge to the right side set of pegs through small holes in the &quot;chaati&quot; supported by hollow ivory/bone beads. Between these inner &quot;tarabs&quot; and on either side of the main playing strings lie two more sets of longer &quot;tarabs&quot;, with five to six strings on the right set and six to seven strings on the left set. They pass from the main bridge over to two small, flat, wide, table-like bridges through the additional bridge towards the second peg set on top of the instrument. These are tuned to the important tones (&quot;swaras&quot;) of the raga. A properly tuned sarangi will hum and cry and will sound like melodious meowing, with tones played on any of the main strings eliciting echo-like resonances. A few sarangis use strings manufactured from the intestines of goats.

== Decline ==
Around the 20th century, the harmonium and violin began to be used as alternatives to the sarangi due to their comparative ease of handling. In Pakistan specifically, since the 1980s, the decline in sarangi playing has also been attributed to the deaths of several masters and extreme religious radicalization.

== Notable performers ==

===Sarangi players in India===
* Abdul Latif Khan (1934–2002)
* Ustad Munir Khan (1926-2011)
* Aruna Narayan (born 1959)
* Ashique Ali Khan (1948–1999)
* Bharat Bhushan Goswami (b. 1955)
* Bundu Khan (1880–1955)
* Dhruba Ghosh (1957–2017)
* Ghulam Ali (Sarangi) (b. 1975)
* Harsh Narayan (b. 1985)
* Kamal Sabri (b. 1974)
* Manonmani (b. 2000)
* Ramesh Mishra (1948–2017)
* Ram Narayan (b. 1927)
* Sabir Khan (Sarangi) (b. 1978)
* Sabri Khan (1927–2015)
* Siddiqui Ahmed Khan (1914–)
* Suhail Yusuf Khan (b. 1988)
* Sultan Khan (1940–2011)
* Ustad Faiyaz Khan (born 1968)
* Moinuddin Khan (musician) (died 2015)
* Ram Narayan (1927–2024)
* Shriram Hasabnis (b.1977)

===Sarangi players in Pakistan===
* Allah Rakha (1932–2000)
* Bundu Khan (1880–1955)
* Nathu Khan (1999-2025

===Other sarangi players===
*Yuji Nakagawa, Sarangi – a Japanese citizen who learnt to play the instrument in India under the tutelage of Dhruba Ghosh

==See also==
*Esraj
*Sarinda
*Hindustani music

==References==
==Further reading==
* Bor, Joep, 1987: &quot;The Voice of the Sarangi&quot;, comprising &quot;National Centre for the Performing Arts Quarterly Journal&quot; 15 (3–4), December 1986 and March 1987 (special combined issue), Bombay: NCPA
* Magriel, Nicolas, 1991 &quot;Sarangi Style in North Indian Music&quot; (published Ph.D. thesis), London: University of London, available on amazon.com
* Qureshi, Regula Burckhardt, 1997: “The Indian Sarangi: Sound of Affect, Site of Contest”, Yearbook for Traditional Music, pp. 1–38
* Sorrell, Neil (with Ram Narayan), 1980: &quot;Indian Music in Performance&quot;, Bolton: Manchester University Press

== External links ==

*Resham Firiri A popular Nepali folk music with a Sarangi and &quot;madal&quot;.
*sarangi.info – downloadable sarangi and vocal music, including the integral of two important books, &quot;The Voice of the Sarangi&quot; by Joep Bor and &quot;Indian Music in Performance and Practice&quot; by Ram Narayan and Neil Sorrell.
*Growing into Music – includes several films by Nicolas Magriel on Indian musical enculturation including films about the sarangi players, Farooq Latif Khan (b. 1975), Sarwar Hussain Khan (b. 1981), Mohammed Ali Khan, Sarangi (d. 2002), Ghulam Sabir Qadri (1922–), Vidya Sahai Mishra (d. 2019), Siddiqui Ahmed Khan (1914–), Ghulam Sabir Khan (b. 1948), Murad Ali (b. 1977), Faiyaz Khan (Varanasi), Zakan Khan (Varanasi) and Kanhaiyalal Mishra (Varanasi).
*Sarangi, Gujarat, 19th century
*Sarangi, ca. 1900
*Sarangi, North India, late 19th century</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q608650" start="4" end="11" title="Sarangi" label="sārangī"/>
<link wikidata="Q204948" start="17" end="22" title="bow (music)" label="bowed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="37" end="62" title="string instrument" label="three-stringed instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564213" start="109" end="127" title="Folk music of Punjab" label="Punjabi folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q289505" start="129" end="150" title="Music of Rajasthan" label="Rajasthani folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522213" start="152" end="169" title="Sindhi music" label="Sindhi folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942112" start="171" end="190" title="Music of Haryana" label="Haryanvi folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295067" start="192" end="207" title="Rasiya" label="Braj folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266593" start="213" end="217" title="Boro people" label="Boro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094915" start="429" end="434" title="Gamak" label="Gamak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807629" start="472" end="477" title="meend" label="meend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423131" start="510" end="524" title="Sarangi (Nepali)" label="Nepali sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13135638" start="545" end="560" title="folk instrument" label="folk instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="809" end="813" title="Raga" label="raag"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="1162" end="1167" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q687406" start="1169" end="1174" title="sarod" label="sarod"/>
<link wikidata="Q960389" start="1180" end="1187" title="bansuri" label="bansuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q62128" start="1581" end="1586" title="khyal" label="khyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q69596" start="1603" end="1609" title="thumri" label="thumri"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="1745" end="1750" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423131" start="1998" end="2012" title="Sarangi (Nepali)" label="Nepali sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="2061" end="2066" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520610" start="2100" end="2109" title="Gandarbha" label="Gandarbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739400" start="2334" end="2343" title="Toona ciliata" label="red cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q226697" start="2765" end="2774" title="parchment" label="parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q506308" start="3024" end="3034" title="Barasingha" label="Barasingha"/>
<link wikidata="Q920063" start="3156" end="3190" title="Sympathetic string" label="sympathetic steel or brass strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q36864" start="3399" end="3404" title="Nail (anatomy)" label="nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="3439" end="3452" title="Talcum powder" label="Talcum powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="3758" end="3767" title="chromatic" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="3826" end="3834" title="diatonic" label="diatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="3891" end="3897" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380503" start="4574" end="4579" title="swara" label="swara"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665916" start="5215" end="5231" title="Abdul Latif Khan" label="Abdul Latif Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5246" end="5262" title="Ustad Munir Khan" label="Ustad Munir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26210568" start="5277" end="5290" title="Aruna Narayan" label="Aruna Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105811226" start="5305" end="5321" title="Ashique Ali Khan" label="Ashique Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q72743486" start="5336" end="5358" title="Bharat Bhushan Goswami" label="Bharat Bhushan Goswami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997568" start="5371" end="5381" title="Bundu Khan" label="Bundu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20563165" start="5396" end="5408" title="Dhruba Ghosh" label="Dhruba Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595190" start="5423" end="5433" title="Ghulam Ali (singer)" label="Ghulam Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q23007997" start="5456" end="5469" title="Harsh Narayan" label="Harsh Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5482" end="5493" title="Kamal Sabri" label="Kamal Sabri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751281" start="5506" end="5515" title="Manonmani" label="Manonmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289425" start="5528" end="5541" title="Ramesh Mishra" label="Ramesh Mishra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41074" start="5556" end="5567" title="Ram Narayan" label="Ram Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703693" start="5580" end="5590" title="Sabir Khan (musician)" label="Sabir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396383" start="5613" end="5623" title="Sabri Khan" label="Sabri Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q73648283" start="5638" end="5657" title="Siddiqui Ahmed Khan" label="Siddiqui Ahmed Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661925" start="5668" end="5685" title="Suhail Yusuf Khan" label="Suhail Yusuf Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q981797" start="5698" end="5709" title="Sultan Khan (musician)" label="Sultan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279006" start="5724" end="5741" title="Ustad Faiyaz Khan (Karnataka singer)" label="Ustad Faiyaz Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209989" start="5756" end="5781" title="Moinuddin Khan (musician)" label="Moinuddin Khan (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41074" start="5796" end="5807" title="Ram Narayan" label="Ram Narayan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5822" end="5838" title="Shriram Hasabnis" label="Shriram Hasabnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730311" start="5885" end="5896" title="Allah Rakha (sarangi)" label="Allah Rakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997568" start="5911" end="5921" title="Bundu Khan" label="Bundu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400479" start="5936" end="5946" title="Nathu Khan" label="Nathu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818847" start="6125" end="6130" title="Esraj" label="Esraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q348878" start="6132" end="6139" title="Sarinda (instrument)" label="Sarinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="6141" end="6157" title="Hindustani music" label="Hindustani music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726202" start="6906" end="6911" title="madal" label="madal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7298" end="7315" title="Farooq Latif Khan" label="Farooq Latif Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7327" end="7346" title="Sarwar Hussain Khan" label="Sarwar Hussain Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7358" end="7384" title="Mohammed Ali Khan, Sarangi" label="Mohammed Ali Khan, Sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7396" end="7414" title="Ghulam Sabir Qadri" label="Ghulam Sabir Qadri"/>
<link wikidata="Q73648283" start="7454" end="7473" title="Siddiqui Ahmed Khan" label="Siddiqui Ahmed Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7483" end="7500" title="Ghulam Sabir Khan" label="Ghulam Sabir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7512" end="7521" title="Murad Ali" label="Murad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7533" end="7555" title="Faiyaz Khan (Varanasi)" label="Faiyaz Khan (Varanasi)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7557" end="7578" title="Zakan Khan (Varanasi)" label="Zakan Khan (Varanasi)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7583" end="7612" title="Kanhaiyalal Mishra (Varanasi)" label="Kanhaiyalal Mishra (Varanasi)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="343824" wikidata="Q6569049" url="?curid=343824" title="Utti Jaeger Regiment">
<text>The Utti Jaeger Regiment (, () Special jaegers) is the Finnish Army training and development centre for special forces and helicopter operations in charge of the Army Special Forces Unit and the Special Forces Qualification Course.

==Function==

=== Regiment ===
The Utti Jaeger Regiment is responsible for training special forces for the Finnish Army as well as upkeeping high readiness of the Army Special Forces Unit and helicopter operations and performing executive assistance tasks. The regiment consists of around 400 hired personnel and 220 conscripts according to sources from 2018. Its Special Jaeger Company () served during the War in Afghanistan, training security officials in medical care, firearms, and operational planning, and has been in standby duties as a part of the European Union Battlegroups and NATO Response Force. The Finnish special forces trace their history to the four long-range reconnaissance patrol detachments (&#x27;) and Detached Battalion 4 (&#x27;), which fought in the Winter War, Continuation War and Lapland War during 1939–1944. After the wartime units were demobilized in November 1944, the Army reinitiated organized special forces training in February 1962 by establishing the Parachute Jaeger School (, ()) at Utti, near the city of Kouvola. On 1 January 1997, the Utti Jaeger Regiment was formed by merging the Parachute Jaeger School, Military Police School and Helicopter Wing. The Parachute Jaeger School was later reformed into the Special Jaeger Battalion and the Helicopter Wing reinforced into the Helicopter Battalion.

=== Special Jaeger ===
According to the newspaper &quot;Helsingin Sanomat&quot;, a typical special forces soldier has served in the Defence Forces for seven years and is around 28–29-years-old. On average, they run in a Cooper test and bench press . Before applying for and attending the year-long Special Forces Qualification Course, they often have served as a paratrooper or a combat diver during conscript service. Approximately 12 students are chosen for the course out of a 100 applicants after a four-day exam. All of the course attendees are trained in communications, engineer and medical care, and receive specializations later, such as sniper, vehicle, high-altitude military parachuting, military intelligence or forward air control training. Those chosen for career tracts after the basic course serve at either Utti Jaeger Regiment or Special Operations Detachment of the Naval Reconnaissance Battalion of the Coastal Brigade.

== Organisation ==
As of 2018, the Utti Jaeger Regiment is divided into three battalions in addition to the headquarters:
*Special Jaeger Battalion
**Special Jaeger Company – hosts the special jaeger non-commissioned officers, maintains special forces readiness and capabilities of the Army, and oversees the Special Forces Qualification Course.
**Paratrooper Company – trains conscripts in basic long-range reconnaissance patrol, sissi, urban and air assault operations.
*Helicopter Battalion – equipped with 20 NH90 tactical transport helicopters and 7 MD 500 light helicopters; responsible for all helicopter operations and training of the Defence Forces.
**1st Helicopter Company – high readiness unit supporting special operations forces and crisis management.
**2nd Helicopter Company – basic flight training and helicopter support for other forces.
**Aircraft Maintenance Company
*Support Battalion
**Support Company – trains conscripts in support tasks and handles logistics in cooperation with the Logistics Centre.
**Logistics Centre
== See also ==
* Finnish Border Guard
* Finnish Defence Intelligence Agency
* Jäger (infantry)
* Lauri Törni
* Police Rapid Response Unit (Finland)

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6569049" start="4" end="24" title="Utti Jaeger Regiment" label="Utti Jaeger Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569049" start="31" end="46" title="Utti Jaeger Regiment" label="Special jaegers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383264" start="55" end="67" title="Finnish Army" label="Finnish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="104" end="118" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="123" end="133" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="494" end="502" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="641" end="659" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276346" start="790" end="817" title="EU Battlegroup" label="European Union Battlegroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q573044" start="822" end="841" title="NATO Response Force" label="NATO Response Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673153" start="902" end="934" title="long-range reconnaissance patrol" label="long-range reconnaissance patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389069" start="960" end="980" title="Detached Battalion 4" label="Detached Battalion 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="1011" end="1021" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="1023" end="1039" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154940" start="1044" end="1055" title="Lapland War" label="Lapland War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346928" start="1259" end="1263" title="Utti" label="Utti"/>
<link wikidata="Q204382" start="1282" end="1289" title="Kouvola" label="Kouvola"/>
<link wikidata="Q366921" start="1634" end="1651" title="Helsingin Sanomat" label="Helsingin Sanomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q909284" start="1798" end="1809" title="Cooper test" label="Cooper test"/>
<link wikidata="Q14093" start="1814" end="1825" title="bench press" label="bench press"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="2225" end="2231" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967730" start="2242" end="2276" title="high-altitude military parachuting" label="high-altitude military parachuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="2278" end="2299" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q488598" start="2303" end="2322" title="forward air control" label="forward air control"/>
<link wikidata="Q18682502" start="2502" end="2517" title="Coastal Brigade" label="Coastal Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="2720" end="2745" title="non-commissioned officers" label="non-commissioned officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424460" start="2951" end="2956" title="Sissi (Finnish light infantry)" label="sissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="2958" end="2963" title="Urban warfare" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="2968" end="2979" title="Air Assault" label="air assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q629539" start="3033" end="3037" title="NHIndustries NH90" label="NH90"/>
<link wikidata="Q848899" start="3075" end="3081" title="MD Helicopters MD 500" label="MD 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418075" start="3581" end="3601" title="Finnish Border Guard" label="Finnish Border Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450866" start="3604" end="3639" title="Finnish Defence Intelligence Agency" label="Finnish Defence Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q315316" start="3642" end="3658" title="Jäger (infantry)" label="Jäger (infantry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q819320" start="3661" end="3672" title="Lauri Törni" label="Lauri Törni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320781" start="3675" end="3711" title="Police Rapid Response Unit (Finland)" label="Police Rapid Response Unit (Finland)"/>
</links>
</doc>
